Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
 
FORM 10-K
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022
OR
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF
THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from         to        
Commission File Number: 001-35992
 
Oracle Corporation
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
54-2185193
(State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer
Identification No.)
 
 
2300 Oracle Way
 
Austin, Texas
(Address of principal executive offices)
78741
(Zip Code)
(737) 867-1000
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading Symbol(s)
Name of each exchange on which registered
Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share
3.125% senior notes due July 2025
ORCL
—
New York Stock Exchange
New York Stock Exchange
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:
None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.    YES  ☒    NO  ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.    YES ☐    NO  ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period
that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.    YES  ☒    NO  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§232.405 of this chapter) during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).    YES  ☒    NO  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company or an emerging growth company. See the definitions of “large
accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer  ☒
Accelerated filer    ☐
Non-accelerated filer  ☐
Smaller reporting company  ☐
Emerging growth company  ☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting standards provided
pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report.    ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).    YES  ☐    NO  ☒
The aggregate market value of the voting stock held by non-affiliates of the registrant was $137,902,273,000 based on the number of shares held by non-affiliates of the registrant as of May 31, 2022, and based
on the closing sale price of common stock as reported by the New York Stock Exchange on November 30, 2021, which is the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter. This
calculation does not reflect a determination that persons are affiliates for any other purposes.
Number of shares of common stock outstanding as of June 13, 2022: 2,664,926,000.
Documents Incorporated by Reference:
Portions of the registrant's definitive proxy statement relating to its 2022 annual meeting of stockholders are incorporated by reference into Part III of this Annual Report on Form 10-K where indicated. Such
proxy statement will be filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission within 120 days of the registrant’s fiscal year ended May 31, 2022.
 

ORACLE CORPORATION
FISCAL YEAR 2022
FORM 10-K
ANNUAL REPORT
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
Page
 
 
 
 
 
PART I.
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item 1.
  Business
 
4
 
 
 
 
Item 1A.
  Risk Factors
 
18
 
 
 
 
Item 1B.
  Unresolved Staff Comments
 
33
 
 
 
 
Item 2.
  Properties
 
33
 
 
 
 
Item 3.
  Legal Proceedings
 
33
 
 
 
 
Item 4.
  Mine Safety Disclosures
 
33
 
 
 
 
PART II.
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item 5.
  Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
 
34
 
 
 
 
Item 6.
  [Reserved]
 
35
 
 
 
 
Item 7.
  Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
 
36
 
 
 
 
Item 7A.
  Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
 
57
 
 
 
 
Item 8.
  Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
 
58
 
 
 
 
Item 9.
  Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
 
58
 
 
 
 
Item 9A.
  Controls and Procedures
 
59
 
 
 
 
Item 9B.
  Other Information
 
60
 
 
 
 
PART III.
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item 10.
  Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
 
61
 
 
 
 
Item 11.
  Executive Compensation
 
61
 
 
 
 
Item 12.
  Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
 
61
 
 
 
 
Item 13.
  Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
 
61
 
 
 
 
Item 14.
  Principal Accountant Fees and Services
 
61
 
 
 
 
PART IV.
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item 15.
  Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
 
62
 
 
 
 
Item 16.
  Form 10-K Summary
 
109
 
 
 
 
  Signatures
 
116
   
 
 
 
 

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Cautionary Note on Forward-Looking Statements
For purposes of this Annual Report, the terms “Oracle,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Oracle Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries. This Annual Report
on Form 10-K contains statements that are not historical in nature, are predictive in nature, or that depend upon or refer to future events or conditions or
otherwise contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the Exchange Act), and
Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the Securities Act). These include, among other things, statements regarding:
•
the possible impact of the Russia-Ukraine situation on our business, including our belief that our profitability and the generation of
positive cash flow from our operations will not be jeopardized by the current situation;
•
our expectations regarding the impacts on our business as a result of the global COVID-19 pandemic;
•
our expectation that we may acquire companies, products, services and technologies to further our corporate strategy as compelling
opportunities become available;
•
our expectations regarding the acquisition of Cerner Corporation;
•
our belief that our acquisitions enhance the products and services that we can offer to customers, expand our customer base, provide
greater scale to accelerate innovation, grow our revenues and earnings, and increase stockholder value;
•
our expectation that, on a constant currency basis, our total cloud and license revenues generally will continue to increase due to
expected growth in our cloud services and our license support offerings, and continued demand for our cloud license and on-premise
license offerings;
•
our belief that our Oracle Cloud Software-as-a-Service and Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (SaaS and OCI, respectively, and collectively, Oracle
Cloud Services) offerings are opportunities for us to expand our cloud and license business, and that we are in the early stages of what we
expect will be a material migration of our existing Oracle customer base from on-premise applications and infrastructure products and
services to the Oracle Cloud;
•
our belief that we can market our SaaS and cloud infrastructure services to a broader ecosystem of small and medium-sized businesses,
non-IT lines of business purchasers, developers and partners due to the highly available, intuitive design, low touch and low cost
characteristics of the Oracle Cloud;
•
our expectation that substantially all of our customers will renew their license support contracts annually;
•
our belief that Oracle Fusion Cloud ERP is a strategic suite of applications that is foundational to facilitate and extract more business value
out of the adoption of other Oracle SaaS offerings as customers realize the value of a common data model that spans across core business
applications;
•
our belief that our SaaS offerings remove business boundaries between front- and back-office activities;
•
our expectations regarding the ability of the Oracle Autonomous Database to deliver rapid insights and innovation to our customers while
also reducing customer downtime and cost;
•
our expectation that current and expected customer demand will require us to accelerate cloud services and license support expenses in
order to expand the Oracle Cloud by increasing existing data center capacity and adding additional data centers in new geographic
locations, which may result in lower total operating margins in future periods;
•
our expectation that our hardware business will have lower operating margins as a percentage of revenues than our cloud and license
business;
•
our expectation that we will continue to make significant investments in research and development, and our belief that research and
development efforts are essential to maintaining our competitive position;
1

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
•
our expectation that our international operations will continue to provide a significant portion of our total revenues and expenses;
•
our expectation that variable expenditures that were curtailed primarily in response to COVID-19 may normalize in future periods
provided global economic and health conditions improve;
•
our expectation that the proportion of our cloud services and license support revenues relative to our cloud license and on-premise
license revenues, hardware revenues and services revenues will continue to increase;
•
the sufficiency of our sources of funding for working capital, capital expenditures, contractual obligations, acquisitions, dividends, stock
repurchases, debt repayments and other matters;
•
our belief that we have adequately provided under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles for outcomes related to our tax audits
and that the final outcome of our tax-related examinations, agreements or judicial proceedings will not have a material effect on our
results of operations, our belief that our net deferred tax assets will likely be realized in the foreseeable future, and our expectations
regarding the “Build Back Better Act” budget reconciliation bill;
•
our belief that the outcome of certain legal proceedings and claims to which we are a party will not, individually or in the aggregate,
result in losses that are materially in excess of amounts already recognized, if any;
•
our expectation that certain litigation related charges will not recur;
•
the possibility that certain legal proceedings to which we are a party could have a material impact on our financial position, future cash
flows and results of operations;
•
the timing and amount of expenses we expect to incur;
•
the cost savings we expect to realize pursuant to our Fiscal 2022 Oracle Restructuring Plan;
•
declarations of future cash dividend payments and the timing and amount of future stock repurchases, including our expectation that the
levels of our future stock repurchase activity may be modified in comparison to past periods in order to use available cash for other
purposes;
•
our expectations regarding the impact of recent accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements;
•
our expectations regarding the performance of our investments in marketable and non-marketable equity securities and the timing and
amount of changes in fair value of these investments;
•
our expectation that, to the extent customers renew support contracts or cloud SaaS and OCI contracts from companies that we have
acquired prior to fiscal 2022, we will recognize revenues for the full contracts’ values over the respective renewal periods;
•
our ability to predict revenues, particularly certain cloud license and on-premise license revenues and hardware revenues;
•
the percentages of remaining performance obligations that we expect to recognize as revenues over respective future periods;
•
our expectation that the financial impacts of standard warranty or service level provisions in our revenue arrangements will continue to
be insignificant;
as well as other statements regarding our future operations, financial condition and prospects, and business strategies. Forward-looking statements may be
preceded by, followed by or include the words “expects,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks,” “strives,” “endeavors,” “estimates,” “will,”
“should,” “is designed to” and similar expressions. We claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Exchange Act
and the Securities Act for all forward-looking statements. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about
future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions about our business that could affect our future results
and could cause those results or other outcomes to differ materially from those expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might
cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report and as may
be updated in
2

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
filings we make from time to time with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the SEC), including our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q to be filed by us
in our fiscal year 2023, which runs from June 1, 2022 to May 31, 2023.
We have no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or risks, except to
the extent required by applicable securities laws. If we do update one or more forward-looking statements, no inference should be drawn that we will make
additional updates with respect to those or other forward-looking statements. New information, future events or risks could cause the forward-looking events
we discuss in this Annual Report not to occur. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which reflect our expectations only
as of the date of this Annual Report.
3

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
PART I
Item 1.Business
Oracle provides products and services that address enterprise information technology (IT) environments. Our products and services include enterprise
applications and infrastructure offerings that are delivered worldwide through a variety of flexible and interoperable IT deployment models. These models
include on-premise deployments, cloud-based deployments, and hybrid deployments (an approach that combines both on-premise and cloud-based
deployment) such as our Oracle Cloud@Customer offering (an instance of Oracle Cloud in a customer’s own data center). Accordingly, we offer choice and
flexibility to our customers and facilitate the product, service and deployment combinations that best suit our customers’ needs. Our customers include
businesses of many sizes, government agencies, educational institutions and resellers that we market and sell to directly through our worldwide sales force
and indirectly through the Oracle Partner Network. Using Oracle technologies, our customers build, deploy, run, manage and support their internal and
external products, services and business operations including, for example, a global cloud applications developer that utilizes Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (OCI)
to power its software-as-a-service (SaaS) offerings; a multi-national financial institution that runs its banking applications using the Oracle Exadata Database
Machine; and a global consumer products company that leverages Oracle Fusion Cloud Enterprise Resource Planning for its accounting processes,
consolidation and financial planning functions.
Oracle Cloud Services offerings, which include Oracle SaaS and OCI offerings, provide comprehensive and integrated applications and infrastructure services
delivered via cloud-based deployment models. Oracle Cloud Services integrate the IT components, including software, hardware and services, on a customer’s
behalf in a cloud-based IT environment that Oracle deploys, manages, supports and upgrades for the customer and that a customer may access utilizing
common web browsers via a broad spectrum of devices.
Oracle Cloud Services are designed to be rapidly deployable to enable customers shorter time to innovation; intuitive for casual and experienced users; easily
maintainable to reduce upgrade, integration and testing work; connectable among differing deployment models to enable interchangeability and extendibility
between IT environments; compatible to easily move workloads between the Oracle Cloud and other IT environments; cost-effective by requiring lower
upfront customer investment; and secure, standards-based and reliable.
Oracle cloud license and on-premise license deployment offerings include Oracle Applications, Oracle Database and Oracle Middleware software offerings,
among others, which customers deploy using IT infrastructure from the Oracle Cloud or their own cloud-based or on-premise IT environments. Substantially
all customers, at their option, purchase license support contracts when they purchase an Oracle license.
Oracle hardware products include Oracle Engineered Systems, servers, storage and industry-specific products, among others. Customers generally opt to
purchase hardware support contracts when they purchase Oracle hardware products.
Oracle also offers services to assist our customers and partners to maximize the performance of their Oracle purchases.
Providing choice and flexibility to Oracle customers as to when and how they deploy Oracle applications and infrastructure technologies is an important
element of our corporate strategy. We believe that offering customers broad, comprehensive, flexible and interoperable deployment models for Oracle
applications and infrastructure technologies is important to our growth strategy and better addresses customer needs relative to our competitors, many of
whom provide fewer offerings, more restrictive deployment models and less flexibility for a customer’s transition to cloud-based IT environments.
Our investments in, and innovation with respect to, Oracle products and services that we offer through our three businesses (cloud and license, hardware and
services businesses, described further below) are another important element of our corporate strategy. In fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, we invested $7.2
billion, $6.5 billion and $6.1 billion, respectively, in research and development to enhance our existing portfolio of offerings and to develop new technologies
and services. We have a deep understanding as to how applications and infrastructure technologies interact and function with one another including through
the use of OCI to power our Oracle Fusion SaaS Applications, which we and our customers use to run internal business processes. We focus our development
efforts on improving the performance, security, operation, integration and cost-effectiveness of our offerings
4

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
relative to our competitors; facilitating the ease with which organizations are able to deploy, use, manage and maintain our offerings; and incorporating
emerging technologies within our offerings to enable leaner business processes, automation and innovation. For example, the Oracle Autonomous Database
is designed to deliver transformational infrastructure as an OCI offering that utilizes machine learning capabilities. After an initial purchase of Oracle products
and services, our customers can continue to benefit from our offerings, research and development efforts and deep IT expertise by electing to purchase and
renew Oracle support offerings for their license and hardware deployments, which may include product enhancements that we periodically deliver to our
products, and by renewing their Oracle Cloud Services contracts with us.
Our selective and active acquisition program is another important element of our corporate strategy. We believe that our acquisitions enhance the products
and services that we can offer to customers, expand our customer base, provide greater scale to accelerate innovation, grow our revenues and earnings, and
increase stockholder value. We have invested billions of dollars over time to acquire a number of companies, products, services and technologies that add to,
are complementary to, or have otherwise enhanced our existing offerings, including our acquisition of Cerner Corporation in June 2022 (see Note 2 of Notes
to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information). We expect to continue to acquire companies,
products, services and technologies to further our corporate strategy.
We have three businesses, cloud and license, hardware, and services, and each is comprised of a single operating segment. Item 7 Management’s Discussion
and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, both included elsewhere in this
Annual Report, provide additional information related to our businesses and operating segments.
Oracle Corporation was incorporated in 2005 as a Delaware corporation and is the successor to operations originally begun in June 1977.
Recent Global Events
Oracle withdrew its operations from the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus in March 2022. Neither of the aforementioned countries, nor Ukraine,
have composed or are expected to compose a material portion of Oracle’s total consolidated revenues, net income, net assets, or workforce. Our business
was also affected by the impacts of COVID-19 during the fiscal 2022 and 2021 periods presented in this Annual Report. For additional discussion of these
matters and their impacts to Oracle, and a more complete discussion of the risks we encounter in our business, please refer to Item 1A Risk Factors and Item 7
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, each of which are included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Oracle Applications and Infrastructure Technologies
Oracle’s comprehensive portfolio of applications and infrastructure technologies is designed to address an organization’s IT environment needs including
business process, infrastructure and applications development requirements, among others. Oracle technologies are based upon industry standards and are
designed to be enterprise-grade, reliable, scalable and secure. Oracle applications and infrastructure technologies including database and middleware
software as well as enterprise applications, virtualization, clustering, large-scale systems management and related infrastructure products and services are the
building blocks of Oracle Cloud Services, our partners’ cloud services, and our customers’ cloud IT environments. Oracle applications and infrastructure
offerings are marketed and sold through our cloud and license, hardware, and services businesses and are delivered through the Oracle Cloud, or through
other IT deployment models including cloud-based, hybrid and on-premise deployments. We believe Oracle applications and infrastructure offerings enable
flexibility, interoperability and choice to best meet customer IT needs.
We believe that our Oracle Cloud Services offerings are opportunities for us to continue to expand our cloud and license business. We believe that our
customers increasingly recognize the value of access to the latest versions of Oracle cloud-based applications and infrastructure capabilities via a lower cost,
rapidly deployable, flexible and interoperable services model that Oracle provisions, manages, upgrades and maintains on our customers’ behalf. We believe
that we can market and sell our Oracle SaaS and OCI offerings together to help new and existing customers migrate their extensive installed base of on-
premise and cloud-based applications and infrastructure
5

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
technologies to the Oracle Cloud, and we believe we are in the early stages of what we expect will be a material migration of our existing Oracle customer
base from on-premise applications and infrastructure products and services to the Oracle Cloud. In addition, we also believe we can market our Oracle SaaS
and OCI services to a broader ecosystem of small and medium-sized businesses, non-IT lines of business purchasers, developers and partners due to the highly
available, intuitive design, ease of access, low touch and low cost characteristics of the Oracle Cloud.
In recent periods, customer demand for our applications and infrastructure technologies delivered through our Oracle Cloud Services deployment models has
increased. To address customer demand and enable customer choice, we have introduced certain programs for customers to pivot their applications and
infrastructure licenses and license support contracts to the Oracle Cloud for new deployments and to migrate to and expand with the Oracle Cloud for their
existing workloads. The proportion of our cloud services and license support revenues relative to our cloud license and on-premise license revenues,
hardware revenues and services revenues has increased and our cloud services and license support revenues represented 71% of our total revenues during
each of fiscal 2022 and 2021 and 70% of our total revenues during fiscal 2020. We expect these trends to continue.
Oracle Applications Technologies
Oracle applications technologies are marketed, sold, delivered and supported through our cloud and license business. Our applications cloud services and
license support revenues represented 42%, 41% and 40% of our total cloud services and license support revenues during fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020,
respectively. Oracle applications offerings include our Oracle Cloud SaaS offerings, which are available for customers as a subscription, and Oracle applications
license offerings, which are available for customers to purchase for use within the Oracle Cloud, and other cloud-based and on-premise IT environments, and
include the option to purchase related license support. Regardless of the deployment model selected, our applications technologies are designed to reduce
the risk, cost and complexity of our customers’ IT infrastructures, while supporting customer choice with flexible deployment models that readily enable
performance, agility, compatibility and extendibility. Our applications technologies are generally designed using industry standard architectures to manage
and automate core business functions across the enterprise, as well as to help customers differentiate and innovate in those processes unique to their
industries or organizations. We offer applications that are deployable to meet several business automation requirements across a broad range of industries.
We also offer industry-specific applications, which provide solutions to customers in the automotive, communications, construction and engineering,
consumer goods, energy and water, financial services, food and beverage, government and education, healthcare, high technology, hospitality, industrial
manufacturing, life sciences, media and entertainment, oil and gas, professional services, retail, travel and transportation, and wholesale distribution
industries, among others.
Oracle Cloud Software-as-a-Service (SaaS)
Oracle’s broad spectrum of Oracle Cloud SaaS offerings provides customers a choice of software applications that are delivered via a cloud-based IT
environment that we deploy, manage, upgrade and support, and that customers purchase by entering into a subscription agreement with us for a stated
period. Customers access Oracle Cloud SaaS offerings utilizing common web browsers via a broad spectrum of devices. Our SaaS offerings are built upon open
industry standards such as SQL, Java and HTML5 for easier application accessibility, integration and development. Our SaaS offerings represent an industry
leading business innovation platform, leveraging Oracle’s Next-Generation Cloud Infrastructure, and include a broad suite of modular, next generation cloud
software applications spanning all core business functions including, among others:
•
Oracle Fusion Cloud Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), which is designed to be a complete, global and integrated ERP solution to help
organizations improve decision making and workforce productivity, and to optimize back-office operations by utilizing a single data and security
model with a common user interface;
•
Oracle Fusion Cloud Enterprise Performance Management (EPM), which is designed to analyze financial performance, drive accurate and agile
financial plans, optimize the financial close and consolidation process, streamline account reconciliation and satisfy an organization’s reporting
requirements;
6

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
•
Oracle Fusion Cloud Supply Chain and Manufacturing Management (SCM), which is designed to help organizations create, optimize and digitize
their supply chains and innovate products quickly;
•
Oracle Fusion Cloud Human Capital Management (HCM), which is designed to help organizations find, develop and retain their talent, enable
collaboration, provide complete workforce insights, improve business process efficiency, and enable users to connect to an integrated suite of
HCM applications from any device;
•
Oracle Fusion Sales, Service and Marketing, which are modules that are designed to be complete and integrated solutions to help organizations
deliver consistent and personalized customer experiences across their customer channels, touch points and interactions;
•
NetSuite Applications Suite, which is designed to be a unified, cloud-based applications suite to run a company’s entire business and includes
financials and ERP, customer relationship management, human resources, professional services and commerce, among others. Our NetSuite
applications are generally marketed to small to medium-sized organizations; and
•
Oracle Advertising, which enables organizations to leverage their own data and consumer data to inform and measure marketing strategies and
programs.
In addition, we offer several cloud-based industry solutions to address specific customer needs within certain industries including communications,
construction and engineering, education, financial services, government, healthcare, hospitality, manufacturing, and retail, among others.
Customers, partners and other interested parties may elect to subscribe to Oracle applications and infrastructure training and certification programs through a
variety of online, cloud-based learning subscriptions offered by Oracle University. Learners generally have unlimited access to course content delivered during
the subscription period.
We believe that the comprehensiveness and breadth of our SaaS offerings as a business innovation platform differentiate us from many of our competitors
that offer more limited or specialized applications. Our SaaS offerings are designed to support connected business processes in the cloud and are centered on
an intuitive and conversational user experience, a responsive, open and flexible business core, and a common data model. We believe Oracle Fusion Cloud
ERP is a strategic suite of applications that is foundational to facilitating and extracting more business value out of the adoption of other Oracle SaaS offerings,
such as Oracle Fusion Cloud HCM and Oracle Fusion Cloud EPM, as customers realize the value of a common data model that spans across core business
applications. We believe our SaaS offerings remove business boundaries between front- and back-office activities. Our SaaS offerings are designed to deliver a
secure data isolation architecture and flexible upgrades; self-service access controls for users; a Service-Oriented Architecture; built-in social, mobile and
business insight capabilities (analytics); and a high performance, high availability infrastructure based on Oracle’s Next-Generation Cloud Infrastructure. These
SaaS capabilities are designed to simplify customer IT environments, reduce time to implement and upgrade, enable agility, reduce risk, provide an intuitive
user experience for casual and experienced users, and enable customers to focus resources on business growth opportunities. Our SaaS offerings are also
designed to natively incorporate advanced technologies such as Internet-of-Things (IoT), artificial intelligence, machine learning, blockchain, digital assistants
and advances in the “human interface” and how users interact with Oracle Cloud SaaS offerings within a business context or to augment human capabilities to
enhance productivity.
Oracle Applications Licenses
Customers have the ability to license Oracle Applications, including Oracle E-Business Suite, PeopleSoft, JD Edwards and Siebel applications, among others, for
use within the Oracle Cloud or within their own cloud-based or on-premise IT environments. These licensed applications are designed to manage and
automate core business functions across the enterprise, including HCM, ERP, EPM, SCM, Customer Experience, and industry-specific applications, as described
above, among others.
We provide customers the option to purchase license support contracts in connection with the purchase of Oracle Applications licenses.
7

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Oracle License Support
Oracle license support offerings are marketed and sold as a part of our cloud and license business. Substantially all of our customers opt to purchase license
support contracts when they purchase Oracle applications and infrastructure licenses to run within the Oracle Cloud or other cloud-based and on-premise IT
environments. We believe our license support offerings protect and enhance our customers’ investments in Oracle applications and infrastructure
technologies because they provide proactive and personalized support services including Oracle Lifetime Support and unspecified license enhancements and
upgrades during the term of the support period. Substantially all license support customers renew their support contracts with us upon expiration in order to
continue to benefit from technical support services and the periodic issuance of unspecified updates and enhancements, which current license support
customers are entitled to receive. Our license support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net fees paid by the customer to purchase the
license, are typically one year in duration and are generally billed to the customer annually in advance.
Oracle Infrastructure Technologies
Oracle infrastructure technologies are marketed, sold and delivered through our cloud and license business and through our hardware business. Our
infrastructure technologies are designed to be flexible, cost-effective, standards-based, secure and high-performance in order to facilitate the development,
running, integration, management and extension across an organization’s cloud-based, on-premise and hybrid IT environments.
Our cloud and license business’ infrastructure technologies include the Oracle Database, which is the world’s most popular enterprise database; Java, which is
the computer industry’s most widely-used software development language; and middleware including development tools, among others. These infrastructure
technologies are available through a subscription to our OCI offerings or through the purchase of a license and related license support, at the customer’s
option, to run within the Oracle Cloud, as a part of a customer’s on-premise cloud services, and in other customer IT environments. Our OCI offerings also
include cloud-based compute, storage and networking capabilities, among others, and new and innovative services such as Oracle Autonomous Database
(described further below), MySQL HeatWave and emerging technologies such as IoT, digital assistant, and blockchain.
Our hardware business’ infrastructure technologies consist of hardware products and certain unique hardware-related software offerings and include Oracle
Engineered Systems, enterprise servers, storage solutions, industry-specific hardware, virtualization software, operating systems, management software, and
related hardware services, including hardware support at the customer’s option. Our customers utilize Oracle hardware products and related offerings in their
cloud-based, on-premise or hybrid environments to run their internal business operations and to deliver products and services to their customers.
We design our infrastructure technologies to work in our customers’ on-premise IT environments that may include other Oracle or non-Oracle hardware or
software components. Our flexible and open approach also provides Oracle customers with a choice as to how they can utilize and deploy Oracle
infrastructure technologies: through the use of Oracle Cloud offerings; on-premise in our customers’ data centers; or a hybrid combination of these two
deployment models, such as in the Oracle Cloud@Customer deployment model (described further below). We focus on the operation and integration of
Oracle infrastructure technologies to make them easier to deploy, extend, interconnect, manage and maintain for our customers and to improve computing
performance relative to our competitors’ offerings. For example, the Oracle Exadata Database Machine integrates multiple Oracle technology components to
work together to deliver improved performance, availability, scalability, security and operational efficiency of Oracle Database workloads relative to our
competitors’ products.
Oracle Infrastructure Technologies – Cloud and License Business Offerings
Oracle infrastructure technologies are marketed, sold and delivered through our cloud and license business. Our infrastructure cloud services and license
support revenues represented 58%, 59% and 60% of our total cloud services and license support revenues during fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
8

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (OCI)
OCI offerings are based upon Oracle’s Next-Generation Cloud Infrastructure and are designed to deliver our infrastructure technologies as a service including
compute, storage and networking services. OCI offerings include our Oracle Autonomous Database offerings, among others, that Oracle runs, manages,
upgrades and supports on behalf of the customer. We typically charge a prepaid fee that is decremented as the OCI services are consumed by the customer
over a stated time period. By utilizing OCI, customers can leverage the Oracle Cloud for enterprise-grade, high performance, scalable, cost-effective and secure
infrastructure technologies that are designed to be rapidly deployable and provide real-time elasticity while reducing the amount of time and resources
normally consumed by IT processes within on-premise environments. OCI is designed to be differentiated from other cloud vendors to provide better security
by separating cloud control code computers from customer data compute nodes. Customers use OCI to build and operate new cloud-native applications, to
run new workloads and to move their existing Oracle or non-Oracle workloads to the Oracle Cloud from their on-premise data centers or from other cloud-
based IT environments, among other uses. We continue to invest in OCI to improve features and performance; to expand the catalog of cloud-based
infrastructure tools and services that we provide; to increase the capacity and geographic footprint to deliver these services; to simplify the processes for
migrating workloads to the Oracle Cloud; and to provide customers with the ability to run workloads across different IT environments, the Oracle Cloud as
well as other third-party clouds in a hybrid deployment model.
Oracle customers and partners utilize OCI offerings for platform-related services that are based upon the Oracle Database, Java and Oracle Middleware,
including open source and other tools for a variety of use cases across data management (including the use of Oracle Autonomous Database and MySQL
HeatWave), applications development, integration, content management, analytics, IT management and governance, security, and rapidly emerging
technologies such as machine learning. OCI machine learning features are designed to be embedded into customer applications for a variety of predictive use
cases including, among others, the servicing of machine parts that are at risk of failing, the stocking of retailer store shelves, and the financial modeling to stay
within a business’ forecasts.
Oracle customers and partners also utilize OCI offerings for highly-scalable, available, and secure compute, storage and networking services. OCI compute
services range from virtual machines to graphics processing unit-based offerings to bare metal servers and include options for dense I/O workloads and high
performance computing. OCI storage offerings include block, object and archive storage services. In addition, our OCI offerings include networking,
connectivity, and edge services that help connect customer data centers and third-party clouds, such as Microsoft Azure, with our OCI services for the creation
of distributed and multi-cloud architectures.
In addition to the full suite of OCI offerings delivered by dozens of Oracle public cloud regions across the globe, we provide our customers with flexibility by
offering certain OCI services within a customer’s own data center to address customer latency requirements and address restrictions imposed upon customers
that operate in certain regulated industries, entities or jurisdictions. Oracle Cloud@Customer is designed to enable customers to run Oracle Autonomous
Database or Oracle Database in their own data centers behind their firewalls while having the services managed by Oracle. Oracle Dedicated Region
Cloud@Customer is designed to enable customers to bring a self-contained OCI instance into their data centers while accessing a substantial portfolio of OCI
and Oracle SaaS offerings. Oracle Roving Edge Infrastructure offerings are designed to enable customers to access cloud computing and storage services at the
edge of networks and in generally disconnected locations in order to accelerate deployment of cloud workloads outside of the data center.
Oracle Database Licenses
Oracle Database is the world’s most popular enterprise database and is designed to enable reliable and secure storage, retrieval and manipulation of all forms
of data. Oracle Database is licensed throughout the world by businesses and organizations of all sizes for a multitude of purposes, including, among others: for
use within the Oracle Cloud to deliver our Oracle SaaS and OCI offerings; for use as a cloud license by a number of cloud-based vendors as a component of
their respective cloud offerings; for packaged and custom applications for transaction processing; and for data warehousing and business intelligence. Oracle
Database may be deployed in various IT
9

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
environments including Oracle Cloud, Oracle Cloud@Customer and Dedicated Region Cloud@Customer environments, other cloud-based IT environments,
and on-premise data centers, among others. Oracle Database Enterprise Edition is available with a number of optional add-on products to address specific
customer requirements. As described above, customers may elect to purchase license support for Oracle Database licenses. We also offer Oracle Database as
a cloud service, such as with OCI’s Exadata Cloud Service and Database Cloud Service.
In addition to the Oracle Database, we offer a portfolio of specialized databases to address specific customer requirements including MySQL, the world’s most
popular open source database, as a cloud service and an on-premise offering.
Oracle Autonomous Database
Oracle Autonomous Database is designed to deliver performance and scale for enterprise database workloads with automated database operations and
policy-driven optimization by combining certain Oracle infrastructure technologies including the Oracle Database, Oracle’s Next-Generation Cloud
Infrastructure, Oracle Exadata, and native machine learning capabilities, among others. Oracle Autonomous Database is designed to be self-driving,
automating routine database administration tasks including maintenance, tuning, patching, security and backup. Oracle Autonomous Database is engineered
to lower labor costs and reduce human error while using machine learning-driven diagnostics for fault prediction and error handling and is also engineered to
provide automatic threat detection and remediation. Oracle Autonomous Database is designed to enable on-demand, automatic scaling of database
resources combined with consumption-based pricing in order to help organizations lower costs by paying only for resources used. The integration of Oracle
Autonomous Database with other Oracle Cloud Services, such as Java Cloud and the Oracle APEX low-code service, along with open interfaces and
integrations, is designed to provide developers with a modern, open platform to develop new and innovative applications.
For analytics workloads, Oracle Autonomous Database is designed to provide customers with easy-to-use analytics tools and machine learning capabilities
that are accelerated using Oracle Exadata’s scale-out infrastructure. We believe Oracle Autonomous Database’s built-in developer capabilities and automation
will enable organizations to:
•
quickly deploy new data marts and data warehouses;
•
move existing ones to the cloud; and
•
create data lake houses.
All of which is designed to enable organizations to gain new insights into customer behavior, more accurately anticipate future demand, align workforce
deployment with business activity forecasts and accelerate the pace of operations, among other benefits. For transaction processing workloads, Oracle
Autonomous Database is designed to enable organizations to safely run a complex mix of high-performance transactions. It is also designed to enable
organizations to efficiently support dynamic workloads, conduct real-time analysis of transactional data and lower administration costs.
Oracle Autonomous Database offers the following options, among others:
•
Shared Exadata Cloud Infrastructure, which is designed to provide a simple and elastic deployment choice in OCI regions where Oracle
autonomously operates all aspects of the database lifecycle, including database placement, backup and software updates;
•
Dedicated Exadata Cloud Infrastructure, which is designed to provide dedicated compute, storage, networking and database resources for a single
tenant in OCI regions, enabling high levels of security isolation and governance, customizable operational policies for autonomous operations,
workload placement and optimization, availability, over-provisioning and peak usage; and
•
Exadata Cloud@Customer Infrastructure, which is designed to be deployed in customer data centers to provide the characteristics of a private,
on-premise cloud but with cloud automation, consumption pricing, and Oracle management of the infrastructure and software.
10

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Oracle Middleware Licenses
We license our Oracle Middleware, which is a broad family of integrated application infrastructure software, for use in the Oracle Cloud, other cloud-based
environments, on-premise data centers and related IT environments. Oracle Middleware is designed to enable customers to design and integrate Oracle and
non-Oracle business applications, automate business processes, scale applications to meet customer demand, simplify security and compliance, manage
lifecycles of documents and get actionable, targeted business intelligence. Built with Oracle’s Java technology platform, Oracle Middleware products are
designed to be flexible across different deployment environments—cloud, on-premise or hybrid—as a foundation for custom, packaged and composite
applications, thereby simplifying and reducing time to deployment. Oracle Middleware is designed to protect customers’ IT investments and work with both
Oracle and non-Oracle database, middleware and applications software through an open architecture and adherence to industry standards. In addition,
Oracle Middleware supports multiple development languages and tools, which enables developers to flexibly build once and deploy applications globally
across websites, portals and cloud-based applications utilizing a variety of IT environments.
Among our other middleware license offerings, we license development tools, such as Oracle WebLogic Server for Java application development, and Oracle
Identity Manager, which automates user identity provisioning and allows enterprises to manage the end-to-end lifecycle of user identities across all enterprise
resources. Organizations may elect to purchase license support, as described above, for Oracle Middleware licenses at their option. We also offer certain of
our middleware capabilities as a part of our OCI offerings.
Java Licenses
Java is the world’s most popular programming language that is used to deliver cloud development and deployment services, microservices, analytics, data
management, blockchain, security, and continuous integration tools for numerous platforms and technologies including websites, enterprise and consumer
applications, embedded devices and large-scale systems. Java is designed to enable developers to write software on a single platform and run it on many
other different platforms, independent of operating system and hardware architecture. Java has been adopted by both independent software vendors (ISVs)
that have built their products using Java and by enterprise organizations building custom applications or consuming Java-based ISV products. Oracle is the
steward of the Java platform and ecosystem. Customers generally purchase Java offerings through subscriptions that include licenses and support services.
Oracle’s Java offerings are used by customers to support their Java deployments and to stay current with the latest security updates and other technology
innovations.
Oracle Infrastructure Technologies – Hardware Business Offerings
Oracle infrastructure technologies are also marketed, sold and delivered through our hardware business, including a broad selection of hardware products
and related hardware support services to power cloud-based and on-premise IT environments.
Oracle Engineered Systems
Oracle Engineered Systems are core to our cloud-based and on-premise data center infrastructure offerings. Oracle Engineered Systems are pre-integrated
products, combining multiple unique Oracle technology components, including database, storage, operating system, and management software with server,
storage, networking hardware and other technologies. Oracle Engineered Systems are designed to work together to deliver improved performance, scalability,
availability, security and operational efficiency relative to our competitors’ products; to be upgraded effectively and efficiently in a non-disruptive manner; and
to simplify maintenance cycles and improve security by providing a single solution for patching. For example, Oracle Exadata Database Machine is an
integrated platform that is optimized for running Oracle Database, achieving higher performance, scalability and availability at a lower cost by combining
Oracle Database, storage and operating system software with Oracle server, storage and networking hardware. We offer certain of our Oracle Engineered
Systems, including the Oracle Exadata Database Machine, among others, through flexible deployment options, including on-premise, as a cloud offering in
OCI, and as a hybrid cloud offering in customer data centers.
11

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Oracle Servers
We offer a wide range of Oracle server products that are designed for mission-critical enterprise environments and that are key components of our Oracle
Engineered Systems and Oracle Cloud offerings. We have two families of server products: those based on the Oracle SPARC microprocessor, which are
designed to be differentiated by their reliability, security and scalability specifically for UNIX environments; and those using x86 microprocessors. By offering a
range of server sizes and microprocessors, customers are offered the flexibility to choose the types of servers that they believe will be most appropriate and
valuable for their particular IT environments.
Oracle Storage
Oracle storage products are engineered for cloud, on-premise and hybrid IT environments and designed to securely store, manage, protect and archive
customers’ mission-critical data assets generated by any database or application. Oracle storage products combine flash, disk, tape and server technologies
with optimized software and unique integrations with the Oracle Database offering greater performance and efficiency and lower total cost relative to our
competitors’ storage products. Certain of our storage products provide integration with Oracle Cloud Services for backup and archiving.
Oracle Industry-Specific Hardware Offerings
We offer hardware products and services designed for certain specific industries including, among others, our point-of-sale terminals and related hardware
that are designed for managing businesses within the food and beverage, hotel and retail industries; and hardware products and services for communications
networks including network signaling, policy control and subscriber data management solutions, and session border control technology.
Oracle Operating Systems, Virtualization, Management and Other Hardware-Related Software
We offer a portfolio of operating systems, including Oracle Linux and Oracle Solaris, virtualization software, and other hardware-related software. We also
offer a range of management technologies and products, including Oracle Enterprise Manager and the Oracle Cloud Observability and Management Platform,
designed to help customers efficiently operate complex IT environments, including both end users’ and service providers’ cloud environments.
Oracle Hardware Support
Oracle hardware support offerings provide customers with unspecified software updates for software components that are essential to the functionality of
our hardware products such as for Oracle operating systems and firmware. These offerings can also include product repairs, maintenance services and
technical support services. We continue to evolve hardware support processes that are intended to proactively identify and solve quality issues and to
increase the amount of new and renewed hardware support contracts sold in connection with the sales of our hardware products. Hardware support
contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net hardware products fees.
Oracle Services
We offer services to help customers and partners maximize the performance of their investments in Oracle applications and infrastructure technologies. We
believe that our services are differentiated based on our focus on Oracle technologies, extensive experience and broad sets of intellectual property and best
practices. Our services offerings substantially include, among others:
•
consulting services, which are designed to help our customers and global system integrator partners more successfully architect and deploy our
cloud and license offerings, including IT strategy alignment, enterprise architecture planning and design, implementation, integration, application
development, security assessments and ongoing software enhancements and upgrades. We utilize a global, blended
12

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
delivery model to optimize value for our customers and partners, consisting of consultants from local geographies, industry specialists and
consultants from our global delivery and solution centers; and
•
advanced customer services, which are support services provided by Oracle to a customer on-site or remote to enable increased performance
and higher availability of a customer’s Oracle products and services.
Oracle Cloud Operations
Oracle Cloud Operations deliver our Oracle Cloud Services to customers through a secure, reliable, scalable, enterprise grade cloud infrastructure platform
managed by Oracle employees within a global network of data centers, which we refer to as the Oracle Cloud. The Oracle Cloud enables secure and isolated
cloud-based instances for each of our customers to access the functionality of Oracle Cloud Services via a broad spectrum of devices. Oracle Cloud Operations
leverage automated software tools to enable the rapid delivery of the latest cloud technology capabilities to the Oracle Cloud as they become available,
providing Oracle customers access to the latest Oracle releases generally on a quarterly cadence. We have invested in the expansion of the Oracle Cloud by
increasing existing data center capacity and adding additional data centers in new geographic locations to meet current and expected customer demand. We
expect this trend will continue.
Manufacturing
We rely on third-party manufacturing partners to produce the substantial majority of our hardware products that we market and sell to customers and utilize
internally to deliver Oracle Cloud Services, and we distribute most of our hardware products from these partners’ facilities. Our manufacturing processes are
substantially based on standardization of components across product types and centralization of assembly and distribution centers. Production of our
hardware products requires that we purchase materials, supplies, product subassemblies and full assemblies from a number of suppliers. For most of our
hardware products, we have existing alternative sources of supply or such sources are readily available. However, we do rely on sole sources for certain
hardware components. We monitor and evaluate potential risks of disruption within our supply chain operations. Refer to Risk Factors included in Item 1A
within this Annual Report for additional discussion of the challenges we encounter with respect to the sources and availability of supplies for our hardware
products and the related risks to our businesses.
Sales and Marketing
We directly market and sell our cloud, license, hardware, support and services offerings globally to businesses of many sizes and in many industries,
government agencies and educational institutions. We also market and sell our offerings globally through indirect channels.
In the United States (U.S.), our sales and services employees are based in our headquarters and other facilities throughout the country. Outside the U.S., our
international subsidiaries sell, support and service our offerings in their local countries as well as within other foreign countries where we do not operate
through a direct sales subsidiary. Our geographic coverage allows us to draw on business and technical expertise from a global workforce, provides stability to
our operations and revenue streams to offset geography specific economic trends, and offers us an opportunity to take advantage of new markets for our
offerings. Our international operations subject us to certain risks, which are more fully described in Risk Factors included in Item 1A of this Annual Report. A
summary of our domestic and international revenues and long-lived assets is set forth in Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included
elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We also market our product offerings worldwide through indirect channels. The companies that comprise our indirect channel network are members of the
Oracle Partner Network. The Oracle Partner Network is a global program that manages our business relationships with a large, broad-based network of
companies, including cloud and license, hardware and services suppliers, system integrators and resellers that deliver innovative solutions and services based
upon and in conjunction with our product offerings. By offering our partners access to our product offerings, educational information, technical services,
marketing and sales support, the Oracle Partner Network program extends our market reach by providing our partners with the resources they need to be
successful in delivering solutions to customers globally.
13

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Research and Development
We develop the substantial majority of our products and services offerings internally utilizing the skills and diversity of a global workforce. In addition, we
have extended our products and services offerings and intellectual property through acquisitions of businesses and technologies. We also purchase or license
intellectual property rights in certain circumstances. Internal development allows us to maintain technical control over the design and development of our
products. We have a number of U.S. and foreign patents and pending applications that relate to various aspects of our products and technology. While we
believe that our patents have value, no single patent is essential to us or to any of our principal businesses. Rapid technological advances in cloud, software
and hardware development, evolving standards in computer hardware and software technology, changing customer needs and frequent new product
introductions, offerings and enhancements characterize the markets in which we compete. We plan to continue to dedicate a significant amount of resources
to research and development efforts to maintain and improve our current products and services offerings.
Human Capital Resources
At Oracle, our success is driven by the quality of our people, who we believe are among the best and brightest in the industry. We strive to create an
environment that supports employee success and a culture where everyone has a voice in driving innovation.
Workforce
As of May 31, 2022, we employed approximately 143,000 full-time employees, of which approximately 48,000 were employed in the U.S. and approximately
95,000 were employed internationally. Our approximate employee counts by lines of business are:
38,000   
Sales and marketing
 
 
25,000   
Services
21,000   
Cloud services and license support operations
 
 
44,000   
Research and development
3,000   
Hardware
 
 
12,000   
General and administrative
The average tenure of our employees is approximately seven years and 27% of our employees have been employed with Oracle for ten or more years.
None of our employees in the U.S. is represented by a labor union; however, in certain foreign subsidiaries, labor unions or workers’ councils represent some
of our employees.
Diversity and Inclusion
We believe that innovation starts with inclusion. Our focus on diversity and inclusion is reflected throughout our organization, starting at the highest level. Our
Chief Executive Officer is a woman and forty percent of our Board members are women and/or come from a diverse background. We endeavor to hire
employees from a broad pool of talent with diverse backgrounds, perspectives and abilities and we believe Oracle’s leaders serve as role models for our
diverse and inclusive workforce. We seek to continuously build on our inclusive hiring strategies, tracking our progress and holding ourselves accountable for
greater diversity at Oracle. Our programs are supported by Oracle leaders across the company with strategic sponsorship from Oracle’s Executive Diversity
Council, which is led by Safra Catz, our Chief Executive Officer, and extend through the actions we are taking globally on Oracle’s five Diversity and Inclusion
(D&I) Imperatives:
•
driving insight and accountability with data;
•
recruiting with an intention on diversity;
•
embedding inclusion into talent development;
•
inspiring an inclusive culture through community; and
•
investing in the future diversity of our industry.
14

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
In addition to global, regional and local programs, Oracle Human Resources partners with business leaders to create and implement D&I plans to embed
targeted strategies into organizations across Oracle. Employee satisfaction on the importance of D&I at Oracle and their manager’s encouragement of diverse
ideas and perspectives ranks high in our employee engagement surveys.
We are proud to be recognized for our progress and commitment to D&I, including being named a Best Place to Work for LGBTQ+ Equality in 2022 by the
Human Rights Campaign Foundation, a 2021 Best Place to Work for Disability Inclusion by the Disability Equality Index, and a 2022 Top Supporter of
Historically Black College and University Engineering Schools by Career Communications Group.
Leaders Who Listen
We believe that an important aspect of creating a culture and environment that supports employee, customer and business success is listening to employee
feedback. We share the results of our annual employee engagement survey with leaders who receive direct observations from employees about areas critical
to Oracle’s strategic priorities, including the employee and customer experience. The results of the survey are also discussed with our Board of Directors and
Board committees. Nearly 80% of our employees participate in the annual survey. Leaders listen to employees, evaluate feedback and prioritize actions to
enhance employee, business and customer success.
Employee Experience
Emerging from the COVID-19 pandemic, Oracle has further increased our focus on delivering a great employee experience, anchored by meaningful work,
career opportunities and well-being, to continue to attract and retain high quality talent. We support employee well-being from multiple dimensions,
including economic, health, development, and lifestyle with a comprehensive suite of compensation, benefits, learning and development, and flexible work
options.
Opportunities to Learn and Grow
We believe that one of the primary reasons candidates join Oracle is for career development and opportunities to grow their careers. We have programs and
resources to help our employees explore, build and achieve their career goals. We also promote regular career conversations between leaders and
employees. These are separate from performance feedback conversations and are focused on helping employees identify and take steps to grow their careers.
Our Talent Review process, run on Oracle Fusion Cloud HCM, provides the mechanism for leaders to review and discuss opportunities and action plans to
develop employees. 24% of our open non-entry level positions were filled internally in fiscal 2022, providing growth opportunities and retaining critical
knowledge and talent.
Helping our employees learn and apply new skills is key to retaining them and critical to our ability to innovate and rapidly evolve. We support employees with
anytime, everywhere learning resources to help build skills for today and the future. Oracle employees received two million hours of training in fiscal 2022 and
accessed online learning content at an average rate of more than two million views per month. Our employees take advantage of online classes and learning
resources on business and technical skills, as well as webinars and learning opportunities that are designed to support employee and family well-being.
Flexible Work Options
For the vast majority of Oracle’s employees, productivity is not tied to being in an office and collaboration can happen between people anywhere. Oracle’s
modern approach to work gives our employees more flexibility to choose where and how to work. Depending on their role, many of our employees can
choose their office location, as well as work from home some or all of the time. We believe this allows us to engage with a wider pool of talent and retain
employees who want or need more flexibility.
15

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Making a Difference
Many of our employees participate in Oracle’s corporate citizenship initiatives focused on education, the environment and community. Each year, through our
volunteering and giving programs, employees donate tens of thousands of volunteer hours and millions of dollars (matched by Oracle) to a wide variety of
causes. Of particular note are the efforts made by employees to support colleagues impacted by the Russia-Ukraine conflict, above and beyond the direct
support Oracle has provided. In addition to monetary donations by employees and by Oracle through its matching program to support humanitarian relief
efforts in Ukraine and Oracle employees in need, many employees have offered direct assistance to Ukrainian coworkers and their families as they seek safety.
Seasonality and Cyclicality
Our quarterly revenues have historically been affected by a variety of seasonal factors, including the structure of our sales force incentive compensation plans,
which are common in the IT industry. In each fiscal year, our total revenues and operating margins are typically highest in our fourth fiscal quarter and lowest
in our first fiscal quarter. See “Cloud and License Business” in Item 7 of this Annual Report for more information regarding the seasonality and cyclicality of the
revenues, expenses and margins of our cloud and license business, which is our largest business.
Competition
We face intense competition in all aspects of our business. The nature of the IT industry creates a competitive landscape that is constantly evolving as firms
emerge, expand or are acquired, as technology evolves and as customer demands and competitive pressures otherwise change.
Our customers are demanding less complexity and lower total cost in the implementation, sourcing, integration and ongoing maintenance of their IT
environments. Our enterprise cloud, license and hardware offerings compete directly with certain offerings from some of the largest and most competitive
companies in the world, including Amazon.com, Inc., Microsoft Corporation, International Business Machines Corporation (IBM), Intel Corporation, Cisco
Systems, Inc., Adobe Systems Incorporated, Alphabet Inc., salesforce.com, inc. and SAP SE, as well as other companies like Hewlett-Packard Enterprise and
Workday, Inc. In addition, due to the low barriers to entry in many of our market segments, new technologies and new and growing competitors frequently
emerge to challenge our offerings. Our competitors range from companies offering broad IT solutions across many of our lines of business to vendors
providing point solutions, or offerings focused on a specific functionality, product area or industry. In addition, as we expand into new market segments, we
face increased competition as we compete with existing competitors, as well as firms that may be partners in other areas of our business and other firms with
whom we have not previously competed. Moreover, we or our competitors may take certain strategic actions—including acquisitions, partnerships and joint
ventures, or repositioning of product lines—which invite even greater competition in one or more product offering categories.
Key competitive factors in each of the segments in which we currently compete and may compete in the future include: total cost of ownership, performance,
scalability, reliability, security, functionality, efficiency, ease of use, speed to production and quality of technical support. Our products and services sales and
the relative strength of our products and services versus those of our competitors are also directly and indirectly affected by the following, among other
factors:
•
market adoption of cloud-based IT offerings including SaaS and cloud infrastructure offerings;
•
the ease of deployment, use, transacting for and maintenance of our products and services offerings;
•
compatibility between Oracle products and services deployed within local IT environments and public cloud IT environments, including our Oracle
Cloud environments;
•
the adoption of commodity servers and microprocessors;
•
the broader “platform” competition between our industry standard Java technology platform and the .NET programming environment of
Microsoft;
16

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
•
operating system competition among our Oracle Solaris and Linux operating systems, with alternatives including Microsoft’s Windows Server, and
other UNIX and Linux operating systems;
•
the adoption of open source alternatives to commercial software by enterprise software customers;
•
products, features and functionality developed internally by customers and their IT staff;
•
products, features and functionality customized and implemented for customers by consultants, systems integrators or other third parties; and
•
the attractiveness of offerings from business processing outsourcers.
For more information about the competitive risks we face, refer to Item 1A Risk Factors included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Governmental Regulation
We operate globally and are subject to numerous U.S. federal, state, and foreign laws and regulations covering a wide variety of subject matters. For
information about governmental regulations applicable to our business, refer to Item 1A Risk Factors included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Available Information
Our Annual Report on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed pursuant to Sections
13(a) and 15(d) of the Exchange Act are available, free of charge, on the SEC website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at
www.oracle.com/investor as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such materials with, or furnish them to, the SEC. We use our Investor
Relations website as a means of disclosing material non-public information. Accordingly, investors should monitor our Investor Relations website, in addition
to following our press releases, SEC filings and public conference calls and webcasts. In addition, information regarding our environmental policy and global
sustainability initiatives and solutions are also available on our website at www.oracle.com/corporate/citizenship. The information posted on or accessible
through our website is not incorporated into this Annual Report. The references to our websites are intended to be inactive textual references only.
Information About Our Executive Officers
Our executive officers are listed below.
Name
  Office(s)
Lawrence J. Ellison
  Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Technology Officer
Safra A. Catz
  Chief Executive Officer and Director
Jeffrey O. Henley
  Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors
Edward Screven
  Executive Vice President, Chief Corporate Architect
Dorian E. Daley
  Executive Vice President and General Counsel
William Corey West
  Executive Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer
Mr. Ellison, 77, has been our Chairman of the Board and Chief Technology Officer since September 2014. He served as our Chief Executive Officer from June
1977, when he founded Oracle, until September 2014. He has served as a Director since June 1977. He previously served as our Chairman of the Board from
May 1995 to January 2004. He currently serves as a director of Tesla, Inc.
Ms. Catz, 60, has been our Chief Executive Officer since September 2014. She served as our President from January 2004 to September 2014, our Chief
Financial Officer most recently from April 2011 until September 2014 and a Director since October 2001. She was previously our Chief Financial Officer from
November 2005 until September 2008 and our Interim Chief Financial Officer from April 2005 until July 2005. Prior to being named our President, she held
various other positions with us since joining Oracle in 1999. She currently serves as a director of The Walt Disney Company. She also serves on the U.S.
Homeland Security Advisory Council.
17

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Mr. Henley, 77, has served as our Vice Chairman of the Board since September 2014. He previously served as our Chairman of the Board from January 2004 to
September 2014 and has served as a Director since June 1995. He served as our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer from March 1991 to July
2004.
Mr. Screven, 57, has been Executive Vice President, Chief Corporate Architect since May 2015. He served as our Senior Vice President, Chief Corporate
Architect from November 2006 to April 2015 and as Vice President, Chief Corporate Architect from January 2003 to November 2006. He held various other
positions with us since joining Oracle in 1986.
Ms. Daley, 63, has been our Executive Vice President and General Counsel since April 2015. She served as our Secretary from October 2007 until October 2017
and she was our Senior Vice President, General Counsel from October 2007 to April 2015. She served as our Vice President, Legal, Associate General Counsel
and Assistant Secretary from June 2004 to October 2007, as Associate General Counsel and Assistant Secretary from October 2001 to June 2004 and as
Associate General Counsel from February 2001 to October 2001. She held various other positions with us since joining Oracle’s Legal Department in 1992.
Mr. West, 60, has been our Executive Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer since April 2015. He served as our Senior Vice President, Corporate Controller
and Chief Accounting Officer from February 2008 to April 2015 and served as our Vice President, Corporate Controller and Chief Accounting Officer from April
2007 to February 2008.
Item 1A.Risk Factors
We operate in rapidly changing economic and technological environments that present numerous risks, many of which are driven by factors that we cannot
control or predict. The following discussion, as well as our “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” discussion in Item 7 Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, highlights some of these risks. The risks described below are not exhaustive and you should carefully
consider these risks and uncertainties before investing in our securities.
Business and Operational Risks
Our success depends upon our ability to develop and sell new products and services, integrate acquired products and services and enhance our existing
products and services.   Rapid technological advances, intense competition, changing delivery models and evolving standards in computer hardware and
software development and communications infrastructure, changing and increasingly sophisticated customer needs and frequent new product introductions
and enhancements characterize the industries in which we compete. If we are unable to develop new or sufficiently differentiated products and services,
enhance and improve our product offerings and support services in a timely manner or position and price our products and services to meet demand,
customers may not purchase or subscribe to our license, hardware or cloud offerings or renew license support, hardware support or cloud subscriptions
contracts. Renewals of these contracts are important to the growth of our business. In addition, we cannot provide any assurance that the standards on which
we choose to develop new products will allow us to compete effectively for business opportunities in emerging areas.
We have continued to refresh and release new offerings of our cloud products and services. Machine learning and artificial intelligence are increasingly driving
innovations in technology, but if they fail to operate as anticipated or our other products do not perform as promised, our business and reputation may be
harmed.
During fiscal 2022, we held many of our major customer events in a virtual format. Our shift to virtual customer events may not be successful, and we may not
be able to showcase our products as well as we have historically done through in-person events or generate the same customer interest, opportunities and
leads through these virtual events. We currently plan to reintroduce large in-person events during fiscal 2023 but we may not be able to do so successfully
and our customers may not be able or willing to attend them, which could adversely impact our ability to market and sell our products and services.
In addition, our business may be adversely affected if:
•
we do not continue to develop and release new or enhanced products and services within the anticipated time frames;
18

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
•
infrastructure costs to deliver new or enhanced products and services take longer or result in greater costs than anticipated;
•
we are unable to increase our existing data center capacity or establish data centers in new geographic locations in a timely manner to meet
current or expected customer demand;
•
there is a delay in market acceptance of and difficulty in transitioning new and existing customers to new, enhanced or acquired product lines or
services;
•
there are changes in information technology (IT) trends that we do not adequately anticipate or address with our product development efforts;
•
we do not optimize complementary product lines and services in a timely manner; or
•
we fail to adequately integrate, support or enhance acquired product lines or services.
Our Oracle Cloud strategy, including our Oracle Cloud Software-as-a-Service and Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (SaaS and OCI, respectively, and collectively,
Oracle Cloud Services) offerings, may adversely affect our revenues and profitability.   We provide our cloud and other offerings to customers worldwide via
a variety of deployment models, including via our cloud-based SaaS and OCI offerings. As these business models continue to evolve, we may not be able to
compete effectively, generate significant revenues or maintain the profitability of our cloud offerings. Additionally, the increasing prevalence of cloud and SaaS
delivery models offered by us and our competitors may unfavorably impact the pricing of our cloud and license offerings. If we do not successfully execute our
cloud computing strategy or anticipate the cloud computing needs of our customers, our reputation as a cloud services provider could be harmed and our
revenues and profitability could decline.
As customer demand for our cloud offerings increases, we experience volatility in our reported revenues and operating results due to the differences in timing
of revenue recognition between our cloud license and on-premise license, and hardware product arrangements relative to our cloud offering arrangements.
Customers predominantly purchase our cloud offerings on a subscription basis and revenues from these offerings are generally recognized ratably or as
services are consumed over the terms of the subscriptions. Consequently, any deterioration in sales activity associated with our cloud offerings may not be
immediately observable in our consolidated statement of operations. This is in contrast to revenues associated with our license and hardware product
arrangements, which are generally recognized in full at the time of delivery of the related licenses and hardware products. In addition, we may not be able to
accurately anticipate customer transitions from or be able to sufficiently backfill reduced customer demand for our license, hardware and support offerings
relative to the expected increase in customer adoption of and demand for our Oracle Cloud Services, which could adversely affect our revenues and
profitability.
As a part of our Oracle Cloud strategy, we plan our investment levels based on estimates of future revenues and future anticipated rates of growth. In recent
periods, our cloud services and license support expenses have grown to meet current and expected demand for our cloud offerings, including investments to
increase our existing data center capacity and to establish data centers in new geographic locations. In connection with these investments, we entered, and
expect to continue to enter, into long-term operating lease commitments with third party data center providers that generally require us to pay fees to early
exit such obligations should our strategies change, which could adversely impact our profitability and cash flows. In addition, we outfit these data centers with
equipment and improvements that we typically depreciate over their estimated useful lives, which could be shortened should our cloud strategies change,
which could adversely affect our profitability.
We might experience significant coding, manufacturing or configuration errors in our cloud, license and hardware offerings.   Despite testing prior to the
release and throughout the lifecycle of a product or service, our cloud, license and hardware offerings sometimes contain coding, manufacturing or
configuration errors that can impact their function, performance and security, and result in other negative consequences. The detection and correction of any
errors in released cloud, license or hardware offerings can be time consuming and costly. Errors in our cloud, license or hardware offerings could affect their
ability to properly function, integrate or operate with other cloud, license or hardware offerings, could result in service interruptions, delays or outages of our
cloud offerings, could create security vulnerabilities in our products or services, could delay the development or release of new products or services or new
versions of products or services, and could adversely affect market acceptance
19

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
of our products or services. This includes third-party software products or services incorporated into our own. If we experience any of these errors, or if there
are delays in releasing our cloud, license or hardware offerings or new versions of these offerings, our sales could be affected and revenues could decline. In
addition, we run Oracle’s business operations as well as cloud and other services that we offer to our customers on our products and networks. Therefore, any
flaws could affect our and our customers’ abilities to conduct business operations and to ensure accuracy in financial processes and reporting, and may result
in unanticipated costs. Enterprise customers rely on our cloud, license and hardware offerings and related services to run their businesses, and errors in our
cloud, license and hardware offerings and related services could expose us to product liability, performance and warranty claims as well as significant harm to
our brand and reputation, which could impact our future sales.
If we are unable to compete effectively, the results of operations and prospects for our business could be harmed.   We face intense competition in all
aspects of our business. The nature of the IT industry creates a competitive landscape that is constantly evolving as firms emerge, expand or are acquired, as
technology evolves and as delivery models change. Many vendors spend amounts in excess of what Oracle spends to develop and market applications and
infrastructure technologies including databases, middleware products, application development tools, business applications, collaboration products and
business intelligence, compute, storage and networking products, among others, which compete with Oracle applications and infrastructure offerings. Use of
our competitors’ technologies influences a customer’s purchasing decision or creates an environment that makes it less efficient to utilize or migrate to Oracle
products and services. Our competitors may also adopt business practices that provide customers access to competing products and services on terms that
we may not generally find acceptable, which may convince customers to purchase competitor products and services. We could lose customers if our
competitors introduce new competitive products, add new functionality, acquire competitive products, reduce prices, better execute on their sales and
marketing strategies, offer more flexible business practices, provide debt or equity financing to customers or form strategic alliances with other companies.
Mergers, consolidations or alliances among our competitors, or acquisitions of our competitors by large companies may result in increased competition. We
may also face increasing competition from open source software initiatives in which competitors may provide software and intellectual property for free.
Existing or new competitors could gain sales opportunities or customers at our expense.
We may need to change our pricing models to compete successfully.   The intense competition we face in the sales of our products and services and general
economic and business conditions could put pressure on us to change our prices. If our competitors offer deep discounts on certain products or services or
develop products that the marketplace considers more valuable, we may need to lower prices, introduce pricing models and offerings that are less favorable
to us, or offer other favorable terms in order to compete successfully. Any such changes may reduce revenues and margins and could adversely affect
operating results. Additionally, the increasing prevalence of cloud delivery models offered by us and our competitors may unfavorably impact the pricing of
our other cloud and license, hardware and services offerings, and we may also incur increased cloud delivery expenses as we expand our cloud operations and
update our infrastructure, all of which could reduce our revenues and/or profitability. Our license support fees and hardware support fees are generally priced
as a percentage of our net license fees and net new hardware products fees, respectively. Our competitors may offer lower pricing on their support offerings,
which could put pressure on us to further discount our offerings.
Changes to our prices and pricing policies could cause our revenues to decline or be delayed as our sales force implements and our customers adjust to the
new pricing policies. Some of our competitors may bundle products for promotional purposes or as a long-term pricing strategy, commit to large customer
deployments at prices that are unprofitable, or provide guarantees of prices and product implementations. These practices could, over time, significantly
constrain the prices that we can charge for certain of our products. If we do not adapt our pricing models to reflect changes in customer use of our products
or changes in customer demand, our revenues could decrease. The increase in open source software distribution may also cause us to change our pricing
models.
Any failure to offer high-quality technical support services may adversely affect our relationships with our customers and our financial results.     Our
customers depend on our support organization to resolve technical issues relating to our applications and infrastructure offerings. We may be unable to
respond quickly enough to accommodate short-term increases in customer demand for support services or may be inefficient in our
20

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
resolution of customer support issues. Increased customer demand for these services, without corresponding revenues, could increase costs and adversely
affect our operating results. Any failure to maintain high-quality technical support, or a market perception that we do not maintain high-quality technical
support, could adversely affect our reputation, our ability to sell and renew our applications and infrastructure offerings to existing and prospective
customers, and our business, operating results, and financial position.
Our cloud offerings and hardware offerings are complex, and if we cannot successfully manage this complexity, including the sourcing of technologies and
components, the results of these businesses will suffer. We depend on suppliers to develop, manufacture and deliver on a timely basis the necessary
technologies and components for our hardware products that we market and sell to our customers and that we use as a part of our cloud infrastructure to
deliver our cloud offerings, and there are some technologies and components that can only be purchased from a single vendor due to price, quality,
technology, availability or other business constraints. Our supply chain operations have been, and likely will continue to be, negatively impacted by the COVID-
19 pandemic and could also be disrupted by industry consolidation and component constraints or shortages, natural disasters, political unrest, other public
health crises, changes to trade policies, port stoppages or other transportation disruptions or slowdowns, or other factors affecting the countries or regions
where these single source component vendors are located or where the products are being shipped. If one or more of the risks described above occurs, our
cloud and license business and hardware business and related operating results could be materially and adversely affected.
We are susceptible to third-party manufacturing and logistics delays, which could result in the loss of sales and customers.   We outsource a majority of our
manufacturing, assembly, delivery and technology of, and certain component designs for, our hardware products to a variety of companies, many of which are
located outside the U.S. From time to time, these partners experience production problems, delays or cannot meet our demand for products. The conditions
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic created, and likely will continue to create, delays in our supply chain. Third-party manufacturing and logistics delays
attributable to the effects of COVID-19 caused delays in the manufacturing and fulfilment of certain customer orders during fiscal 2022. Ongoing or future
delays in manufacturing could cause the loss of additional sales, delayed revenue recognition or an increase in our hardware products expenses, all of which
could adversely affect the margins of our cloud and license business and hardware business. These challenges could arise if we alter our manufacturing
strategies, suppliers, or locations.
Our hardware revenues and profitability have declined and could continue to decline.   Our hardware business may adversely affect our total revenues and
overall profitability and related growth rates. We may not achieve our estimated revenue, profit or other financial projections with respect to our hardware
business in a timely manner or at all due to a number of factors, including:
•
our focus on certain of our more profitable Oracle Engineered Systems and certain other hardware products we consider strategic and the de-
emphasis of certain of our lower profit margin commodity hardware products;
•
changes in strategies and frequency for the development and introduction of new versions or next generations of our hardware products;
•
decreased customer demand for related hardware support as hardware products approach the end of their useful lives; and
•
general supply chain material shortages worldwide, which were further exacerbated globally as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Supply chain shortages have in some instances resulted in increases to the costs of production of our hardware products that we may not be able to pass on
to our customers. In addition, we have in some instances responded to such shortages by committing to higher inventory purchases and balances relative to
our historical positions in order to secure manufacturing capacity, which has in some instances increased inventory excess and obsolescence risk and
adversely impacted our operating cash flows.
Our periodic workforce restructurings and reorganizations can be disruptive.     We are currently restructuring our workforce and in the past we have
restructured or made other adjustments to our workforce in response to management changes, product changes, performance issues, changes in strategies,
acquisitions and other internal
21

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
and external considerations. These types of restructurings have resulted, and may in the future result, in increased restructuring costs and temporary reduced
productivity while the employees adjusted to their new roles and responsibilities. In addition, we may not achieve or sustain the expected growth, resource
redeployment or cost savings benefits of these restructurings, or may not do so within the expected timeframe. These effects could recur in connection with
future acquisitions and other restructurings, and our revenues and other results of operations could be negatively affected.
We may lose key employees or may be unable to hire enough qualified employees.   We rely on hiring qualified employees and the continued service of our
senior management, including our Chairman of the Board of Directors, Chief Technology Officer and founder; our Chief Executive Officer; other members of
our executive team; and other key employees. In the technology industry, there is substantial and continuous competition for highly skilled business, product
development, technical and other personnel. We recently reopened certain of our offices around the globe and we intend to reopen other offices when it is
safe to do so and local requirements allow. Our employees continue to have flexibility to choose where and how to work. Depending on their role, this means
that many employees can choose their office location, as well as continue to work from home some or all of the time. While we believe this may help us
engage with a wider pool of talent and may help to retain employees who want or need more flexibility, it may fail to yield these desired benefits and could
also lead to increased employee burnout or negatively impact employee productivity, and it may present cybersecurity risks and additional risks for our real
estate portfolio and strategy. Despite our efforts to reopen our offices in a safe manner, our employees who have opted to return to the office may
nevertheless be exposed to health risks, which may expose us to potential liability.
We may also experience increased compensation costs that are not offset by either improved productivity or higher sales. We may not be successful in
recruiting new personnel and in retaining and motivating existing personnel. With rare exceptions, we do not have long-term employment or non-competition
agreements with our employees. Members of our senior management team have left Oracle over the years for a variety of reasons, and we cannot guarantee
that there will not be additional departures, which may be disruptive to our operations.
We continually focus on improving our cost structure by hiring personnel in countries where advanced technical expertise and other expertise are available at
lower costs. When we make adjustments to our workforce, we may incur expenses associated with workforce reductions that delay the benefit of a more
efficient workforce structure. We are experiencing increased competition for employees in these countries as the trend toward globalization continues, which
has affected our employee retention efforts and increased our expenses in an effort to offer a competitive compensation program. In addition, changes to
immigration and labor law policies may adversely impact our access to technical and professional talent.
Our general compensation program includes restricted stock units and performance-based equity, which are important tools in attracting and retaining
employees in our industry. If our stock price performs poorly, it may adversely affect our ability to retain or attract employees. We continually evaluate our
compensation practices and consider changes from time to time, such as reducing the number of employees granted equity awards or the number of equity
awards granted per employee and granting alternative forms of stock-based compensation, which may have an impact on our ability to retain employees and
the amount of stock-based compensation expense that we record. Any changes in our compensation practices or those of our competitors could affect our
ability to retain and motivate existing personnel and recruit new personnel.
Our cloud and license, and hardware indirect sales channels could affect our future operating results.   Our cloud and license, and hardware indirect channel
network is comprised primarily of resellers, system integrators/implementers, consultants, education providers, internet service providers, network
integrators and independent software vendors. Our relationships with these channel participants are important elements of our cloud, software and hardware
marketing and sales efforts. Our financial results could be adversely affected if:
•
our contracts with channel participants were terminated or our relationships with channel participants were to deteriorate;
•
any of our competitors enter into strategic relationships with or acquire a significant channel participant;
•
the financial condition or operations of our channel participants were to weaken; or
22

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
•
the level of demand for our channel participants’ products and services were to decrease.
There can be no assurance that we will be successful in maintaining, expanding or developing our relationships with channel participants. If we are not
successful, we may lose sales opportunities, customers and revenues.
Acquisitions present many risks and we may not achieve the financial and strategic goals that were contemplated at the time of a transaction.   On June 8,
2022, we closed the acquisition of Cerner Corporation (“Cerner”). We continue to review and consider strategic acquisitions of companies, products, services
and technologies. We have a selective and active acquisition program and we expect to continue to make acquisitions in the future because acquisitions have
been an important element of our overall corporate strategy. Risks we may face in connection with our acquisition program, such as our recent acquisition of
Cerner, include:
•
our ongoing business may be disrupted and our management’s attention may be diverted by acquisition, transition or integration activities;
•
we may have difficulties (1) managing an acquired company’s technologies or lines of business; (2) entering new markets where we have no, or
limited, direct prior experience or where competitors may have stronger market positions; or (3) retaining key personnel from the acquired
companies;
•
an acquisition may not further our business strategy as we expected, we may not integrate an acquired company or technology as successfully as
we expected, we may impose our business practices or alter go-to-market strategies that adversely impact the acquired business or we may
overpay for, or otherwise not realize the expected return on our investments, each or all of which could adversely affect our business or operating
results and potentially cause impairment to assets that we recorded as a part of an acquisition, including intangible assets and goodwill;
•
our operating results or financial condition may be adversely impacted by (1) claims or liabilities that we assume from an acquired company or
technology or that are otherwise related to an acquisition; (2) pre-existing contractual relationships that we assume from an acquired company,
the termination or modification of which may be costly or disruptive to our business; and (3) unfavorable revenue recognition or other accounting
treatment as a result of an acquired company’s business practices;
•
we may fail to identify or assess the magnitude of certain liabilities, shortcomings or other circumstances prior to acquiring a company or
technology;
•
we may not realize any anticipated increase in our revenues from an acquisition for a number of reasons, including (1) if a larger than predicted
number of customers decline to renew their contracts with the acquired company; (2) if we are unable to sell the acquired products or service
offerings to our customer base; (3) if acquired customers do not elect to purchase our technologies due to differing business practices; or (4) if
contract models utilized by an acquired company do not allow us to recognize revenues in a manner that is consistent with our current
accounting practices;
•
we may have difficulty integrating acquired technologies, products, services and their related supply chain operations with our existing lines of
business and related infrastructures;
•
we may have multiple product lines or services offerings as a result of our acquisitions that are offered, priced, delivered and supported
differently, which could cause customer confusion and delays;
•
we may incur higher than anticipated costs (1) to support, develop and deliver acquired products or services; (2) for general and administrative
functions that support new business models; or (3) to comply with regulations applicable to an acquired business that are more complicated than
we had anticipated;
•
we may be unable to obtain timely approvals from, or may otherwise have certain limitations, restrictions, penalties or other sanctions imposed
on us by worker councils or similar bodies under applicable employment laws as a result of an acquisition;
•
we may be unable to obtain required approvals from governmental authorities under competition and antitrust laws on a timely basis, if at all,
and we may need to divest or dispose of assets or businesses or take other actions in order to obtain such approvals;
•
our use of cash to pay for acquisitions may limit other potential uses of our cash;
•
we recently incurred additional debt to finance our acquisition of Cerner and in the future, we may have to incur additional debt to pay for other
acquisitions or have to delay or not proceed with a substantial acquisition if we cannot obtain the necessary funding to complete the acquisition
in a timely manner or on favorable terms; and
23

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
•
we may experience additional or unexpected changes in how we are required to account for our acquisitions pursuant to U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles, including arrangements that we may assume in an acquisition.
The occurrence of any of these risks could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows, particularly
in the case of a larger acquisition or several concurrent acquisitions.
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected how we and our customers are operating our respective businesses, and the duration and extent to which this will
impact our future results of operations remains uncertain.     The COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to control its spread have affected how we and our
customers, partners and suppliers are operating our businesses. Our operations have been and may in the future be negatively affected by a range of external
factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic that are not within our control. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic has led governments to implement
preventative measures to contain or control further spread of the virus, such as travel restrictions, prohibitions of non-essential activities, quarantines, work-
from-home directives and shelter-in-place/social distancing orders. These preventative measures led to sharp reductions in demand in certain industries in
which our customers operate. It is not clear what long-term effects the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, including the effects on our customers,
partners, suppliers and prospects. If we are not able to respond to and manage the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic effectively, our business will be harmed.
We are a U.S. federal government contractor and are therefore subject to a federal executive order requiring our U.S.-based employees to be vaccinated
unless they qualify for medical or religious exemptions. The executive order has been challenged in court and has been enjoined from enforcement, but its
ultimate status, and the impact on our business, is uncertain. However, this requirement or other future vaccine mandates could adversely affect our
workforce retention and hiring. In addition, customer vaccination requirements, as well as certain state and local vaccination mandates, may impact our
staffing abilities.
The negative impacts of the global COVID-19 pandemic on the broader global economy and related impacts on our customers’ business operations and their
demand for our products will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. Additional impacts and risks that we are
not currently aware of may arise. We are similarly unable to predict the extent of the impact of the pandemic on our customers, partners, suppliers and other
partners, but a material effect on these parties could also materially and adversely affect us. In addition, we have curtailed travel expenses since the beginning
of the COVID-19 pandemic, and it may become necessary for us to increase such travel expenses prospectively in furtherance of our business initiatives. The
COVID-19 pandemic may also heighten other risks described in this Risk Factors section.
Data Privacy, Cybersecurity and Intellectual Property Risks
If our security measures for our products and services are compromised and as a result, our data, our customers’ data or our IT systems are accessed
improperly, made unavailable, or improperly modified, our products and services may be perceived as vulnerable, our brand and reputation could be
damaged, the IT services we provide to our customers could be disrupted, and customers may stop using our products and services, any of which could
reduce our revenue and earnings, increase our expenses and expose us to legal claims and regulatory actions.   Our products and services, including Oracle
Cloud Services, store, retrieve, manipulate and manage third-party data, such as our customers’ information and data, as well as our own data. We believe
that Oracle in particular is a target for computer hackers and other bad actors because Oracle stores and processes large amounts of data, including in
customer sectors involving particularly sensitive data such as health sciences, financial services, retail, hospitality and the government. We and our third-party
vendors are regularly subject to attempts by third parties (which may include individuals or groups of hackers and sophisticated organizations, such as state-
sponsored organizations, nation-states and individuals sponsored by them) to identify and exploit product and service vulnerabilities, penetrate or bypass our
security measures, and gain unauthorized access to our or our customers’, partners’ and suppliers’ software, hardware and cloud offerings, networks and
systems. Successful attempts by one of these malicious actors can lead to the compromise of personal information or the confidential information or data of
Oracle or our customers. Attempts of this nature typically involve IT-related viruses, worms, and other malicious software programs that attack networks,
systems, products and services, exploit potential
24

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
security vulnerabilities of networks, systems, products and services, create system disruptions and cause shutdowns or denials of service. Third parties may
attempt to fraudulently induce customers, partners, employees or suppliers into disclosing sensitive information such as user names, passwords or other
information in order to gain access to our data, our customers’, suppliers’ or partners’ data or the IT systems of Oracle, our customers, suppliers or partners.
Our products and services, including our Oracle Cloud Services, may also be accessed or modified improperly as a result of customer, partner, employee,
contractor or supplier error or malfeasance.
If a cyber-attack or other security incident results in unauthorized access to or modification of our customers’ or suppliers’ data, other external data, our own
data or our IT systems, or if the services we provide to our customers are disrupted, or if our products or services are reported to have or are perceived as
having security vulnerabilities, we could incur significant expenses and suffer significant damage to our brand and reputation. If our customers lose confidence
in the security and reliability of our products and services, including our cloud offerings, and perceive them to not be secure, they may decide to reduce or
terminate their spend with us. In addition, cyber-attacks and other security incidents could lead to significant investigation and remediation costs, loss or
destruction of information, interruption of our operations, inappropriate use of proprietary and sensitive data, lawsuits, indemnity obligations, regulatory
investigations and financial penalties, and claims and increased legal liability, including in some cases contractual costs related to customer notification and
fraud monitoring. Our remediation efforts may not be successful. Because the techniques used to obtain unauthorized access to, or sabotage IT systems,
change frequently, grow more complex over time, and often are not recognized until launched against a target, we may be unable to anticipate or implement
adequate measures to prevent such techniques. Our internal IT systems continue to evolve and we are often early adopters of new technologies. However,
our business policies and internal security controls may not keep pace with these changes as new threats emerge. In addition, we often experience increased
activity of this nature during times of instability, including during our office closures related to the COVID-19 pandemic when most of our employees were
working solely from home, and our operations may be more susceptible to malfeasance due to operational changes instituted to comply with safety, health
and regulatory requirements, among others. We may not discover any security breach and loss of information for a significant period of time after the security
breach.
Our products operate in conjunction with and are dependent on a wide variety of third-party products, components and services. If there is a security
vulnerability in one of these components, and if there is a security exploit targeting it, we could face increased costs, liability claims, customer dissatisfaction,
reduced revenue, or harm to our reputation or competitive position. We also have an active acquisition program and have acquired a number of companies,
products, services and technologies over the years. While we make significant efforts to address any IT security issues with respect to our acquired companies,
we may still inherit such risks when we integrate these companies within Oracle.
Our business practices with respect to data could give rise to operational interruption, liabilities or reputational harm as a result of governmental
regulation, legal requirements or industry standards relating to privacy and data protection.   As regulatory focus on privacy issues continues to increase
and worldwide laws and regulations concerning the handling of personal information expand and become more complex, potential risks related to data
collection and use within our business will intensify. In addition, U.S. and foreign governments have enacted or are considering enacting legislation or
regulations, or may in the near future interpret existing legislation or regulations, in a manner that could significantly impact our ability, as well as the ability
of our customers, partners and data providers, to collect, augment, analyze, use, transfer and share personal and other information that is integral to certain
services we provide. Our recent acquisition of Cerner also subjects us to additional data privacy and other related regulations governing the healthcare
industry and patient information, including but not limited to regulations governing electronic health data transmissions, the treatment of patient
information, healthcare fraud and healthcare information sharing.
In the wake of the European Union (EU) General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), the rate of global consideration and adoption of privacy laws has
increased, giving rise to more global jurisdictions in which regulatory inquiries and audits may be requested of Oracle, and if we are not deemed to be in
compliance, could result in enforcement actions and/or fines. This is true in the U.S. where, for example, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Utah and Virginia
have enacted privacy laws, the U.S. Congress is considering several privacy bills at
25

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
the federal level, and a number of other state legislatures are considering privacy laws. Regulators globally are also imposing greater monetary fines for
privacy violations. The GDPR, which became effective in May 2018, provides for monetary penalties of up to 4% of an organization’s worldwide revenue.
These penalties can be significant. For example, one European data protection regulator has fined a major U.S. technology company €225 million for its data
handling practices. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission continues to fine companies for unfair and deceptive data protection practices, and these fines may
increase in size. Taken together, the changes in laws or regulations associated with the enhanced protection of personal and other types of data could greatly
increase the size of potential fines related to data protection, and our cost of providing our products and services could result in changes to our business
practices or even prevent us from offering certain services in jurisdictions in which we operate. Although we have implemented contracts, diligence programs,
policies and procedures designed to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, there can be no assurance that our employees, contractors,
partners, suppliers, data providers or agents will not violate such laws and regulations or our contracts, policies and procedures. Additionally, public
perception and standards related to the privacy of personal information can shift rapidly, in ways that may affect our reputation or influence regulators to
enact regulations and laws that may limit our ability to provide certain products and services.
We make statements about our use and disclosure of personal information through our privacy policy, information provided on our website and press
statements. Any failure, or perceived failure, by us to comply with these public statements or with U.S. federal, state, or foreign laws and regulations, including
laws and regulations regulating privacy, data security, or consumer protection, public perception, standards, self-regulatory requirements or legal obligations,
could result in lost or restricted business, proceedings, actions or fines brought against us or levied by governmental entities or others, or could adversely
affect our business and harm our reputation.
Third parties have claimed, and in the future may claim, infringement or misuse of intellectual property rights and/or breach of license agreement
provisions.   We periodically receive notices from, or have lawsuits filed against us by, others claiming infringement or other misuse of their intellectual
property rights and/or breach of our agreements with them. These third parties include entities that do not design, manufacture, or distribute products or
services or that acquire intellectual property for the sole purpose of monetization through infringement assertions. We expect to continue to receive such
claims as:
•
we continue to expand into new businesses and acquire companies;
•
the number of products and competitors in our industry segments grows;
•
the use and support of third-party code (including open source code) becomes more prevalent in the industry;
•
the volume of issued patents continues to increase; and
•
non-practicing entities continue to assert intellectual property infringement in our industry segments.
Responding to any such claim, regardless of its validity, could:
•
be time consuming, costly and result in litigation;
•
divert management’s time and attention from developing our business;
•
require us to pay monetary damages or enter into royalty and licensing agreements that we would not normally find acceptable;
•
require us to stop selling or to redesign certain of our products;
•
require us to release source code to third parties, possibly under open source license terms;
•
require us to satisfy indemnification obligations to our customers; or
•
otherwise adversely affect our business, results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.
We may not be able to protect our intellectual property rights.   We rely on copyright, trademark, patent and trade secret laws, confidentiality procedures,
controls and contractual commitments to protect our intellectual property. Despite our efforts, these protections may be limited. Unauthorized third parties
may try to copy or reverse engineer our products or otherwise use our intellectual property. Our patents may be invalidated or circumvented. Any of our
pending or future patent applications may not be issued with the claim scope we seek, if at all. In addition, the laws of some countries do not provide the
same level of intellectual property protection as
26

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
U.S. laws and courts. If we cannot protect our intellectual property against unauthorized copying or use, or other misappropriation, we may not remain
competitive.
We may not receive significant revenues from our current research and development efforts for several years, if at all.   Developing our various product
offerings is expensive and the investment in the development of these offerings often involves a long return on investment cycle. An important element of our
corporate strategy is to continue to dedicate a significant amount of resources to research and development and related product and service opportunities,
both through internal investments and the acquisition of intellectual property from acquired companies. Accelerated product and service introductions and
short lifecycles require high levels of expenditures for research and development that could adversely affect our operating results if not offset by revenue
increases. We believe that we must continue to dedicate a significant amount of resources to our research and development efforts to maintain our
competitive position. However, we do not expect to receive significant revenues from these investments for several years, if at all.
Legal and Regulatory Risks
Adverse litigation results could affect our business.   We are subject to various legal proceedings. Litigation can be lengthy, expensive and disruptive to our
operations, and can divert our management’s attention away from running our core business. The results of our litigation also cannot be predicted with
certainty. Even a favorable judgment may be subject to appeals leading to protracted litigation, additional costs and the prospect that our desired outcome
will be overturned. An adverse decision could result in monetary damages or injunctive relief that could affect our business, operating results or financial
condition. Additional information regarding certain of the lawsuits we are involved in is discussed under Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We may be subjected to increased taxes due to changes in U.S. or international tax laws or from adverse resolutions of tax audits and controversies.   As a
multinational corporation, we incur income taxes as well as non-income based taxes (such as payroll, sales, use, property and value-added taxes) in both the
U.S. and various foreign jurisdictions. Significant uncertainties exist with respect to the application of the various taxes to the businesses in which we engage,
often requiring that we make judgments in determining our tax liabilities and worldwide provision for income taxes. We are regularly under audit by tax
authorities in the U.S. and internationally, which can lead to disagreements such as regarding our intercompany transfer prices and calculations and on the
applicability of withholding taxes to our cross-border transactions. Any unfavorable resolution of these tax audits and controversies could cause our tax
liabilities to increase and may have a material and adverse impact on our provision for income taxes and effective tax rate. Although we believe that our
income and non-income based tax estimates are reasonable, there is no assurance that the final determination of tax audits or disputes will not be different
from what is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and tax accruals.
Countries around the world continually consider and make changes to relevant tax, accounting and other laws, treaties, regulations, guidance and
interpretations. In the U.S., various legislative proposals, if enacted, would substantially raise U.S. income taxes on our domestic and international profits.
Such unfavorable tax legislation resulting from the shifting U.S. political landscape and economic environment create the potential for added volatility in our
quarterly provision for income taxes and could have a material adverse impact on our future income tax provisions and effective tax rate. For example, in
November 2021, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill titled the “Build Back Better Act” under budget reconciliation procedures. While that bill, to
date, has failed to advance in the Senate, it is possible that a modified version of the bill containing similar revenue provisions will be enacted, which,
depending on the specific provisions included, could materially increase our future tax liabilities and effective tax rate.
Other countries also continue to consider changes to their tax laws that could negatively affect us by increasing taxes imposed on our international revenue
streams, operations and cross-border transactions, including the imposition of taxes targeted at digital technology businesses and changes in withholding tax
rules. More fundamentally, 137 countries, including the U.S., in a global effort led by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, have
politically committed to implementing tax changes that would provide
27

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
greater taxing rights to market jurisdictions where customers or users are located and impose minimum taxes on corporate profits. If enacted, these proposals
would materially increase the level of income tax on our international profits.
Our future income tax provisions and effective tax rate could materially increase if any of the foregoing potential tax changes are implemented or if other
changes are made to applicable tax laws and rules in the U.S. or in other countries in which we do business. Our provision for income taxes also could be
adversely affected by changes in the mix of income earned or losses incurred in jurisdictions with differing statutory tax rates, fluctuations in our stock price
and level of stock-based compensation expense, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities and by other factors.
Our international sales and operations subject us to additional risks that can adversely affect our operating results.   We derive a substantial portion of our
revenues from, and have significant operations, outside of the U.S. Compliance with international and U.S. laws and regulations that apply to our international
operations increases our cost of doing business in foreign jurisdictions. These laws and regulations include data privacy requirements, labor relations laws, tax
laws, foreign currency-related regulations, competition regulations, anti-bribery laws and other laws prohibiting payments to governmental officials such as
the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), market access regulations, tariffs, and import, export and general trade regulations, including but not limited to
economic sanctions and embargos. Violations of these laws and regulations could result in fines and penalties, criminal sanctions against us, our officers or
our employees, and prohibitions on the conduct of our business, including the loss of trade privileges. Any such violations could result in prohibitions on our
ability to offer our products and services in one or more countries, could delay or prevent potential acquisitions and could also materially damage our
reputation, our brand, our international expansion efforts, our ability to attract and retain employees, our business and our operating results. These laws can
require suspension or termination of business, including financial transactions, in certain countries, territories or with certain customers and any such action
in the future could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. For example, in response to the current Russia-Ukraine conflict,
the U.S. and other countries have announced extensive sanctions against Russia and could impose broader sanctions or take other actions should the conflict
further escalate. Oracle withdrew its operations from the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus in March 2022. Oracle recorded fiscal 2022 revenues
of $248 million from these two countries, a reduction of $118 million relative to fiscal 2021. No revenues are expected to be recognized from these two
countries prospectively. Compliance with these laws also requires a significant amount of management attention and effort, which may divert management’s
attention from running our business operations and could harm our ability to grow our business, or may increase our expenses as we engage specialized or
other additional resources to assist us with our compliance efforts.
Our success depends, in part, on our ability to anticipate these risks and manage these difficulties. We monitor our operations and investigate allegations of
improprieties relating to transactions and the way in which such transactions are recorded. Where circumstances warrant, we provide information and report
our findings to government authorities, and in some circumstances such authorities conduct their own investigations and we respond to their requests or
demands for information. No assurance can be given that action will not be taken by such authorities or that our compliance program will prove effective.
We are also subject to a variety of other risks and challenges in managing an organization operating globally, including those related to:
•
general economic conditions in each country or region;
•
political unrest, terrorism, war and the potential for other hostilities, including but not limited to, the current Russia-Ukraine conflict, the
economic impact thereof and the potential to subject our business to materially adverse consequences should the situation escalate beyond its
current scope, including, among other potential impacts, the geographic proximity of the situation relative to the rest of Europe, where a material
portion of our business is carried out;
•
public health risks, social risks and supporting infrastructure stability risks, particularly in areas in which we have significant operations;
28

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
•
fluctuations in currency exchange rates and related impacts on customer demand and our operating results;
•
difficulties in transferring funds from or converting currencies in certain countries that could lead to a devaluation of our net assets, in particular
our cash assets, in that country’s currency;
•
regulatory changes, including government austerity measures in certain countries that we may not be able to sufficiently plan for or avoid that
may unexpectedly impair bank deposits or other cash assets that we hold in these countries or that impose additional taxes that we may be
required to pay in these countries;
•
common local business behaviors that are in direct conflict with our business ethics, practices and conduct policies;
•
natural disasters;
•
the effects of climate change (such as sea level rise, drought, flooding, wildfires and increased storm sensitivity);
•
longer payment cycles and difficulties in collecting accounts receivable;
•
overlapping tax regimes; and
•
reduced protection for intellectual property rights in some countries.
The variety of risks and challenges listed above could also disrupt or otherwise negatively impact our supply chain operations and sales of our products and
services in affected countries or regions.
As the majority shareholder of Oracle Financial Services Software Limited, a publicly traded company in India, and Oracle Corporation Japan, a publicly traded
company in Japan, we are faced with several additional risks, including being subject to local securities regulations and being unable to exert full control that
we would otherwise have if these entities were wholly-owned subsidiaries.
Our sales to government clients expose us to business volatility and risks, including government budgeting cycles and appropriations, procurement
regulations, governmental policy shifts, early termination of contracts, audits, investigations, sanctions and penalties.   We derive revenues from contracts
with the U.S. government, state and local governments, and foreign governments and are subject to procurement laws relating to the award, administration
and performance of those contracts.
Governmental entities are variously pursuing policies that affect our ability to sell our products and services. Changes in government procurement policy,
priorities, regulations, technology initiatives and/or requirements may negatively impact our potential for growth in the government sector. For example, the
U.S. government imposes evolving cybersecurity requirements, including, for example, the FedRAMP authorization process and the Department of Defense
(DoD) Cybersecurity Maturity Model Certification. These requirements may impact our lines of business in the U.S. federal government market. Compliance
with these cybersecurity requirements is complex and costly, and failure to meet, or delays in meeting, the required security controls could limit our ability to
sell products and services, directly or indirectly, to the DoD and other federal and state government entities that implement similar cybersecurity
requirements.
We are also subject to early termination of our contracts. Many governmental entities have the right to terminate contracts at any time, without cause. For
example, the U.S. federal government may terminate any of our government contracts and subcontracts at its convenience, or for default based on our
performance.
U.S. federal, state and local government and foreign government contracts are generally subject to government funding authorizations/appropriations.
Contracts may be terminated based upon a lack of government funds.
There is increased pressure on governments and their agencies, both domestically and internationally, to reduce spending as governments continue to face
significant deficit reduction pressures. This may adversely impact spending on government programs.
Government contracts laws and regulations impose certain risks, and contracts are generally subject to audits and investigations. If violations of law are found,
they could result in civil and criminal penalties and administrative
29

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
sanctions, including termination of contracts, refund of a portion of fees received, forfeiture of profits, suspension of payments, fines and suspensions or
debarment from future government business.
Environmental and other related laws and regulations subject us to a number of risks and could result in significant liabilities and costs.   Our cloud and
hardware operations are subject to state, federal and international laws governing protection of the environment, proper handling and disposal of materials
used for these products, human health and safety, the use of certain chemical substances and the labor practices of suppliers, as well as local testing and
labeling requirements. Compliance with these ever-changing environmental and other laws in a timely manner could increase our product design,
development, procurement, manufacturing, delivery, cloud operations and administration costs, limit our ability to manage excess and obsolete non-
compliant inventory, change our sales activities, or otherwise impact future financial results of our cloud and hardware businesses. Any violation of these laws
can subject us to significant liability, including fines, penalties and possible prohibition of sales of our products and services into one or more states or
countries and result in a material adverse effect on the financial condition or results of operations of our cloud and hardware businesses. Regulatory, market,
and competitive pressures regarding the greenhouse gas emissions and energy mix for our data center operations may also grow.
A significant portion of our hardware revenues come from international sales. Environmental legislation, such as the EU Directive on Restriction of Hazardous
Substances (RoHS), the EU Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment Directive (WEEE Directive) and China’s regulation on Management Methods for
Controlling Pollution Caused by Electronic Information Products, among others, may increase our cost of doing business internationally and impact our
hardware revenues from the EU, China and other countries with similar environmental legislation as we endeavor to comply with and implement these
requirements.
We have an Environmental Steering Committee (ESC) comprised of senior individuals from a wide range of Oracle business units, including our Chief
Sustainability Officer who oversees our overall sustainability strategy, including climate related risk mitigation. The ESC evaluates if climate or environmental
risks have the potential for significant chronic or acute impact on our core and/or strategic business functions, including service delivery and support, product
development and deployment, supply chain management, facility operations, employee recruitment and retention, or brand reputation. A failure by the ESC
to identify and assess these risks could adversely affect our reputation, business, financial performance and growth.
We publish an annual Corporate Citizenship Report, which includes disclosure of our Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) matters and goals. Our
disclosures on these matters, and standards we set for ourselves or a failure to meet these standards, may potentially harm our reputation and brand. By
electing to set and share publicly these corporate ESG standards, our business may also face increased scrutiny related to ESG activities.
Financial Risks
Our quarterly results of operations may fluctuate significantly based on a number of factors that make our results of operations difficult for us to predict.
 Our revenues, particularly certain of our cloud license and on-premise license revenues and hardware revenues, can be difficult to forecast. A substantial
portion of our cloud license, on-premise license and hardware contracts is completed in the latter part of a quarter. Because a significant portion of our cost
structure is largely fixed in the short term, sales and revenue shortfalls tend to have a disproportionately negative impact on our profitability. The number of
large license transactions and, to a lesser extent, hardware products transactions increases the risk of fluctuations in our quarterly results because a delay in
even a small number of these transactions could cause our quarterly sales, revenues and profitability to fall significantly short of our predictions. In addition,
sudden shifts in regional or global economic or political activity may cause our sales forecasts to be inaccurate.
In addition, we hold a portfolio of publicly traded and privately held equity investments. Changes in the fair values of these investments are recorded as
unrealized gains or losses as a component of consolidated net income in each period. The timing and amount of changes in fair value, if any, of these
investments depends on factors beyond our control, including the perceived and actual performance of the companies or funds in which we invest, and are
subject to the general conditions of public and private equity markets, which are uncertain and have in the past
30

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
varied, and may in the future vary, materially by period and may create volatility in our net income that is not reflective of our core businesses.
Changes in currency exchange rates can adversely affect customer demand and our revenue and profitability.      We conduct a significant number of
transactions and hold cash in currencies other than the U.S. Dollar. Changes in the values of major foreign currencies, particularly the Euro, Japanese Yen,
Saudi Arabian Riyal, Indian Rupee and British Pound, relative to the U.S. Dollar can significantly affect our total assets, revenues, operating results and cash
flows, which are reported in U.S. Dollars. Fluctuations in foreign currency rates, including the strengthening of the U.S. Dollar against the Euro and most other
major international currencies, adversely affects our revenue growth in terms of the amounts that we report in U.S. Dollars after converting our foreign
currency results into U.S. Dollars and in terms of actual demand for our products and services as certain of these products may become relatively more
expensive for foreign currency-based enterprises to purchase. In addition, currency variations can adversely affect margins on sales of our products in
countries outside of the U.S. Generally, our reported revenues and operating results are adversely affected when the dollar strengthens relative to other
currencies and are positively affected when the dollar weakens. In addition, our reported assets generally are adversely affected when the dollar strengthens
relative to other currencies as a portion of our consolidated cash and bank deposits, among other assets, are held in foreign currencies and reported in U.S.
Dollars.
In addition, we incur foreign currency transaction gains and losses, primarily related to sublicense fees and other intercompany agreements among us and our
subsidiaries that we expect to cash settle in the near term, which are charged to earnings in the period incurred. We have a program which primarily utilizes
foreign currency forward contracts designed to offset the risks associated with certain foreign currency exposures. We may suspend the program from time to
time. As part of this program, we enter into foreign currency forward contracts so that increases or decreases in our foreign currency exposures are offset at
least in part by gains or losses on the foreign currency forward contracts in an effort to mitigate the risks and volatility associated with our foreign currency
transaction gains or losses. A large portion of our consolidated operations are international, and we expect that we will continue to realize gains or losses with
respect to our foreign currency exposures, net of gains or losses from our foreign currency forward contracts, including the cost to obtain such contracts. For
example, we will experience foreign currency gains and losses in certain instances if it is not possible or cost-effective to hedge our foreign currency
exposures, if our hedging efforts are ineffective, or should we suspend our foreign currency forward contract program. Our ultimate realized loss or gain with
respect to currency fluctuations will generally depend on the size and type of cross-currency exposures that we enter into, the currency exchange rates
associated with these exposures and changes in those rates, whether we have entered into foreign currency forward contracts to offset these exposures and
any related fees paid to purchase such contracts, and other factors. All of these factors could materially impact our results of operations, financial position and
cash flows.
We have incurred foreign currency losses associated with the devaluation of currencies in certain highly inflationary economies relative to the U.S. Dollar. We
could incur future losses in emerging market countries and other countries where we do business should their currencies become designated as highly
inflationary.
There are risks associated with our outstanding and future indebtedness.     As of May 31, 2022, we had an aggregate of $75.9 billion of outstanding
indebtedness that will mature between calendar year 2022 and calendar year 2061, we incurred additional indebtedness to finance our acquisition of Cerner
in June 2022, and we intend to incur additional indebtedness in the future. Our ability to pay interest and repay the principal for our indebtedness is
dependent upon our ability to manage our business operations, generate sufficient cash flows to service such debt and the other factors discussed in this
section. There can be no assurance that we will be able to manage any of these risks successfully.
We may also need to refinance a portion of our outstanding debt as it matures. There is a risk that we may not be able to refinance existing debt or that the
terms of any refinancing may not be as favorable as the terms of our existing debt. Furthermore, if prevailing interest rates or other factors at the time of
refinancing result in higher interest rates upon refinancing, then the interest expense relating to that refinanced indebtedness would increase.
Should we incur future increases in interest expense, our ability to utilize certain of our foreign tax credits to reduce our U.S. federal income tax could be
limited, which could unfavorably affect our provision for income taxes
31

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
and effective tax rate. In addition, changes to our outlook or credit rating or a withdrawal by any rating agency could negatively affect the value of both our
debt and equity securities and increase the interest amounts we pay on certain outstanding or future debt. These risks could adversely affect our financial
condition and results of operations.
Risks Related to Our Common Stock
Our stock price could become more volatile and your investment could lose value.   All of the factors discussed within this Risk Factors section could affect
our stock price. The timing of announcements in the public market by us or by our competitors regarding new cloud services, products, product
enhancements, technological advances, acquisitions or major transactions could also affect our stock price. Changes in the amounts and frequency of share
repurchases or dividends could affect our stock price. Our stock price could also be affected by factors, some of which are beyond our control, including,
among others: speculation in the press, social media and the analyst community; changes in recommendations or earnings related estimates by financial
analysts; changes in investors’ or analysts’ valuation measures for our stock; negative analyst surveys or channel check surveys; earnings announcements
where our financial results differ from our guidance or investors’ expectations; our credit ratings and market trends unrelated to our performance. The stock
market in general, and the market for technology companies in particular, has experienced extreme price and volume fluctuations that have often been
unrelated or disproportionate to the operating performance of those companies. A significant drop in our stock price could also expose us to the risk of
securities class action lawsuits, which could result in substantial costs and divert management’s attention and resources, which could adversely affect our
business.
We cannot guarantee that our stock repurchase program will be fully implemented or that it will enhance long-term stockholder value.   In fiscal 2022, our
Board of Directors approved expansions of our stock repurchase program totaling $10.0 billion. The repurchase program does not have an expiration date and
we are not obligated to repurchase a specified number or dollar value of shares. Our repurchase program may be suspended or terminated at any time and,
even if fully implemented, may not enhance long-term stockholder value.
General Risks
Economic, political and market conditions can adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition, including our revenue growth
and profitability, which in turn could adversely affect our stock price.   Our business is influenced by a range of factors that are beyond our control and that
we have no comparative advantage in forecasting. These include:
•
general economic and business conditions;
•
overall demand for enterprise cloud, license and hardware products and services;
•
governmental budgetary constraints or shifts in government spending priorities; and
•
general legal, regulatory and political developments.
Macroeconomic developments such as the global or regional economic effects resulting from the current Russia-Ukraine conflict, increasing inflation rates and
related economic curtailment initiatives, the COVID-19 pandemic, the United Kingdom leaving the EU (Brexit), evolving trade policies between the U.S. and
international trade partners, or the occurrence of similar events in other countries that lead to uncertainty or instability in economic, political or market
conditions could negatively affect our business, operating results, financial condition and outlook, which, in turn, could adversely affect our stock price. Any
general weakening of, and related declining corporate confidence in, the global economy or the curtailment of government or corporate spending could cause
current or potential customers to reduce or eliminate their IT budgets and spending, which could cause customers to delay, decrease or cancel purchases of
our products and services or cause customers not to pay us or to delay paying us for previously purchased products and services.
In addition, international, regional or domestic political unrest and the related potential impact on global stability, terrorist attacks and the potential for other
hostilities in various parts of the world, public health crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and natural disasters continue to contribute to a climate of
economic and political
32

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
uncertainty that could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition, including our revenue growth and profitability. These factors generally
have the strongest effect on our sales of cloud license and on-premise license, hardware and related services and, to a lesser extent, also may affect our
renewal rates for license support and our subscription-based cloud offerings.
Business disruptions could adversely affect our operating results.     A significant portion of our critical business operations are concentrated in a few
geographic areas, some of which include emerging market international locations that may be less stable relative to running such business operations solely
within the U.S. We are a highly automated business and a disruption or failure of our systems, supply chains and processes could cause delays in completing
sales, providing services, including some of our cloud offerings, and enabling a seamless customer experience with respect to our customer facing back office
processes. A major earthquake or fire, political, social or other disruption to infrastructure that supports our operations or other catastrophic event or the
effects of climate change (such as increased storm severity, drought and pandemics) that results in the destruction or disruption of any of our critical business
operations, supply chains or IT systems could severely affect our ability to conduct normal business operations and, as a result, our future operating results
could be materially and adversely affected.
Item 1B.Unresolved Staff Comments
None.
Item 2.Properties
Our properties consist of owned and leased office facilities for sales, support, research and development, services, manufacturing, cloud operations and
administrative and other functions. Our headquarters facility consists of approximately 0.9 million square feet in Austin, Texas, all of which we own. We also
own or lease other facilities for current use consisting of approximately 23.1 million square feet in various other locations in the U.S. and abroad.
Approximately 4.7 million square feet, or 20%, of our total owned and leased space is sublet or is being actively marketed for sublease or disposition. We
lease our principal internal manufacturing facility for our hardware products in Hillsboro, Oregon. Our cloud operations deliver our Oracle Cloud Services
through the use of global data centers, substantially all of which were leased through colocation suppliers. We believe that our facilities are in good condition
and suitable for the conduct of our business.
Item 3.Legal Proceedings
The material set forth in Note 13 (pertaining to information regarding contingencies related to our income taxes) and Note 16 (pertaining to information
regarding legal contingencies) of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by
reference.
Item 4.Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable.
33

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
PART II
Item 5.Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
Our common stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “ORCL.” According to the records of our transfer agent, we had 7,706
stockholders of record as of May 31, 2022.
For equity compensation plan information, please refer to Item 12 in Part III of this Annual Report.
Stock Repurchase Program
Our Board of Directors has approved a program for us to repurchase shares of our common stock. On December 9, 2021, we announced that our Board of
Directors approved an expansion of our stock repurchase program by an additional $10.0 billion. As of May 31, 2022, approximately $9.4 billion remained
available for stock repurchases pursuant to our stock repurchase program.
Our stock repurchase authorization does not have an expiration date and the pace of our repurchase activity will depend on factors such as our working
capital needs, our cash requirements for acquisitions and dividend payments, our debt repayment obligations or repurchases of our debt, our stock price, and
economic and market conditions. Our stock repurchases may be effected from time to time through open market purchases or pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1
plan. Our stock repurchase program may be accelerated, suspended, delayed or discontinued at any time.
The following table summarizes the stock repurchase activity for the three months ended May 31, 2022 and the approximate dollar value of shares that may
yet be purchased pursuant to our stock repurchase program:
(in millions, except per share amounts)
 
Total Number of
Shares
Purchased
   
Average Price
Paid per
Share
   
Total Number of
Shares Purchased as
Part of Publicly
Announced
Program
   
Approximate Dollar
Value of Shares that
May Yet Be
Purchased
Under the Program
 
March 1, 2022—March 31, 2022
   
2.8    $
79.24     
2.8    $
9,831.4 
April 1, 2022—April 30, 2022
   
2.4    $
79.28     
2.4    $
9,642.4 
May 1, 2022—May 31, 2022
   
2.7    $
71.06     
2.7    $
9,448.5 
Total
   
7.9    $
76.41     
7.9       
 
34

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Stock Performance Graph and Cumulative Total Return
The graph below compares the cumulative total stockholder return on our common stock with the cumulative total return of the S&P 500 Index and the S&P
Information Technology Index for each of the last five fiscal years ended May 31, 2022, assuming an investment of $100 at the beginning of such period and
the reinvestment of any dividends. The comparisons in the graphs below are based upon historical data and are not indicative of, nor intended to forecast,
future performance of our common stock.
*$100 INVESTED ON MAY 31, 2017 IN STOCK OR
INDEX-INCLUDING REINVESTMENT OF DIVIDENDS
 
5/17
   
5/18
   
5/19
   
5/20
   
5/21
   
5/22
 
Oracle Corporation
   
100.0     
104.6     
115.1     
124.5     
185.3     
171.7 
S&P 500 Index
   
100.0     
114.4     
118.7     
134.0     
188.0     
187.4 
S&P Information Technology Index
   
100.0     
128.2     
133.8     
185.3     
264.3     
269.4
 
Item 6.[Reserved]
35

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We begin Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations with an overview of our businesses and significant trends.
This overview is followed by a summary of our critical accounting policies and estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and
judgments incorporated in our reported financial results. We then provide a more detailed analysis of our results of operations and financial condition for
fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 can be
found in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the
fiscal year ended May 31, 2021, as filed with the SEC on June 21, 2021, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and on our
Investor Relations website at www.oracle.com/investor.
Business Overview
Oracle provides products and services that address enterprise information technology (IT) environments. Our products and services include enterprise
applications and infrastructure offerings that are delivered worldwide through a variety of flexible and interoperable IT deployment models. These models
include on-premise deployments, cloud-based deployments, and hybrid deployments (an approach that combines both on-premise and cloud-based
deployments). Accordingly, we offer choice and flexibility to our customers and facilitate the product, service and deployment combinations that best suit our
customers’ needs. Through our worldwide sales force and Oracle Partner Network, we sell to customers all over the world including businesses of many sizes,
government agencies, educational institutions and resellers.
We have three businesses: cloud and license; hardware; and services; each of which comprises a single operating segment. The descriptions set forth below as
a part of this Item 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the information contained within Item 1
Business and Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report provide additional information related to our
businesses and operating segments and align to how our chief operating decision makers (CODMs), which include our Chief Executive Officer and Chief
Technology Officer, view our operating results and allocate resources.
Cloud and License Business
Our cloud and license business, which represented 85% and 84% of our total revenues in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively, markets, sells and delivers a broad
spectrum of enterprise applications and infrastructure technologies through our cloud and license offerings. Revenue streams included in our cloud and
license business are:
•
Cloud services and license support revenues, which include:
o
license support revenues, which are earned by providing Oracle license support services to customers that have elected to purchase
support services in connection with the purchase of Oracle applications and infrastructure software licenses for use in cloud, on-premise
and other IT environments. Substantially all license support customers renew their support contracts with us upon expiration in order to
continue to benefit from technical support services and the periodic issuance of unspecified updates and enhancements, which current
license support customers are entitled to receive. License support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net fees paid by the
customer to purchase a cloud license and/or on-premise license; are generally billed in advance of the support services being performed;
are generally renewed at the customer’s option; and are generally recognized as revenues ratably over the contractual period that the
support services are provided, which is generally one year; and
o
cloud services revenues, which provide customers access to Oracle Cloud applications and infrastructure technologies via cloud-based
deployment models that Oracle develops, provides unspecified updates and enhancements for, deploys, hosts, manages and supports and
that
36

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
customers access by entering into a subscription agreement with us for a stated period. Oracle Cloud Services arrangements are generally
billed in advance of the cloud services being performed; generally have durations of one to three years; are generally renewed at the
customer’s option; and are generally recognized as revenues ratably over the contractual period of the cloud contract or, in the case of
usage model contracts, as the cloud services are consumed over time.
•
Cloud license and on-premise license revenues, which include revenues from the licensing of our software products including Oracle Applications,
Oracle Database, Oracle Middleware and Java, among others, which our customers deploy within cloud-based, on-premise and other IT
environments. Our cloud license and on-premise license transactions are generally perpetual in nature and are generally recognized as revenues
up front at the point in time when the software is made available to the customer to download and use. Revenues from usage-based royalty
arrangements for distinct cloud licenses and on-premise licenses are recognized at the point in time when the software end user usage occurs.
The timing of a few large license transactions can substantially affect our quarterly license revenues due to the point-in-time nature of revenue
recognition for license transactions, which is different than the typical revenue recognition pattern for our cloud services and license support
revenues in which revenues are generally recognized ratably over the contractual terms. Cloud license and on-premise license customers have the
option to purchase and renew license support contracts, as further described above.
Providing choice and flexibility to our customers as to when and how they deploy Oracle applications and infrastructure technologies are important elements
of our corporate strategy. In recent periods, customer demand for our applications and infrastructure technologies delivered through our Oracle Cloud
Services has increased. To address customer demand and enable customer choice, we have introduced certain programs for customers to pivot their
applications and infrastructure licenses and the related license support to the Oracle Cloud for new deployments and to migrate to and expand with the
Oracle Cloud for their existing workloads. The proportion of our cloud services and license support revenues relative to our cloud license and on-premise
license revenues, hardware revenues and services revenues has increased and we expect this trend to continue. Cloud services and license support revenues
represented 71% of our total revenues during each of fiscal 2022 and 2021 and 70% of our total revenues during fiscal 2020.
Our cloud and license business’ revenue growth is affected by many factors, including the strength of general economic and business conditions;
governmental budgetary constraints; the strategy for and competitive position of our offerings; customer satisfaction with our offerings; the continued
renewal of our cloud services and license support customer contracts by the customer contract base; substantially all customers continuing to purchase
license support contracts in connection with their license purchases; the pricing of license support contracts sold in connection with the sales of licenses; the
pricing, amounts and volumes of licenses and cloud services sold; our ability to manage Oracle Cloud capacity requirements to meet existing and prospective
customer demand; and foreign currency rate fluctuations.
On a constant currency basis, we expect that our total cloud and license revenues generally will continue to increase due to:
•
expected growth in our cloud services and license support offerings; and
•
continued demand for our cloud license and on-premise license offerings.
We believe these factors should contribute to future growth in our cloud and license business’ total revenues, which should enable us to continue to make
investments in research and development and our cloud operations to develop, improve, increase the capacity of and expand the geographic footprint of our
cloud and license products and services.
Our cloud and license business’ margin has historically trended upward over the course of the four quarters within a particular fiscal year due to the historical
upward trend of our cloud and license business’ revenues over those quarterly periods and because the majority of our costs for this business are generally
fixed in the short term. The historical upward trend of our cloud and license business’ revenues over the course of the four quarters within a particular fiscal
year is primarily due to the addition of new cloud services and license support contracts to the
37

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
customer contract base that we generally recognize as revenues ratably or based upon customer usage over the respective contractual terms and the renewal
of existing customers’ cloud services and license support contracts over the course of each fiscal year that we generally recognize as revenues in a similar
manner; and the historical upward trend of our cloud license and on-premise license revenues, which we generally recognize at a point in time upon delivery;
in each case over those four fiscal quarterly periods.
Hardware Business
Our hardware business, which represented 7% and 8% of our total revenues in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively, provides a broad selection of enterprise
hardware products and hardware-related software products including Oracle Engineered Systems, servers, storage, industry-specific hardware offerings,
operating systems, virtualization, management and other hardware-related software, and related hardware support. Each hardware product and its related
software, such as an operating system or firmware, are highly interdependent and interrelated and are accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
The revenues for this combined performance obligation are generally recognized at the point in time that the hardware product and its related software are
delivered to the customer and ownership is transferred to the customer. We expect to make investments in research and development to improve existing
hardware products and services and to develop new hardware products and services. The majority of our hardware products are sold through indirect
channels, including independent distributors and value-added resellers. Our hardware support offerings provide customers with unspecified software updates
for software components that are essential to the functionality of our hardware products and associated software products. Our hardware support offerings
can also include product repairs, maintenance services and technical support services. Hardware support contracts are entered into and renewed at the
option of the customer, are generally priced as a percentage of the net hardware products fees and are generally recognized as revenues ratably as the
hardware support services are delivered over the contractual terms.
We generally expect our hardware business to have lower operating margins as a percentage of revenues than our cloud and license business due to the
incremental costs we incur to produce and distribute these products and to provide support services, including direct materials and labor costs.
Our quarterly hardware revenues are difficult to predict. Our hardware revenues, cost of hardware and hardware operating margins that we report are
affected by many factors, including our manufacturing partners’ abilities to timely manufacture or deliver a few large hardware transactions, with this factor
becoming more pronounced in recent periods due to global supply chain constraints for certain technology components; our strategy for and the position of
our hardware products relative to competitor offerings; customer demand for competing offerings, including cloud infrastructure offerings; the strength of
general economic and business conditions; governmental budgetary constraints; whether customers decide to purchase hardware support contracts at or in
close proximity to the time of hardware product sale; the percentage of our hardware support contract customer base that renews its support contracts and
the close association between hardware products, which have a finite life, and customer demand for related hardware support as hardware products age;
customer decisions to either maintain or upgrade their existing hardware infrastructure to newly developed technologies that are available; and foreign
currency rate fluctuations.
Services Business
Our services business, which represented 8% of our total revenues in each of fiscal 2022 and 2021, helps customers and partners maximize the performance
of their investments in Oracle applications and infrastructure technologies. We believe that our services are differentiated based on our focus on Oracle
technologies, extensive experience, broad sets of intellectual property and best practices. Our services offerings include consulting services and advanced
customer services. Our services business has lower margins than our cloud and license and hardware businesses. Our services revenues are affected by many
factors including our strategy for, and the competitive position of, our services; customer demand for our cloud and license and hardware offerings and the
related services that we may market and sell in connection with these offerings; general economic conditions;
38

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
governmental budgetary constraints; personnel reductions in our customers’ IT departments; tighter controls over customer discretionary spending; and
foreign currency rate fluctuations.
Acquisitions
Our selective and active acquisition program is another important element of our corporate strategy. Historically, we have invested billions of dollars to
acquire a number of complementary companies, products, services and technologies. As compelling opportunities become available, we may acquire
companies, products, services and technologies in furtherance of our corporate strategy. On December 20, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of
Merger with Cerner Corporation (Cerner), a provider of digital information systems used within hospitals and health systems that are designed to enable
medical professionals to deliver better healthcare to individual patients and communities, for a preliminary estimated purchase price of approximately $28.2
billion. The transaction closed on June 8, 2022. Notes 2 and 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report,
provide additional information related to our acquisition of Cerner and our other recent acquisitions.
We believe that we can fund our future acquisitions with our internally available cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, cash generated
from operations, additional borrowings or from the issuance of additional securities. We estimate the financial impact of any potential acquisition with regard
to earnings, operating margin, cash flows and return on invested capital targets, among others, before deciding to move forward with an acquisition.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) as set forth in the Financial
Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification (ASC), and we consider the various staff accounting bulletins and other applicable guidance
issued by the SEC. GAAP, as set forth within the ASC, requires us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates,
judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and
assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial
statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. To the extent that there are differences between these
estimates, judgments or assumptions and actual results, our financial statements will be affected. The accounting policies that reflect our more significant
estimates, judgments and assumptions and which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results
include:
•
Revenue Recognition;
•
Business Combinations;
•
Goodwill and Intangible Assets—Impairment Assessments;
•
Accounting for Income Taxes; and
•
Legal and Other Contingencies.
Our senior management has reviewed our critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Finance and Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report includes additional information about our critical and other
accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
The most critical judgments required in applying ASC 606, Revenue Recognition from Customers, and our revenue recognition policy relate to the
determination of distinct performance obligations and the evaluation of the standalone selling price (SSP) for each performance obligation.
39

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Many of our customer contracts include multiple performance obligations. Judgment is required in determining whether each performance obligation within
a customer contract is distinct. Oracle products and services generally function on a standalone basis and do not require a significant amount of integration or
interdependency. Therefore, multiple products and services contained within a customer contract are generally considered to be distinct and are not
combined for revenue recognition purposes. We allocate the transaction price for each customer contract to each performance obligation based on the
relative SSP (the determination of SSP is discussed below) for each performance obligation within each contract. We recognize the amount of transaction
price allocated to each performance obligation within a customer contract as revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied.
We use historical sales transaction data and judgment, among other factors, in determining the SSP for products and services. For substantially all
performance obligations except cloud licenses and on-premise licenses, we are able to establish the SSP based on the observable prices of products or
services sold separately in comparable circumstances to similar customers. We typically establish an SSP range for our products and services, which is
reassessed on a periodic basis or when facts and circumstances change. SSP for our products and services can evolve over time due to changes in our pricing
practices that are influenced by intense competition, changes in demand for our products and services, and economic factors, among others. Our cloud
licenses and on-premise licenses have not historically been sold on a standalone basis, as substantially all customers elect to purchase license support
contracts at the time of a license purchase. License support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net fees paid by the customer to purchase
the license. We are unable to establish the SSP for our cloud licenses and on-premise licenses based on observable prices given the same products are sold for
a broad range of amounts (that is, the selling price is highly variable) and a representative SSP is not discernible from past transactions or other observable
evidence. As a result, the SSP for a cloud license and an on-premise license included in a contract with multiple performance obligations is generally
determined by applying a residual approach whereby all other performance obligations within a contract are first allocated a portion of the transaction price
based upon their respective SSPs, with any residual amount of transaction price allocated to cloud license and on-premise license revenues.
Business Combinations
We apply the provisions of ASC 805, Business Combinations (ASC 805), in accounting for our acquisitions. ASC 805 requires that we evaluate whether a
transaction pertains to an acquisition of assets, or to an acquisition of a business. A business is defined as an integrated set of assets and activities that is
capable of being conducted and managed for the purpose of providing a return to investors. Asset acquisitions are accounted for by allocating the cost of the
acquisition to the individual assets and liabilities assumed on a relative fair value basis; whereas the acquisition of a business requires us to recognize
separately from goodwill the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at the acquisition date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as
the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While we use our
best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date as well as any contingent consideration,
where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year
from the business acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the
conclusion of a business acquisition’s measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes
first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations.
Accounting for business combinations requires our management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date, including
our estimates for intangible assets, pre-acquisition contingencies and any contingent consideration, where applicable. Although we believe that the
assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information
obtained from the management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that may affect
the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
40

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
For a given business acquisition, we may identify certain pre-acquisition contingencies as of the acquisition date and may extend our review and evaluation of
these pre-acquisition contingencies throughout the measurement period in order to obtain sufficient information to assess whether we include these
contingencies as a part of the fair value estimates of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and, if so, to determine their estimated amounts.
If we cannot reasonably determine the fair value of a non-income tax related pre-acquisition contingency by the end of the measurement period, which is
generally the case given the nature of such matters, we will recognize an asset or a liability for such pre-acquisition contingency if: (1) it is probable that an
asset existed or a liability had been incurred at the acquisition date and (2) the amount of the asset or liability can be reasonably estimated. Subsequent to
the measurement period or final determination of the net asset values for the business combination, whichever comes first, changes in our estimates of such
contingencies will affect earnings and could have a material effect on our results of operations and financial position.
In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances assumed in a business combination are initially estimated as of the acquisition date.
We reevaluate these items quarterly based upon facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date with any adjustments to our preliminary
estimates being recorded to goodwill if identified within the measurement period. Subsequent to the measurement period or our final determination of the
tax allowance’s or contingency’s estimated value, whichever comes first, changes to these uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances will
affect our provision for income taxes in our consolidated statement of operations and could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial
position.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets—Impairment Assessments
We review goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate its carrying value may not be recoverable. We make
certain judgments and assumptions to determine our reporting units and in allocating shared assets and liabilities to determine the carrying values for each of
our reporting units.
Judgment in the assessment of qualitative factors of impairment include cost factors; financial performance; legal, regulatory, contractual, political, business,
and other factors; entity specific factors; industry and market considerations, macroeconomic conditions, and other relevant events and factors affecting the
reporting unit. To the extent we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a quantitative
test is then performed.
Performing a quantitative goodwill impairment test includes the determination of the fair value of a reporting unit and involves significant estimates and
assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include, among others, revenue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future cash
flows, risk-adjusted discount rates, future economic and market conditions, and the determination of appropriate market comparables.
We make judgments about the recoverability of purchased finite lived intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that
impairment may exist. In such situations, we are required to evaluate whether the net book values of our finite lived intangible assets are recoverable. We
determine whether finite lived intangible assets are recoverable based upon the forecasted future cash flows that are expected to be generated by the lowest
level associated asset grouping. Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives of our intangible assets are complex and subjective
and include, among others, forecasted undiscounted cash flows to be generated by certain asset groupings. These assumptions and estimates can be affected
by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our
internal forecasts.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Judgment is required in determining our worldwide income tax provision. In the ordinary course of a global business, there are many transactions and
calculations where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Some of these uncertainties arise as a consequence of revenue sharing and cost reimbursement
arrangements among related entities, the process of identifying items of revenues and expenses that qualify for preferential tax
41

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
treatment, and the segregation of foreign and domestic earnings and expenses to avoid double taxation. Although we believe that our estimates are
reasonable, the final tax outcome of these matters could be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. Such
differences could have a material effect on our income tax provision and net income in the period in which such determination is made.
We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In order for us to realize our
deferred tax assets, we must be able to generate sufficient taxable income in those jurisdictions where the deferred tax assets are located. We consider future
growth, forecasted earnings, future taxable income, the mix of earnings in the jurisdictions in which we operate, historical earnings, taxable income in prior
years, if carryback is permitted under the law, and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in determining the need for a valuation allowance. In the event
we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets
valuation allowance would be charged to earnings in the period in which we make such a determination, or goodwill would be adjusted at our final
determination of the valuation allowance related to an acquisition within the measurement period. If we later determine that it is more likely than not that
the net deferred tax assets would be realized, we would reverse the applicable portion of the previously provided valuation allowance as an adjustment to our
provision for income taxes at such time.
We calculate our current and deferred tax provision based on estimates and assumptions that could differ from the actual results reflected in income tax
returns filed during the subsequent year. Adjustments based on filed returns are generally recorded in the period when the tax returns are filed and the global
tax implications are known, which can materially impact our effective tax rate.
The amount of income tax we pay is subject to ongoing audits by federal, state and foreign tax authorities, which often result in proposed assessments. Our
estimate of the potential outcome for any uncertain tax issue may require certain judgments. A description of our accounting policies associated with tax
related contingencies assumed as a part of a business combination is provided under “Business Combinations” above.
For those tax related contingencies that are not a part of a business combination, we account for these uncertain tax issues pursuant to ASC 740, Income
Taxes, which contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The first step is
to determine if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained in an audit, including resolution
of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized
upon ultimate settlement. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, no assurance can be given with respect to
the final outcome of these matters. We adjust reserves for our uncertain tax positions due to changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax
audit, judicial rulings, and refinement of estimates or realization of earnings or deductions that differ from our estimates. To the extent that the final outcome
of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences generally will impact our provision for income taxes in the period in which such a
determination is made. Our provisions for income taxes include the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate and
also include the related interest and penalties.
Legal and Other Contingencies
We are currently involved in various claims and legal proceedings. Quarterly, we review the status of each significant matter and assess our potential financial
exposure. A description of our accounting policies associated with contingencies assumed as a part of a business combination is provided under “Business
Combinations” above. For legal and other contingencies that are not a part of a business combination, we accrue a liability for an estimated loss if the
potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable, and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required in
both the determination of probability and the determination as to whether the amount of an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties
related to these matters, accruals are based only on the best information available at the time the accruals are made. As additional information becomes
available, we reassess the potential liability related to our pending claims and
42

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
litigation and may revise our estimates. Such revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on our results of operations and
financial position.
Results of Operations
Recent Global Events
Oracle withdrew its operations from the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus in March 2022. Neither of the aforementioned countries, nor Ukraine,
have composed or are expected to compose a material portion of Oracle’s total consolidated revenues, net income, net assets, or workforce. We serve
hundreds of thousands of customers globally across a broad geographic and industry base. We are profitable and generate a large amount of positive cash
flow from our operations, and we do not believe the current posture of the Russia-Ukraine situation will jeopardize either of these characteristics of our
business. Other impacts due to this rapidly evolving situation are currently unknown and could potentially subject our business to materially adverse
consequences. For a more complete discussion of the risks we encounter in our business, please refer to Item 1A Risk Factors included elsewhere in this
Annual Report.
In addition, for a discussion of the impacts on and risks to our business from COVID-19, please refer to the risks included in Item 1A Risk Factors in this Annual
Report and the information presented below in Results of Operations in this Item 7.
Presentation of Operating Segment Results and Other Financial Information
In our fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 results of operations discussion below, we provide an overview of our total consolidated revenues, total
consolidated operating expenses and total consolidated operating margin, all of which are presented on a GAAP basis. We also present a GAAP-based
discussion below for substantially all of the other expense items as presented in our consolidated statements of operations that are not directly attributable to
our three businesses.
In addition, we discuss below the fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 results of each of our three businesses—cloud and license, hardware and services—
which are our operating segments as defined pursuant to ASC 280, Segment Reporting. The financial reporting for our three businesses that is presented
below is presented in a manner that is consistent with that used by our CODMs. Our operating segment presentation below reflects revenues, direct costs and
sales and marketing expenses that correspond to and are directly attributable to each of our three businesses. We also utilize these inputs to calculate and
present a segment margin for each of our three businesses in the discussion below.
Consistent with our internal management reporting processes, the below operating segment presentation for fiscal 2021 is noted to include any revenues
adjustments related to cloud services and license support contracts that would have otherwise been recorded by the acquired businesses as independent
entities but were not recognized in our consolidated statements of operations for fiscal 2021 due to certain business combination accounting requirements
that were eliminated in fiscal 2022. Refer to “Supplemental Disclosure Related to Certain Charges” below for additional discussion of these items and Note 14
of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a reconciliation of the summations of our total operating segment
revenues as presented in the discussion below to total revenues as presented per our consolidated statements of operations for fiscal 2021.
In addition, research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses, stock-based compensation expenses, amortization of intangible assets,
certain other expense allocations, acquisition related and other expenses, restructuring expenses, interest expense, non-operating expenses or income, net
and (provision for) benefit from income taxes are not attributed to our three operating segments because our management does not view the performance of
our three businesses including such items and/or it is impracticable to do so. Refer to “Supplemental Disclosure Related to Certain Charges” below for
additional discussion of certain of these items and Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a
43

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
reconciliation of the summations of total segment margin as presented in the discussion below to total income before income taxes as presented per our
consolidated statements of operations for fiscal 2022 and 2021.
We experienced COVID-19 related impacts to our businesses during fiscal 2022 and 2021. Certain of these historical impacts to our operating results are
further discussed below. Any future impacts are currently unknown.
Separately,
•
as described further below and in Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we remitted
and recorded $4.7 billion for certain litigation related charges during fiscal 2022;
•
as described further above, Oracle withdrew its operations from the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus in March 2022. Oracle
recorded fiscal 2022 revenues of $248 million from these two countries, a reduction of $118 million relative to fiscal 2021. No revenues are
expected to be recognized from these two countries prospectively; and
•
as described further below and in Notes 1 and 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we
recorded a $2.3 billion one-time net deferred tax benefit during fiscal 2021 that related to a partial realignment of our legal entity structure that
resulted in the intra-group transfer of certain intellectual property rights.
Constant Currency Presentation
Our international operations have provided and are expected to continue to provide a significant portion of each of our businesses’ revenues and expenses.
As a result, each of our businesses’ revenues and expenses and our total revenues and expenses will continue to be affected by changes in the U.S. Dollar
against major international currencies. In order to provide a framework for assessing how our underlying businesses performed, excluding the effects of
foreign currency rate fluctuations, we compare the percent change in the results from one period to another period in this Annual Report using constant
currency disclosure. To present this information, current and comparative prior period results for entities reporting in currencies other than U.S. Dollars are
converted into U.S. Dollars at constant exchange rates (i.e., the rates in effect on May 31, 2021, which was the last day of our prior fiscal year) rather than the
actual exchange rates in effect during the respective periods. For example, if an entity reporting in Euros had revenues of 1.0 million Euros from products sold
on May 31, 2022 and 2021, our financial statements would reflect reported revenues of $1.07 million in fiscal 2022 (using 1.07 as the month-end average
exchange rate for the period) and $1.22 million in fiscal 2021 (using 1.22 as the month-end average exchange rate for the period). The constant currency
presentation, however, would translate the fiscal 2022 results using the fiscal 2021 exchange rate and indicate, in this example, no change in revenues during
the period. In each of the tables below, we present the percent change based on actual, unrounded results in reported currency and in constant currency.
44

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Total Revenues and Operating Expenses
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
   
 
 
 
Percent Change
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
 
 
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
Total Revenues by Geography:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Americas
 
$
23,679   
8% 
8% 
$
21,828 
EMEA(1)
 
 
12,011   
1% 
5% 
 
11,894 
Asia Pacific
 
 
6,750   
0% 
4% 
 
6,757 
Total revenues
 
 
42,440   
5% 
7% 
 
40,479 
Total Operating Expenses
 
 
31,514   
25% 
26% 
 
25,266 
Total Operating Margin
 
$
10,926   
-28% 
-25% 
$
15,213 
Total Operating Margin %
 
26%   
  
  
38% 
% Revenues by Geography:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Americas
 
56%   
  
  
54% 
EMEA
 
28%   
  
  
29% 
Asia Pacific
 
16%   
  
  
17% 
Total Revenues by Business:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Cloud and license
 
$
36,052   
6% 
7% 
$
34,099 
Hardware
 
 
3,183   
-5% 
-3% 
 
3,359 
Services
 
 
3,205   
6% 
8% 
 
3,021 
Total revenues
 
$
42,440   
5% 
7% 
$
40,479 
% Revenues by Business:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Cloud and license
 
85%   
  
  
84% 
Hardware
 
7%   
  
  
8% 
Services
 
8%   
  
  
8%
 
(1)
Comprised of Europe, the Middle East and Africa
Excluding the effects of foreign currency rate fluctuations, our total revenues increased in fiscal 2022 due to growth in our cloud and license business’
revenues and services business’ revenues, which were partially offset by a decline in our hardware business’ revenues. The constant currency increase in our
cloud and license business’ revenues during fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021 was attributable to growth in our cloud services and license support revenues
and cloud license and on-premise license revenues as customers purchased our applications and infrastructure technologies via cloud and license deployment
models. Customers also renewed their related cloud contracts and license support contracts to continue to gain access to the latest versions of our
technologies and to receive support services. The constant currency increase in our services business’ revenues during fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021 was
attributable to an increase in revenues for each of our primary services offerings. The constant currency decrease in our hardware business’ revenues during
fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021 was due to the emphasis we placed on the marketing and sale of our growing cloud-based infrastructure technologies and
the de-emphasis of our sales and marketing efforts for certain of our non-strategic hardware products and related support services. In constant currency, the
Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific regions contributed 68%, 22% and 10%, respectively, to our total revenue growth during fiscal 2022.
Excluding the effects of foreign currency rate fluctuations, our total operating expenses increased during fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021 substantially due to
certain litigation related charges recorded to acquisition related and other expenses as further described in Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition, our total operating expenses increased due to higher cloud services and license support
expenses, which were primarily due to higher employee related expenses and infrastructure investments that were made to support the increase in our cloud
and license business’ revenues; higher services expenses, which increased primarily due to higher employee related and external contractor expenses; and
higher research and development and general and administrative expenses, both of which increased primarily due to higher employee related expenses.
These constant currency expense increases were partially offset by lower amortization of intangible assets, lower restructuring expenses and by $250 million
of gains from operating asset sales, which were allocated across most of our operating expense lines during fiscal 2022. During fiscal 2022 and
45

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
2021, we curtailed certain variable expenditures including employee travel expenses, among others, primarily in response to COVID-19. We expect certain of
these expenses may normalize in future periods provided global economic and health conditions improve.
In constant currency, our total operating margin and total operating margin as a percentage of total revenues decreased in fiscal 2022, relative to fiscal 2021,
substantially due to the unfavorable impact of the fiscal 2022 litigation related charges referenced above, partially offset by higher fiscal 2022 total margin
generated by our operating segments and the aforementioned gains from operating asset sales during fiscal 2022.
Supplemental Disclosure Related to Certain Charges
To supplement our consolidated financial information, we believe that the following information is helpful to an overall understanding of our past financial
performance and prospects for the future.
Our operating results reported pursuant to GAAP included the following business combination accounting adjustments and expenses related to acquisitions
and certain other expense and income items that affected our GAAP net income:
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
 
Cloud services and license support deferred revenues(1)
 
$
—   
$
2 
Amortization of intangible assets(2)
 
 
1,150   
 
1,379 
Acquisition related and other(3)
 
 
4,713   
 
138 
Restructuring(4)
 
 
191   
 
431 
Stock-based compensation, operating segments(5)
 
 
735   
 
513 
Stock-based compensation, R&D and G&A(5)
 
 
1,878   
 
1,324 
Income tax effects(6)
 
 
(1,723)  
 
(3,408)
 
$
6,944   
$
379
 
(1)
Due to business combination accounting rules that were applicable to acquisitions closed prior to fiscal 2022, we have estimated the fair values of the cloud services and license support contracts
assumed and did not recognize the cloud services and license support revenue amounts presented in the above table for fiscal 2021 that would have otherwise been recorded by the acquired businesses
as independent entities upon delivery of the contractual obligations. To the extent customers for which these contractual obligations pertain renew these contracts with us, we expect to recognize
revenues for the full contracts’ values over the respective contracts’ renewal periods.
(2)
Represents the amortization of intangible assets, substantially all of which were acquired in connection with our acquisitions. As of May 31, 2022, estimated future amortization related to intangible
assets was as follows (in millions):
Fiscal 2023
 
$
750 
Fiscal 2024
 
 
508 
Fiscal 2025
 
 
148 
Fiscal 2026
 
 
24 
Fiscal 2027
 
 
6 
Thereafter
 
 
4 
Total intangible assets, net
 
$
1,440
 
(3)
Acquisition related and other expenses consisted of personnel related costs for transitional and certain other employees, certain business combination adjustments including certain adjustments after the
measurement period has ended, and certain other operating items, net. For fiscal 2022, acquisition related and other expenses also included certain litigation related charges as further described in Note
16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We consider the litigation related charges that are included in this line item to be outside our ordinary course
of business based on the following considerations: (i) the unprecedented nature of the litigation related charges including the nature and size of the damages awarded; (ii) the dissimilarity of this litigation
and related charges to recurring litigation of which we are a party in the normal course of business, for which any and all such charges are included in our GAAP operating results and are not separately
quantified and disclosed within this line item or any other line in the table presented above; (iii) the complexity of the case; (iv) the counterparty involved; and (v) our expectation that litigation related
charges of this nature will not recur in future periods; among other factors.
(4)
Restructuring expenses during fiscal 2022 primarily related to employee severance in connection with our Fiscal 2022 Oracle Restructuring Plan (2022 Restructuring Plan). Restructuring expenses during
fiscal 2021 primarily related to employee severance in connection with our Fiscal 2019 Oracle Restructuring Plan (2019 Restructuring Plan). Additional information regarding certain of our restructuring
plans is provided in management’s discussion below under “Restructuring Expenses,” and in Note 8 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
46

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
(5)
Stock-based compensation was included in the following operating expense line items of our consolidated statements of operations (in millions):
 
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
2022
   
2021
 
Cloud services and license support
 
$
205   
$
134 
Hardware
 
 
15   
 
11 
Services
 
 
67   
 
55 
Sales and marketing
 
 
448   
 
313 
Stock-based compensation, operating segments
 
 
735 
  
513 
Research and development
 
 
1,633   
 
1,188 
General and administrative
 
 
245   
 
136 
Total stock-based compensation
 
$
2,613   
$
1,837
 
(6)
For fiscal 2022, the applicable jurisdictional tax rates applied to our income before income taxes after excluding the tax effects of items within the table above such as for stock-based compensation,
amortization of intangible assets, restructuring, and certain acquisition related and other items, and after excluding the net deferred tax effects associated with a previously recorded income tax benefit
that resulted from a partial realignment of our legal entity structure, resulted in an effective tax rate of 16.3%, instead of 12.2%, which represented our effective tax rate as derived per our consolidated
statement of operations. For fiscal 2021, the applicable jurisdictional tax rates applied to our income before income taxes after excluding the tax effects of items within the table above such as for stock-
based compensation, amortization of intangible assets, restructuring, and certain other acquisition related items, and after excluding a $2.3 billion net tax benefit arising from the increase of a deferred
tax asset associated with a partial realignment of our legal entity structure and any related deferred tax expense resulted in an effective tax rate of 15.9%, instead of (5.7%), which represented our
effective tax rate as derived per our consolidated statement of operations.
Cloud and License Business
Our cloud and license business engages in the sale and marketing of our applications and infrastructure technologies that are delivered through various
deployment models and include: Oracle license support offerings; Oracle Cloud Services offerings; and Oracle cloud license and on-premise license offerings.
License support revenues are typically generated through the sale of applications and infrastructure license support contracts related to cloud licenses and
on-premise licenses; are purchased by our customers at their option; and are generally recognized as revenues ratably over the contractual term, which is
generally one year. Our cloud services deliver applications and infrastructure technologies on a subscription basis via cloud-based deployment models that we
develop, provide unspecified updates and enhancements for, deploy, host, manage and support. Revenues for our cloud services are generally recognized
over the contractual term, which is generally one to three years, or in the case of usage model contracts, as the cloud services are consumed. Cloud license
and on-premise license revenues represent fees earned from granting customers licenses, generally on a perpetual basis, to use our database and middleware
and our applications software products within cloud and on-premise IT environments and are generally recognized up front at the point in time when the
software is made available to the customer to download and use. We continue to place significant emphasis, both domestically and internationally, on direct
sales through our own sales force. We also continue to market certain of our offerings through indirect channels. Costs associated with our cloud and license
business are included in cloud services and license support expenses, and sales and marketing expenses. These costs are largely personnel and infrastructure
related including the cost of providing our cloud services and license support offerings, salaries and commissions earned by our sales force for the sale of our
cloud and license offerings, and marketing program costs.
47

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
   
Percent Change
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021(1)
 
Cloud and License Revenues:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Americas
 
$
20,594   
10% 
10% 
$
18,783 
EMEA
 
 
10,016   
1% 
5% 
 
9,928 
Asia Pacific
 
 
5,442   
1% 
5% 
 
5,390 
Total revenues
 
 
36,052   
6% 
7% 
 
34,101 
Expenses:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Cloud services and license support(2)
 
 
4,915   
19% 
20% 
 
4,133 
Sales and marketing(2)
 
 
7,054   
4% 
5% 
 
6,799 
Total expenses(2)
 
 
11,969   
9% 
11% 
 
10,932 
Total Margin
 
$
24,083   
4% 
6% 
$
23,169 
Total Margin %
 
67%   
  
  
68% 
% Revenues by Geography:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Americas
 
57%   
  
  
55% 
EMEA
 
28%   
  
  
29% 
Asia Pacific
 
15%   
  
  
16% 
Revenues by Offerings:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Cloud services and license support(1)
 
$
30,174   
5% 
6% 
$
28,702 
Cloud license and on-premise license
 
 
5,878   
9%
 
12% 
 
5,399 
Total revenues(1)
 
$
36,052   
6%
 
7% 
$
34,101 
Cloud Services and License Support Revenues by Ecosystem:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Applications cloud services and license support
 
$
12,612   
8% 
8% 
$
11,713 
Infrastructure cloud services and license support
 
 
17,562   
3%
 
5% 
 
16,989 
Total cloud services and license support revenues
 
$
30,174   
5%
 
6% 
$
28,702
 
(1)
Revenues presented for fiscal 2021 included cloud services and license support revenue adjustments related to certain cloud services and license support contracts that would have otherwise been
recorded as revenues by the acquired businesses as independent entities but were not recognized in our GAAP-based consolidated statements of operations for fiscal 2021 due to business combination
accounting rules that were applicable to acquisitions closed prior to fiscal 2022. Such revenue adjustments were included in our operating segment results for fiscal 2021 for purposes of reporting to and
review by our CODMs. See “Presentation of Operating Segment Results and Other Financial Information” above for additional information.
(2)
Excludes stock-based compensation and certain expense allocations. Also excludes amortization of intangible assets and certain other GAAP-based expenses, which were not allocated to our operating
segment results for purposes of reporting to and review by our CODMs, as further described under “Presentation of Operating Segment Results and Other Financial Information” above.
Excluding the effects of foreign currency rate fluctuations, our cloud and license business’ total revenues increased in fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021 due to
growth in our cloud services and license support revenues and growth in our cloud license and on-premise license revenues as customers purchased our
applications and infrastructure technologies via cloud and license deployment models and renewed their related cloud contracts and license support
contracts to continue to gain access to the latest versions of our technologies and to receive support for which we delivered such cloud and support services
during fiscal 2022. Our total cloud services revenues increased to $10.8 billion in fiscal 2022 from $8.9 billion in fiscal 2021 due to growth in our Oracle SaaS
and OCI offerings. In constant currency, the Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific regions contributed 71%, 18% and 11%, respectively, of the constant currency
revenue growth for this business in fiscal 2022.
In constant currency, our total cloud and license business’ expenses increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 due to higher cloud services and license
support expenses, primarily due to higher employee related expenses due to higher headcount and higher technology infrastructure expenses to support the
increase in our cloud and license business’ revenues; and higher sales and marketing expenses, primarily due to higher employee related expenses from
higher headcount. These constant currency expense increases were partially offset by an allocation of a portion of the gains from fiscal 2022 operating asset
sales as described above. Our cloud services and license support expenses have grown in recent periods and we expect this growth to continue to accelerate
in
48

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
fiscal 2023 as we increase our existing data center capacity and establish data centers in new geographic locations in order to meet current and expected
customer demand.
Excluding the effects of currency rate fluctuations, our cloud and license business’ total margin increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 due to fiscal
2022 increases in total revenues for this business, while total fiscal 2022 margin as a percentage of revenues for this business decreased slightly due to
expenses growth.
Hardware Business
Our hardware business’ revenues are generated from the sales of our Oracle Engineered Systems, server, storage, and industry-specific hardware offerings.
The hardware product and related software, such as an operating system or firmware, are highly interdependent and interrelated and are accounted for as a
combined performance obligation. The revenues for this combined performance obligation are generally recognized at the point in time that the hardware
product is delivered to the customer and ownership is transferred to the customer. Our hardware business also earns revenues from the sale of hardware
support contracts purchased by our customers at their option and that are generally recognized as revenues ratably as the hardware support services are
delivered over the contractual term, which is generally one year. The majority of our hardware products are sold through indirect channels such as
independent distributors and value-added resellers and we also market and sell our hardware products through our direct sales force. Operating expenses
associated with our hardware business include the cost of hardware products, which consists of expenses for materials and labor used to produce these
products by our internal manufacturing operations or by third-party manufacturers, warranty and related expenses and the impact of periodic changes in
inventory valuation, including the impact of inventory determined to be excess and obsolete; the cost of materials used to repair customer products with
eligible support contracts; the cost of labor and infrastructure to provide support services; and sales and marketing expenses, which are largely personnel
related and include variable compensation earned by our sales force for the sales of our hardware offerings. 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
   
Percent Change
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
Hardware Revenues:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Americas
 
$
1,558   
-6% 
-6% 
$
1,650 
EMEA
 
 
949   
-4% 
1% 
 
989 
Asia Pacific
 
 
676   
-6% 
-3% 
 
720 
Total revenues
 
 
3,183   
-5% 
-3% 
 
3,359 
Expenses:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Hardware products and support(1)
 
 
944   
0% 
2% 
 
945 
Sales and marketing(1)
 
 
361   
-7% 
-5% 
 
388 
Total expenses(1)
 
 
1,305   
-2% 
0% 
 
1,333 
Total Margin
 
$
1,878   
-7% 
-5% 
$
2,026 
Total Margin %
 
59%   
  
  
60% 
% Revenues by Geography:
 
 
    
  
  
 
  
Americas
 
49%   
  
  
49% 
EMEA
 
30%   
  
  
30% 
Asia Pacific
 
21%   
  
  
21%
 
(1)
Excludes stock-based compensation and certain expense allocations. Also excludes amortization of intangible assets and certain other GAAP-based expenses, which were not allocated to our operating
segment results for purposes of reporting to and review by our CODMs, as further described under “Presentation of Operating Segments and Other Financial Information” above.
Our constant currency hardware revenues decreased in fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021, primarily due to our continued emphasis on the marketing and sale
of our cloud-based infrastructure technologies and strategic hardware offerings and the de-emphasis of our sales and marketing efforts for certain of our
nonstrategic hardware products, which resulted in reduced sales volumes of certain of our hardware product lines and also
49

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
impacted the volume of hardware support contracts sold in recent periods. Our hardware business’ revenues were also adversely impacted during fiscal 2022
and 2021 due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including global supply chain shortages for technology components that resulted in certain
manufacturing delays, and any such prospective impacts are unknown. Geographically, we experienced constant currency revenue declines in the Americas
and the Asia Pacific regions during fiscal 2022, partially offset by constant currency revenue increases in the EMEA region.
Excluding the effects of currency rate fluctuations, total hardware expenses were flat in fiscal 2022, relative to the corresponding prior year period.
In constant currency, our hardware business’ total margin and total margin as a percentage of revenues decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021
primarily due to lower total revenues for this business.
Services Business
Our services offerings are designed to help maximize the performance of customer investments in Oracle applications and infrastructure technologies and
substantially include our consulting services and advanced customer services offerings. Services revenues are generally recognized over time as the services
are performed. The cost of providing our services consists primarily of personnel related expenses, technology infrastructure expenditures, facilities expenses
and external contractor expenses. 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
   
Percent Change
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
Services Revenues:
 
 
    
   
  
 
  
Americas
 
$
1,527 
 
9%
 
9% 
$
1,397 
EMEA
 
 
1,046 
 
7%
 
11% 
 
977 
Asia Pacific
 
 
632 
 
-2%
 
1% 
 
647 
Total revenues
 
 
3,205 
 
6%
 
8% 
 
3,021 
Total Expenses(1)
 
 
2,539 
 
6%
 
8% 
 
2,393 
Total Margin
 
$
666 
 
6%
 
9% 
$
628 
Total Margin %
 
21% 
 
 
 
  
21% 
% Revenues by Geography:
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
Americas
 
48% 
 
 
 
  
46% 
EMEA
 
32% 
 
 
 
  
32% 
Asia Pacific
 
20% 
 
 
 
  
22%
 
(1)
Excludes stock-based compensation and certain allocations. Also excludes certain other GAAP-based expenses, which were not allocated to our operating segment results for purposes of reporting to and
review by our CODMs, as further described under “Presentation of Operating Segments and Other Financial Information” above.
Excluding the effects of currency rate fluctuations, our total services revenues increased in fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021 primarily due to revenue
increases in each of our primary services offerings. In constant currency, the Americas, the EMEA and the Asia Pacific regions contributed 53%, 44% and 3%,
respectively, to the revenue growth for this business in fiscal 2022.
In constant currency, total services expenses increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to higher employee related expenses due to higher
headcount and higher external contractor expenses.
In constant currency, our services business’ total margin increased during fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021 due to higher total revenues for this business. In
constant currency, total margin as a percentage of total services revenues was flat during fiscal 2022 relative to fiscal 2021.
Research and Development Expenses:   Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel related expenditures. We intend to continue to
invest significantly in our research and development efforts because, in our judgment, they are essential to maintaining our competitive position.
50

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
   
Percent Change
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
Research and development(1)
 
$
5,586 
 
5%
 
5% 
$
5,339 
Stock-based compensation
 
 
1,633 
 
38%
 
38% 
 
1,188 
Total expenses
 
$
7,219 
 
11%
 
11% 
$
6,527 
% of Total Revenues
 
17% 
 
 
 
  
16%
 
(1)
Excluding stock-based compensation
On a constant currency basis, total research and development expenses increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to higher employee
related expenses due to increased headcount and higher stock-based compensation expenses. This constant currency expense increase was partially offset by
an allocation of gains from fiscal 2022 operating asset sales as described above.
General and Administrative Expenses:   General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel related expenditures for IT, finance, legal and
human resources support functions.
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
   
Percent Change
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
General and administrative(1)
 
$
1,072 
 
-4%
 
-3% 
$
1,118 
Stock-based compensation
 
 
245 
 
79%
 
79% 
 
136 
Total expenses
 
$
1,317 
 
5%
 
6% 
$
1,254 
% of Total Revenues
 
3% 
 
 
 
  
3%
 
(1)
Excluding stock-based compensation
Excluding the effects of foreign currency rate fluctuations, total general and administrative expenses increased in fiscal 2022 primarily due to higher stock-
based compensation expenses. This constant currency expense increase was partially offset by an allocation of gains from fiscal 2022 operating asset sales as
described above.
Amortization of Intangible Assets:   Substantially all of our intangible assets were acquired through our business combinations. We amortize our intangible
assets over, and monitor the appropriateness of, the estimated useful lives of these assets. We also periodically review these intangible assets for potential
impairment based upon relevant facts and circumstances. Note 6 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report has
additional information regarding our intangible assets and related amortization.
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
  
 
 
 
Percent Change
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
 
 
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
Developed technology
 $
475 
 
-24%
 
-23%
 $
621 
Cloud services and license support agreements and related relationships
  
592 
 
-11%
 
-11%
  
669 
Other
  
83 
 
-7%
 
-7%
  
89 
Total amortization of intangible assets
 $
1,150 
 
-17%
 
-17%
 $
1,379
 
Amortization of intangible assets decreased in fiscal 2022 due to a reduction in expenses associated with certain of our intangible assets that became fully
amortized, partially offset by a smaller amount of additional amortization from intangible assets that we acquired in connection with our recent acquisitions.
Acquisition Related and Other Expenses:     Acquisition related and other expenses consist of personnel related costs for transitional and certain other
employees, certain business combination adjustments, including adjustments after the measurement period has ended, and certain other operating items,
net.
51

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
   
Percent Change
 
 
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
Transitional and other employee related costs
 
$
10   
88% 
87% 
$
5 
Business combination adjustments, net
 
 
9   
109% 
108% 
 
4 
Other, net
 
 
4,694   
* 
* 
 
129 
Total acquisition related and other expenses
 
$
4,713   
* 
* 
$
138
 
*
Not meaningful
On a constant currency basis, acquisition related and other expenses increased during fiscal 2022 due to litigation related charges of $4.7 billion, which we
generally do not expect to recur, as further described in Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Restructuring Expenses: Restructuring expenses resulted from the execution of management approved restructuring plans that were generally developed to
improve our cost structure and/or operations, often in conjunction with our acquisition integration strategies and/or other strategic initiatives. Restructuring
expenses consist of employee severance costs, contract termination costs and certain other exit costs to improve our cost structure prospectively. For
additional information regarding our restructuring plans, see Note 8 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
   
 
 
 
Percent Change
   
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
 
 
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
Restructuring expenses
 
$
191   
-56% 
-56% 
$
431
 
Restructuring expenses in fiscal 2022 primarily related to our 2022 Restructuring Plan. Restructuring expenses in fiscal 2021 primarily related to our 2019
Restructuring Plan, which is substantially complete. Our management approved, committed to and initiated the 2022 Restructuring Plan and the 2019
Restructuring Plan in order to restructure and further improve efficiencies in our operations. We may incur additional restructuring expenses in future periods
due to the initiation of new restructuring plans or from changes in estimated costs associated with existing restructuring plans.
The majority of the initiatives undertaken by our 2022 Restructuring Plan were effected to implement our continued emphasis in developing, marketing,
selling and delivering our cloud-based offerings. Certain of the cost savings realized pursuant to our 2022 Restructuring Plan initiatives were offset by
investments in resources and geographies that better address the development, marketing, sale and delivery of our cloud‑based offerings including
investments in the development and delivery of our second‑generation cloud infrastructure.
Interest Expense:
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
   
Percent Change
 
 
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
Interest expense
 
$
2,755   
10% 
10% 
$
2,496
 
Interest expense increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to higher average borrowings during fiscal 2022 that resulted from our
issuance of $15.0 billion of senior notes in March 2021 partially offset by lower interest expense that resulted from $8.3 billion of scheduled repayments
made during fiscal 2022.
52

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Non-Operating (Expenses) Income, net: Non-operating (expenses) income, net consists primarily of interest income, net foreign currency exchange losses,
the noncontrolling interests in the net profits of our majority-owned subsidiaries (primarily Oracle Financial Services Software Limited and Oracle Corporation
Japan), net gains and losses related to equity investments including losses attributable to equity method investments and net other income and expenses,
including net unrealized gains and losses from our investment portfolio related to our deferred compensation plan, and non-service net periodic pension
income and losses.
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
   
Percent Change
 
 
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
Interest income
  $
94   
-7% 
-5%  $
101 
Foreign currency losses, net
   
(199)  
79% 
79%   
(112)
Noncontrolling interests in income
   
(184)  
2% 
2%   
(180)
(Losses) gains in equity investments, net
   
(147)  
* 
*   
262 
Other (losses) gains, net
   
(86)  
* 
*   
211 
Total non-operating (expenses) income, net
  $
(522)  
* 
*  $
282
 
*
Not meaningful
In constant currency, we incurred non-operating expenses, net in fiscal 2022 in comparison to non-operating income, net that we recorded in fiscal 2021. Non-
operating expenses, net increased during fiscal 2022 primarily due to higher net foreign currency losses; higher net losses from equity investments, primarily
due to an unrealized gain of $299 million recorded in fiscal 2021 for certain non-marketable equity securities with no such corresponding gain recorded in
fiscal 2022; higher losses in fiscal 2022 associated with equity investments for which we follow the equity method of accounting; and higher other expense,
net, which was primarily attributable to higher unrealized investment losses associated with certain marketable equity securities that we held for employee
benefit plans, and for which an equal and offsetting amount was recorded to our operating expenses during the same period.
(Provision for) Benefit from Income Taxes: Our effective income tax rates for each of the periods presented were the result of the mix of income earned in
various tax jurisdictions that apply a broad range of income tax rates. Refer to Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in
this Annual Report for a discussion regarding the differences between the effective income tax rates as presented for the periods below and the U.S. federal
statutory income tax rates that were in effect during these periods. Future effective tax rates could be adversely affected by an unfavorable shift of earnings
weighted to jurisdictions with higher tax rates, by unfavorable changes in tax laws and regulations, by adverse rulings in tax related litigation, or by shortfalls in
stock-based compensation realized by employees relative to stock-based compensation that was recorded for book purposes, among others.
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
 
   
Percent Change
 
 
 
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Actual
 
Constant
 
2021
 
(Provision for) benefit from income taxes
 
$
(932)  
* 
* 
$
747 
Effective tax expense (benefit) rate
 
12.2%   
  
  
(5.7%)
 
*
Not meaningful
Provision for income taxes increased during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to the absence of a favorable impact of $2.3 billion net tax
benefit arising from an increase in a net deferred tax asset associated with a partial realignment of our legal entity structure that resulted in the intra-group
transfer of certain intellectual property rights in fiscal 2021. This unfavorable variance was partially offset by lower income taxes of $824 million associated
with lower pre-tax income in fiscal 2022 that was primarily attributable to certain litigation related charges as further described in Note 16 of Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report and, to a much lesser extent, a favorable jurisdictional mix of earnings partially
offset by a decrease in unrecognized tax benefits due to settlements with tax authorities and other events.
53

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Liquidity and Capital Resources
 
As of May 31,
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
 
 
Change
 
2021
 
Working capital
 $
12,122 
 
-61%  $
31,403 
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities
 $
21,902 
 
-53%  $
46,554
 
Working capital: The decrease in working capital as of May 31, 2022 in comparison to May 31, 2021 was primarily due to $16.2 billion of cash used for
repurchases of our common stock, $4.7 billion of cash paid for certain litigation related charges that we generally do not expect to recur, $3.8 billion of long-
term senior notes that were reclassified to current liabilities, cash used to pay dividends to our stockholders and cash used for capital expenditures during
fiscal 2022. These unfavorable impacts were partially offset by the favorable impacts to our net current assets resulting from our net income, net cash
proceeds of $318 million associated with the sale of certain operating assets, and cash proceeds from stock option exercises, all of which occurred during
fiscal 2022. Our working capital may be impacted by some or all of the aforementioned factors in future periods, the amounts and timing of which are
variable.
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities: Cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of deposits held at major banks, money market funds and
other securities with original maturities of 90 days or less. Marketable securities consist of time deposits, marketable equity securities and certain other
securities. The decrease in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities at May 31, 2022 in comparison to May 31, 2021 was primarily due to $16.2 billion
of settled repurchases of our common stock, $8.3 billion of debt repayments, $4.7 billion of cash paid for certain litigation related charges that we generally
do not expect to recur, payments of cash dividends to our stockholders and cash used for capital expenditures. These cash outflows during fiscal 2022 were
partially offset by certain cash inflows generated by our normal business operations, from the sales of certain operating assets, and from stock option
exercises during fiscal 2022.
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Change
 
2021
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  $
9,539   
-40%  $
15,887 
Net cash provided by (used for) investing activities
  $
11,220   
*  $
(13,098)
Net cash used for financing activities
  $
(29,126)  
181%  $
(10,378)
*
Not meaningful
Cash flows from operating activities:   Our largest source of operating cash flows is cash collections from our customers following the purchase and renewal
of their license support agreements. Payments from customers for these license support agreements are generally received near the beginning of the
contracts’ terms, which are generally one year in length. Over the course of a fiscal year, we also have historically generated cash from the sales of new
licenses, cloud services, hardware offerings and other services. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are typically for employee related
expenditures, material and manufacturing costs related to the production of our hardware products, taxes, interest payments and leased facilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to lower net income that was primarily the result
of cash payments made in connection with certain litigation related charges that we generally do not expect to recur and certain other cash unfavorable
working capital changes, net, in each case during fiscal 2022 in comparison to fiscal 2021.
Cash flows from investing activities:   The changes in cash flows from investing activities primarily relate to the timing of our purchases, maturities and sales
of our investments in marketable securities, and investments in capital and other assets, including certain intangible assets, to support our growth.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $11.2 billion during fiscal 2022 in comparison to net cash used for investing activities of $13.1 billion during fiscal
2021. The increase in net cash provided by investing activities during fiscal 2022 was primarily due to a decrease in the cash used for the purchases of
marketable securities and
54

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
other investments, partially offset by a decrease in cash proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities and other investments and an increase in
cash used for capital expenditures, in each case during fiscal 2022 in comparison to fiscal 2021.
Cash flows from financing activities: The changes in cash flows from financing activities primarily relate to borrowings and repayments related to our debt
instruments, stock repurchases, dividend payments and net proceeds related to employee stock programs.
Net cash used for financing activities during fiscal 2022 increased compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to an issuance of $15.0 billion of senior notes in fiscal
2021 with no corresponding issuance of senior notes in fiscal 2022, higher debt repayments, higher net cash used for our employee stock program, and higher
payments of dividends, partially offset by lower stock repurchases, in each case during fiscal 2022 in comparison to fiscal 2021.
Free cash flow:   To supplement our statements of cash flows presented on a GAAP basis, we use non-GAAP measures of cash flows on a trailing 4-quarter
basis to analyze cash flows generated from our operations. We believe that free cash flow is also useful as one of the bases for comparing our performance
with our competitors. The presentation of non-GAAP free cash flow is not meant to be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net income as an
indicator of our performance, or as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity. We calculate free cash flow as follows:
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
Change
 
2021
 
Net cash provided by operating activities
  $
9,539   
-40%  $
15,887 
Capital expenditures
   
(4,511)  
111%   
(2,135)
Free cash flow
  $
5,028   
-63%  $
13,752 
Net income
  $
6,717   
   $
13,746 
Free cash flow as percent of net income
 
75%   
  
100%
 
Recent Financing Activities:
Credit Agreements and Related Borrowings:    In March 2022, we entered into a $6.0 billion, five-year revolving credit agreement (the Revolving Credit
Agreement) and a $15.7 billion, 364-day delayed draw term loan credit agreement (the Bridge Credit Agreement). In June 2022, in connection with the
acquisition of Cerner, we borrowed $15.7 billion pursuant to the Bridge Credit Agreement. Additional information is included in Notes 7 and 17 of Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Cash Dividends:   In fiscal 2022, we declared and paid cash dividends of $1.28 per share that totaled $3.5 billion. In June 2022, our Board of Directors declared
a quarterly cash dividend of $0.32 per share of our outstanding common stock payable on July 26, 2022 to stockholders of record as of the close of business
on July 12, 2022. Future declarations of dividends and the establishment of future record and payment dates are subject to the final determination of our
Board of Directors.
Common Stock Repurchase Program:   Our Board of Directors has approved a program for us to repurchase shares of our common stock. On December 9,
2021, we announced that our Board of Directors approved an expansion of our stock repurchase program by an additional $10.0 billion. As of May 31, 2022,
approximately $9.4 billion remained available for stock repurchases pursuant to our stock repurchase program. We repurchased 185.8 million shares for $16.2
billion, 329.2 million shares for $21.0 billion, and 361.0 million shares for $19.2 billion in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our stock repurchase
authorization does not have an expiration date and the pace of our repurchase activity will depend on factors such as our working capital needs, our cash
requirements for acquisitions and dividend payments, our debt repayment obligations or repurchases of our debt, our stock price, and economic and market
conditions. Our stock repurchases may be effected from time to time through open market purchases and pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1 plan. Our stock
repurchase program may be accelerated, suspended, delayed or discontinued at any time.
55

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Contractual Obligations:   Our largest contractual obligations as of May 31, 2022 consisted of:
•
principal payments related to our senior notes and other borrowings that are included in our consolidated balance sheet and the related periodic
interest payments;
•
our acquisition of Cerner, which closed on June 8, 2022 and for which we borrowed $15.7 billion on the same day pursuant to the Bridge Credit
Agreement;
•
routine tax payments including those that are payable pursuant to the transition tax under the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 that are
included in our consolidated balance sheet;
•
operating lease liabilities that are included in our consolidated balance sheet; and
•
other contractual commitments associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding.
In addition, as of May 31, 2022, we had $8.9 billion of gross unrecognized income tax benefits, including related interest and penalties, recorded on our
consolidated balance sheet, the nature of which is uncertain with respect to settlement or release with the relevant tax authorities, although we believe it is
reasonably possible that certain of these liabilities could be settled or released during fiscal 2023. We are involved in claims and legal proceedings, which are
inherently uncertain with respect to outcomes, estimates and assumptions that we make as of each reporting period, are inherently unpredictable, and many
aspects are out of our control. Notes 2, 7, 13 and 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report include
additional information regarding our most material contractual obligations and contingencies.
We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, cash generated from operations, and the Revolving Credit Agreement
and the Bridge Credit Agreement will be sufficient to meet our working capital, capital expenditures and contractual obligations requirements. In addition, we
believe that we could fund our future acquisitions, dividend payments and repurchases of common stock or debt with our internally available cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities, cash generated from operations, additional borrowings or from the issuance of additional securities.
Stock-Based Awards
Our stock-based compensation program is a key component of the compensation package we provide to attract and retain certain of our talented employees
and align their interests with the interests of existing stockholders.
We recognize that stock-based awards dilute existing stockholders and have sought to control the number of stock-based awards granted while providing
competitive compensation packages. Consistent with these dual goals, our cumulative potential dilution since June 1, 2019 has been a weighted-average
annualized rate of 1.3% per year. The potential dilution percentage is calculated as the average annualized new stock-based awards granted and assumed, net
of stock-based awards forfeited by employees leaving the company, divided by the weighted-average outstanding shares during the calculation period. This
maximum potential dilution will only result if all stock-based awards vest and, if applicable, are exercised. Of the outstanding stock options at May 31, 2022,
which generally have a ten-year exercise period, all have exercise prices lower than the market price of our common stock on such date. In recent years, our
stock repurchase program has more than offset the dilutive effect of our stock-based compensation program. However, we may modify the levels of our stock
repurchases in the future depending on a number of factors, including the amount of cash we have available for acquisitions, to pay dividends, to repay or
repurchase indebtedness or for other purposes. As of May 31, 2022, the maximum potential dilution from all outstanding stock-based awards, regardless of
when granted and regardless of whether vested or unvested, was 8.4%.
During fiscal 2022, the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors reviewed and approved the annual organization-wide stock-based award grants to
selected employees; all stock-based award grants to senior officers; and any individual grant of restricted stock units of 62,500 or greater. Each member of a
separate executive officer committee, referred to as the Plan Committee, was allocated a fiscal 2022 equity budget that could be used throughout the fiscal
year to grant equity within his or her organization, subject to certain limitations established by the Compensation Committee.
56

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Stock-based awards activity from June 1, 2019 through May 31, 2022 is summarized as follows (shares in millions):
Stock-based awards outstanding at May 31, 2019
   
321 
Stock-based awards granted and assumed
   
169 
Stock-based awards vested and issued and, if applicable, exercised
   
(211)
Forfeitures, cancellations and other, net
   
(54)
Stock-based awards outstanding at May 31, 2022
   
225 
Weighted-average annualized stock-based awards granted and assumed, net of forfeitures and cancellations
   
39 
Weighted-average annualized stock repurchases
   
(292)
Shares outstanding at May 31, 2022
   
2,665 
Basic weighted-average shares outstanding from June 1, 2019 through May 31, 2022
   
2,952 
Stock-based awards outstanding as a percent of shares outstanding at May 31, 2022
 
8.4% 
Total in the money stock-based awards outstanding (based on the closing price of our common stock on the last trading day of fiscal 2022) as a percent of
shares outstanding at May 31, 2022
 
8.4% 
Weighted-average annualized stock-based awards granted and assumed, net of forfeitures and cancellations and before stock repurchases, as a percent of
weighted-average shares outstanding from June 1, 2019 through May 31, 2022
 
1.3% 
Weighted-average annualized stock-based awards granted and assumed, net of forfeitures and cancellations and after stock repurchases, as a percent of
weighted-average shares outstanding from June 1, 2019 through May 31, 2022
 
-8.6%
 
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements, if any, and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial
statements, if any, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Item 7A.Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Equity Price Risk
Marketable and Non-Marketable Equity Investments
Our marketable and non-marketable equity securities investments totaled $1.1 billion and $946 million as of May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Our
marketable equity securities investments in publicly traded companies are recorded at fair value, which is subject to market price volatility. Our non-
marketable equity securities investments in private companies not accounted for under the equity method are adjusted to fair value for observable
transactions for identical or similar investments of the same issuer or for impairment. Our non-marketable equity securities investments accounted for under
the equity method, primarily in a related party entity, generally do not fluctuate based on market price changes. However, these equity method investments
could be impaired if the carrying value exceeds the fair value and is not expected to recover. The timing and amounts of changes in fair value, if any, of our
marketable and non-marketable equity investments depends on factors beyond our control, including the perceived and actual performance of the companies
in which we invest. For additional disclosure regarding the impact to our quarterly results of operations from investment volatility, please refer to Item 1A Risk
Factors included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Currency Risk
Foreign Currency Translation Risk
As described under “Constant Currency Presentation” above, our international operations have provided and are expected to continue to provide a significant
portion of our consolidated revenues and expenses that we report in U.S. Dollars. As a result, our consolidated revenues and expenses are affected and will
continue to be affected by changes in the U.S. Dollar against major foreign currencies. Fluctuations in foreign currencies impact the amount of total assets,
liabilities, earnings and cash flows that we report for our foreign subsidiaries upon the translation of these amounts into U.S. Dollars for, and as of the end of,
each reporting period. In particular, the strengthening of
57

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
the U.S. Dollar generally will reduce the reported amount of our foreign-denominated cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, total revenues and total
expenses that we translate into U.S. Dollars and report in our consolidated financial statements for, and as of the end of, each reporting period.
Foreign Currency Transaction Risk
We transact business in various foreign currencies. Our principal currency exposures include the Euro, Japanese Yen, Saudi Arabian Riyal, Indian Rupee and
British Pound. Our foreign currency exposures primarily arise from various intercompany transactions. We have established a program that primarily utilizes
foreign currency forward contracts to offset the risks that arise from the aforementioned transactions. Under this program, our strategy is to enter into foreign
currency forward contracts for major currencies in which we have an exposure so that increases or decreases in our foreign currency exposures are offset by
gains or losses on the foreign currency forward contracts which mitigate the risks and volatility associated with our foreign currency transactions. We may
suspend this program from time to time. Our foreign currency forward contracts are generally short-term in duration and we do not use them for trading
purposes.
We realize gains or losses with respect to our foreign currency exposures, net of gains or losses from our foreign currency forward contracts, and we also incur
costs to enter into these foreign currency forward contracts, substantially all of which are included in non-operating expenses or income, net in our
consolidated financial statements. Our ultimate realized gain or loss with respect to foreign currency exposures will generally depend on the size and type of
cross-currency transactions that we enter into, the currency exchange rates associated with these exposures and changes in those rates, the net realized gain
or loss on our foreign currency forward contracts and other factors. Furthermore, as a large portion of our consolidated operations are international, we could
experience additional foreign currency volatility in the future, in which the amounts and timing are unknown. Refer to Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional details about our foreign currency forward contracts.
Sensitivity Analysis
The following table sets forth the hypothetical potential losses that we consider to be the most material to the reported fair values and/or future earnings of
our interest rate, equity price and foreign currency influenced holdings, prior to any income tax effects, resulting from hypothetical changes in relevant market
rates as of or for the reporting periods below:
 
 
 
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
Hypothetical Change
 
Impact
 
2022
   
2021
 
Equity price risk:
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
Marketable and non-marketable equity investments
 
25% decrease in market price and fair values
 
Earnings
 
$
(277)  
$
(236)
Foreign currency risk:
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
Total revenues
 
10% decrease in foreign exchange rates
 
Earnings
 
$
(2,107)  
$
(2,061)
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities
 
10% decrease in foreign exchange rates
 
Fair values
 
$
(421)  
$
(650)
Item 8.Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The response to this item is submitted as a separate section of this Annual Report. See Part IV, Item 15.
Item 9.Changes In and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
58

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Item 9A.Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As of the end of the period covered by this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we carried out an evaluation under the supervision and with the participation of our
Disclosure Committee and our management, including our Principal Executive and Financial Officer, of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our
disclosure controls and procedures pursuant to Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e).
Based on our management’s evaluation (with the participation of our Principal Executive and Financial Officer), as of the end of the period covered by this
report, our Principal Executive and Financial Officer has concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of May 31, 2022 to provide
reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed by us in reports that we file or submit under the Exchange Act is (i) recorded, processed,
summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms and (ii) accumulated and communicated to our management, including
our Principal Executive and Financial Officer as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f). Under the supervision and with the participation of our management, including our Principal Executive and Financial Officer,
we conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2022 based on the guidelines established in
Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission’s 2013 framework. Our internal
control over financial reporting includes policies and procedures that provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external reporting purposes in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Based on the results of our evaluation, our management concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was effective as of May 31, 2022. We
reviewed the results of management’s assessment with our Finance and Audit Committee.
The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2022 has been audited by Ernst & Young LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting identified in connection with the evaluation required by paragraph (d) of Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15 or 15d-15 that occurred during our last fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal
control over financial reporting.
Inherent Limitations on Effectiveness of Controls
Our management, including our Principal Executive and Financial Officer, believes that our disclosure controls and procedures and internal control over
financial reporting are designed to provide reasonable assurance of achieving their objectives and are effective at the reasonable assurance level. However,
our management does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our internal control over financial reporting will prevent all errors and all
fraud. A control system, no matter how well conceived and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control
system are met. Further, the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints and the benefits of controls must be
considered relative to their costs. Because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that all
control issues and instances of fraud, if any, have been detected. These inherent limitations include the realities that judgments in decision-making can be
faulty and that breakdowns can occur because of a simple error or mistake. Additionally, controls can be circumvented by the individual acts of some persons,
by collusion of two or more people or by management override of the controls. The design of any system of controls
59

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
also is based in part upon certain assumptions about the likelihood of future events and there can be no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving
its stated goals under all potential future conditions; over time, controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or the degree of
compliance with policies or procedures may deteriorate. Because of the inherent limitations in a cost-effective control system, misstatements due to error or
fraud may occur and not be detected.
Item 9B.Other Information
None.
60

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
PART III
Item 10.Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Pursuant to General Instruction G(3) of Form 10-K, the information required by this item relating to our executive officers is included under the caption
“Executive Officers of the Registrant” in Part I of this Annual Report.
The other information required by this Item 10 is incorporated herein by reference from the information contained in our Proxy Statement to be filed with the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission in connection with the solicitation of proxies for our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders (2022 Proxy Statement).
Item 11.Executive Compensation
The information required by this Item 11 is incorporated herein by reference from the information to be contained in our 2022 Proxy Statement.
Item 12.Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The information required by this Item 12 is incorporated herein by reference from the information to be contained in our 2022 Proxy Statement.
Item 13.Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The information required by this Item 13 is incorporated herein by reference from the information to be contained in our 2022 Proxy Statement.
Item 14.Principal Accountant Fees and Services
The information required by this Item 14 is incorporated herein by reference from the information to be contained in our 2022 Proxy Statement.
61

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
PART IV
Item 15.Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
(a)
1. Financial Statements
The following financial statements are filed as a part of this report:
 
Page
 
 
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (PCAOB ID: 42)
 
63
Consolidated Financial Statements:
 
 
Balance Sheets as of May 31, 2022 and 2021
 
66
Statements of Operations for the years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
 
67
Statements of Comprehensive Income for the years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
 
68
Statements of Stockholders’ (Deficit) Equity for the years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
 
69
Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
 
70
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
 
71
2. Financial Statement Schedules
All schedules are omitted because the information required to be set forth therein is not applicable or is shown in the financial statements or notes herein or
not present in amounts sufficient to require submission of the schedule.
(b) Exhibits
The information required by this Item is set forth in the Index of Exhibits that is after Item 16 of this Annual Report.
 
62

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of Oracle Corporation
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Oracle Corporation (the Company) as of May 31, 2022 and 2021, the related consolidated
statements of operations, comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended May 31, 2022, and the related notes
(collectively referred to as the “financial statements”). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Company at May 31, 2022 and 2021, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended May 31, 2022, in conformity
with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company's internal control
over financial reporting as of May 31, 2022, based on criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) and our report dated June 21, 2022 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements
based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with
the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to assess the
risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures
included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matter
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the financial statements that was communicated or required to be
communicated to the audit committee and that: (1) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved our especially
challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of the critical audit matter does not alter in any way our opinion on the financial statements, taken
as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or
disclosures to which it relates.
 
Income Tax – Uncertain tax positions
Description of the
matter
 
As discussed in Note 13 of the financial statements, the Company recognizes uncertain tax positions and measures unrecognized tax
benefits related to various domestic and foreign matters. As of May 31, 2022, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits was $7.3
billion, of which $4.3 billion, if recognized would impact the Company’s effective tax rate. The Company uses significant judgment in the
accounting for uncertain tax positions including the interpretation and application of tax laws and legal rulings in various jurisdictions.
Auditing management’s evaluation of whether an uncertain tax position is more likely than not to be sustained and the measurement of the
benefit of various tax positions was complex, involved significant judgment, and was based on interpretations and application of tax laws
and legal rulings.
63

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
How we addressed
the matter in our
audit
 
We obtained an understanding, evaluated the design, and tested the operating effectiveness of the controls over management’s process for
interpretation and application of tax laws and legal rulings, as well as development of the assumptions and estimates used in the
measurement of uncertain tax positions.
To test management’s assessment of which uncertain tax positions are more likely than not to be sustained, we performed audit procedures
that included, among others reading and evaluating management’s assumptions and analysis, including any communications with taxing
authorities that detailed the basis and technical merits of the uncertain tax positions. We involved our tax subject matter professionals in
assessing the technical merits of certain tax positions based on our knowledge of relevant tax laws and experience with related taxing
authorities.
In addition, we also evaluated the Company’s disclosures in relation to these matters included in Note 13 of the financial statements.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2002.
San Jose, California
June 21, 2022
64

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of Oracle Corporation
Opinion on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
We have audited Oracle Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2022, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated
Framework issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (2013 framework) (the COSO criteria). In our opinion, Oracle
Corporation (the Company) maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of May 31, 2022, based on the COSO criteria.
We also have audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated balance sheets
of Oracle Corporation as of May 31, 2022 and 2021, the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for each of the
three years in the period ended May 31, 2022, and the related notes and our report dated June 21, 2022 expressed an unqualified opinion thereon.
Basis for Opinion
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an
opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to
be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and
Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the
design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions
and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with
authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
San Jose, California
June 21, 2022
65

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
As of May 31, 2022 and 2021
 
May 31,
 
(in millions, except per share data)
 
2022
 
 
2021
 
ASSETS
 
 
    
 
  
Current assets:
 
 
    
 
  
Cash and cash equivalents
 
$
21,383   
$
30,098 
Marketable securities
 
 
519   
 
16,456 
Trade receivables, net of allowances for credit losses of $362 and $373 as of May 31, 2022 and May 31, 2021,
respectively
 
 
5,953   
 
5,409 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
 
 
3,778   
 
3,604 
Total current assets
 
 
31,633   
 
55,567 
Non-current assets:
 
 
    
 
  
Property, plant and equipment, net
 
 
9,716   
 
7,049 
Intangible assets, net
 
 
1,440   
 
2,430 
Goodwill, net
 
 
43,811   
 
43,935 
Deferred tax assets
 
 
12,782   
 
13,636 
Other non-current assets
 
 
9,915   
 
8,490 
Total non-current assets
 
 
77,664   
 
75,540 
Total assets
 
$
109,297   
$
131,107 
LIABILITIES AND STOCKHOLDERS' (DEFICIT) EQUITY
 
 
    
 
  
Current liabilities:
 
 
    
 
  
Notes payable, current
 
$
3,749   
$
8,250 
Accounts payable
 
 
1,317   
 
745 
Accrued compensation and related benefits
 
 
1,944   
 
2,017 
Deferred revenues
 
 
8,357   
 
8,775 
Other current liabilities
 
 
4,144   
 
4,377 
Total current liabilities
 
 
19,511   
 
24,164 
Non-current liabilities:
 
 
    
 
  
Notes payable and other borrowings, non-current
 
 
72,110   
 
75,995 
Income taxes payable
 
 
12,210   
 
12,345 
Deferred tax liabilities
 
 
6,031   
 
7,864 
Other non-current liabilities
 
 
5,203   
 
4,787 
Total non-current liabilities
 
 
95,554   
 
100,991 
Commitments and contingencies
 
 
    
 
  
Oracle Corporation stockholders' (deficit) equity:
 
 
    
 
  
Preferred stock, $0.01 par value—authorized: 1.0 shares; outstanding: none
 
 
—   
 
— 
Common stock, $0.01 par value and additional paid in capital—authorized: 11,000 shares; outstanding: 2,665 shares
and 2,814 shares as of May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively
 
 
26,808   
 
26,533 
Accumulated deficit
 
 
(31,336)  
 
(20,120)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
 
 
(1,692)  
 
(1,175)
Total Oracle Corporation stockholders' (deficit) equity
 
 
(6,220)  
 
5,238 
Noncontrolling interests
 
 
452   
 
714 
Total stockholders' (deficit) equity
 
 
(5,768)  
 
5,952 
Total liabilities and stockholders' (deficit) equity
 
$
109,297   
$
131,107
 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
66

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
For the Years Ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions, except per share data)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Revenues:
   
      
      
  
Cloud services and license support
  $
30,174    $
28,700    $
27,392 
Cloud license and on-premise license
   
5,878     
5,399     
5,127 
Hardware
   
3,183     
3,359     
3,443 
Services
   
3,205     
3,021     
3,106 
Total revenues
   
42,440     
40,479     
39,068 
Operating expenses:
   
      
      
  
Cloud services and license support(1)
   
5,213     
4,353     
4,006 
Hardware(1)
   
972     
972     
1,116 
Services
   
2,692     
2,530     
2,816 
Sales and marketing(1)
   
8,047     
7,682     
8,094 
Research and development
   
7,219     
6,527     
6,067 
General and administrative
   
1,317     
1,254     
1,181 
Amortization of intangible assets
   
1,150     
1,379     
1,586 
Acquisition related and other
   
4,713     
138     
56 
Restructuring
   
191     
431     
250 
Total operating expenses
   
31,514     
25,266     
25,172 
Operating income
   
10,926     
15,213     
13,896 
Interest expense
   
(2,755)    
(2,496)    
(1,995)
Non-operating (expenses) income, net
   
(522)    
282     
162 
Income before income taxes
   
7,649     
12,999     
12,063 
(Provision for) benefit from income taxes
   
(932)    
747     
(1,928)
Net income
  $
6,717    $
13,746    $
10,135 
Earnings per share:
   
      
      
  
Basic
  $
2.49    $
4.67    $
3.16 
Diluted
  $
2.41    $
4.55    $
3.08 
Weighted average common shares outstanding:
   
      
      
  
Basic
   
2,700     
2,945     
3,211 
Diluted
   
2,786     
3,022     
3,294
 
(1)
Exclusive of amortization of intangible assets, which is shown separately.
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
67

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
For the Years Ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Net income
  $
6,717    $
13,746    $
10,135 
Other comprehensive (loss) income, net of tax:
   
      
      
  
Net foreign currency translation (losses) gains
   
(707)    
479     
(78)
Net unrealized gains (losses) on defined benefit plans
   
190     
71     
(79)
Net unrealized (losses) gains on marketable securities
   
—     
(1)    
91 
Net unrealized losses on cash flow hedges
   
—     
(8)    
(22)
Total other comprehensive (loss) income, net
   
(517)    
541     
(88)
Comprehensive income
  $
6,200    $
14,287    $
10,047
 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
68

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF STOCKHOLDERS’ (DEFICIT) EQUITY
For the Years Ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
 
 
Common Stock and
Additional Paid in
Capital
    
 
   
Accumulated
Other
Comprehensive
Loss
   
Total
Oracle
Corporation
Stockholders'
(Deficit) Equity
    
 
   
Total
Stockholders'
(Deficit) Equity
 
(in millions, except per share data)
 
Number of
Shares
   
Amount
   
Accumulated
Deficit
   
   
   
Noncontrolling
Interests
   
 
Balances as of May 31, 2019
  
3,359   $
26,909   $
(3,496)  $
(1,628)  $
21,785   $
578   $
22,363 
Common stock issued under stock-based compensation
plans
  
78    
1,470    
—    
—    
1,470    
—    
1,470 
Common stock issued under stock purchase plans
  
2    
118    
—    
—    
118    
—    
118 
Stock-based compensation
  
—    
1,590    
—    
—    
1,590    
—    
1,590 
Repurchases of common stock
  
(361)   
(2,932)   
(16,268)   
—    
(19,200)   
—    
(19,200)
Shares repurchased for tax withholdings upon vesting of
restricted stock-based awards
  
(11)   
(665)   
—    
—    
(665)   
—    
(665)
Cash dividends declared ($0.96 per share)
  
—    
—    
(3,070)   
—    
(3,070)   
—    
(3,070)
Other, net
  
—    
(4)   
3    
—    
(1)   
(94)   
(95)
Other comprehensive loss, net
  
—    
—    
—    
(88)   
(88)   
(5)   
(93)
Net income
  
—    
—    
10,135    
—    
10,135    
164    
10,299 
Balances as of May 31, 2020
  
3,067    
26,486    
(12,696)   
(1,716)   
12,074    
643    
12,717 
Common stock issued under stock-based compensation
plans
  
86    
1,658    
—    
—    
1,658    
—    
1,658 
Common stock issued under stock purchase plans
  
2    
128    
—    
—    
128    
—    
128 
Stock-based compensation
  
—    
1,837    
—    
—    
1,837    
—    
1,837 
Repurchases of common stock
  
(329)   
(2,893)   
(18,107)   
—    
(21,000)   
—    
(21,000)
Shares repurchased for tax withholdings upon vesting of
restricted stock-based awards
  
(12)   
(666)   
—    
—    
(666)   
—    
(666)
Cash dividends declared ($1.04 per share)
  
—    
—    
(3,063)   
—    
(3,063)   
—    
(3,063)
Other, net
  
—    
(17)   
—    
—    
(17)   
(111)   
(128)
Other comprehensive income, net
  
—    
—    
—    
541    
541    
2    
543 
Net income
  
—    
—    
13,746    
—    
13,746    
180    
13,926 
Balances as of May 31, 2021
  
2,814    
26,533    
(20,120)   
(1,175)   
5,238    
714    
5,952 
Common stock issued under stock-based compensation
plans
  
48    
318    
—    
—    
318    
—    
318 
Common stock issued under stock purchase plans
  
2    
164    
—    
—    
164    
—    
164 
Stock-based compensation
  
—    
2,613    
—    
—    
2,613    
—    
2,613 
Repurchases of common stock
  
(186)   
(1,723)   
(14,477)   
—    
(16,200)   
—    
(16,200)
Shares repurchased for tax withholdings upon vesting of
restricted stock-based awards
  
(13)   
(1,093)   
—    
—    
(1,093)   
—    
(1,093)
Cash dividends declared ($1.28 per share)
  
—    
—    
(3,457)   
—    
(3,457)   
—    
(3,457)
Other, net
  
—    
(4)   
1    
—    
(3)   
(396)   
(399)
Other comprehensive (loss) income, net
  
—    
—    
—    
(517)   
(517)   
(50)   
(567)
Net income
  
—    
—    
6,717    
—    
6,717    
184    
6,901 
Balances as of May 31, 2022
  
2,665   $
26,808   $
(31,336)  $
(1,692)  $
(6,220)  $
452   $
(5,768)
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
69

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
For the Years Ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
 
 
2021
 
 
2020
 
Cash flows from operating activities:
   
        
     
  
Net income
  $
6,717    $
13,746    $
10,135 
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
   
      
      
  
Depreciation
   
1,972     
1,537     
1,382 
Amortization of intangible assets
   
1,150     
1,379     
1,586 
Deferred income taxes
   
(1,146)    
(2,425)    
(851)
Stock-based compensation
   
2,613     
1,837     
1,590 
Other, net
   
220     
(39)    
239 
Changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of effects from acquisitions:
   
      
      
  
(Increase) decrease in trade receivables, net
   
(874)    
333     
(445)
Decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets
   
11     
622     
665 
Decrease in accounts payable and other liabilities
   
(733)    
(23)    
(496)
Decrease in income taxes payable
   
(398)    
(1,485)    
(444)
Increase (decrease) in deferred revenues
   
7     
405     
(222)
Net cash provided by operating activities
   
9,539     
15,887     
13,139 
Cash flows from investing activities:
   
      
      
  
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments
   
(10,272)    
(37,982)    
(5,731)
Proceeds from maturities of marketable securities
   
19,788     
26,024     
4,687 
Proceeds from sales of marketable securities and other investments
   
6,363     
1,036     
12,575 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
   
(148)    
(41)    
(124)
Capital expenditures
   
(4,511)    
(2,135)    
(1,564)
Net cash provided by (used for) investing activities
   
11,220     
(13,098)    
9,843 
Cash flows from financing activities:
   
      
      
  
Payments for repurchases of common stock
   
(16,248)    
(20,934)    
(19,240)
Proceeds from issuances of common stock
   
482     
1,786     
1,588 
Shares repurchased for tax withholdings upon vesting of restricted stock-based awards
   
(1,093)    
(666)    
(665)
Payments of dividends to stockholders
   
(3,457)    
(3,063)    
(3,070)
Proceeds from borrowings, net of issuance costs
   
—     
14,934     
19,888 
Repayments of borrowings
   
(8,250)    
(2,631)    
(4,500)
Other, net
   
(560)    
196     
(133)
Net cash used for financing activities
   
(29,126)    
(10,378)    
(6,132)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
   
(348)    
448     
(125)
Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents
   
(8,715)    
(7,141)    
16,725 
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of period
   
30,098     
37,239     
20,514 
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period
  $
21,383    $
30,098    $
37,239 
Non-cash investing and financing activities:
   
      
      
  
Change in unsettled repurchases of common stock
  $
(48)   $
66    $
(40)
Supplemental schedule of cash flow data:
   
      
      
  
Cash paid for income taxes
  $
2,567    $
3,189    $
3,218 
Cash paid for interest
  $
2,735    $
2,408    $
1,972
 
See notes to consolidated financial statements.
70

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
May 31, 2022
 
1.
ORGANIZATION AND SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Oracle Corporation provides products and services that substantially address all aspects of enterprise information technology (IT) environments, including
applications and infrastructure technologies. We deliver our products and services to customers worldwide through a variety of flexible and interoperable IT
deployment models, including cloud-based, Cloud@Customer (an instance of Oracle Cloud in the customer’s own data center), on-premise and hybrid
models. Oracle Cloud Software-as-a-Service and Oracle Cloud Infrastructure (SaaS and OCI, respectively, and collectively, Oracle Cloud Services) offerings
provide a comprehensive and integrated stack of applications and infrastructure services delivered via cloud-based deployment models that Oracle develops,
deploys, hosts, upgrades, supports and manages for the customer. Customers may also elect to purchase Oracle software licenses and hardware products and
related services to manage their own cloud-based or on-premise IT environments. Customers that purchase our software licenses may elect to purchase
license support contracts, which provide our customers with rights to unspecified license upgrades and maintenance releases issued during the support
period as well as technical support assistance. Customers that purchase our hardware products may elect to purchase hardware support contracts, which
provide customers with software updates and can include product repairs, maintenance services, and technical support services. We also offer customers a
broad set of services offerings that are designed to improve customer utilization of their investments in Oracle applications and infrastructure technologies.
Oracle Corporation conducts business globally and was incorporated in 2005 as a Delaware corporation and is the successor to operations originally begun in
June 1977.
Basis of Financial Statements
The consolidated financial statements included our accounts and the accounts of our wholly- and majority-owned subsidiaries. Noncontrolling interest
positions of certain of our consolidated entities are reported as a separate component of consolidated equity from the equity attributable to Oracle’s
stockholders for all periods presented. The noncontrolling interests in our net income were not significant to our consolidated results for the periods
presented and therefore have not been presented separately and instead are included as a component of non-operating expenses or income, net in our
consolidated statements of operations. Intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated.
The comparability of our consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended May 31, 2022 was impacted by $4.7 billion of certain litigation related
charges that are more fully described in Note 16 below. The comparability of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended May 31, 2021 was
impacted by a $2.3 billion net income tax benefit related to the partial realignment of our legal entity structure that resulted in the intra-group transfer of
certain intellectual property rights. Refer to Note 13 below for additional information regarding our income taxes.
In fiscal 2022, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes; and ASU
2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers, neither of which had a
material impact to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended May 31, 2022.
Use of Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) as set forth in the Financial
Accounting Standards Board’s (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC), and we consider the various staff accounting bulletins and other applicable
guidance issued by the SEC. These accounting principles require us to make certain estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates,
judgments and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon
71

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
information available to us at the time that these estimates, judgments and assumptions are made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect
the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the
periods presented. To the extent that there are differences between these estimates, judgments or assumptions and actual results, our consolidated financial
statements will be affected. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require
management’s judgment in its application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting among available alternatives would not
produce a materially different result.
Revenue Recognition
Our sources of revenues include:
•
cloud and license revenues, which include the sale of: cloud services and license support; and cloud licenses and on-premise licenses, which
typically represent perpetual software licenses purchased by customers for use in both cloud and on-premise IT environments;
•
hardware revenues, which include the sale of hardware products, including Oracle Engineered Systems, servers, and storage products, and
industry-specific hardware; and hardware support revenues; and
•
services revenues, which are earned from providing cloud-, license- and hardware-related services including consulting and advanced customer
services.
License support revenues are typically generated through the sale of license support contracts related to cloud license and on-premise licenses purchased by
our customers at their option. License support contracts provide customers with rights to unspecified software product upgrades, maintenance releases and
patches released during the term of the support period and include internet access to technical content, as well as internet and telephone access to technical
support personnel. License support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net cloud license and on-premise license fees. Substantially all of our
customers elect to purchase and renew their license support contracts annually.
Cloud services revenues include revenues from Oracle Cloud Services offerings, which deliver applications and infrastructure technologies via cloud-based
deployment models that we develop functionality for, provide unspecified updates and enhancements for, deploy, host, manage, upgrade and support and
that customers access by entering into a subscription agreement with us for a stated period.
Cloud license and on-premise license revenues primarily represent amounts earned from granting customers perpetual licenses to use our database,
middleware, application and industry-specific software products, which our customers use for cloud-based, on-premise and other IT environments. The vast
majority of our cloud license and on-premise license arrangements include license support contracts, which are entered into at the customer’s option.
Revenues from the sale of hardware products represent amounts earned primarily from the sale of our Oracle Engineered Systems, computer servers,
storage, and industry-specific hardware. Our hardware support offerings generally provide customers with software updates for the software components
that are essential to the functionality of the hardware products purchased and can also include product repairs, maintenance services and technical support
services. Hardware support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the net hardware products fees.
Our services are offered to customers as standalone arrangements or as a part of arrangements to customers buying other products and services. Our
consulting services are designed to help our customers to, among others, deploy, architect, integrate, upgrade and secure their investments in Oracle
applications and infrastructure technologies. Our advanced customer services are designed to provide supplemental support services, performance services
and higher availability for Oracle products and services.
72

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
We apply the provisions of ASC 606, Revenue From Contracts with Customers (ASC 606) as a single standard for revenue recognition that applies to all of our
cloud, license, hardware and services arrangements and generally require revenues to be recognized upon the transfer of control of promised goods or
services provided to our customers, reflecting the amount of consideration we expect to receive for those goods or services. Pursuant to ASC 606, revenues
are recognized upon the application of the following steps:
•
identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•
identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•
determination of the transaction price;
•
allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract; and
•
recognition of revenues when, or as, the contractual performance obligations are satisfied.
Our customers that contract with us for the provision of cloud services, software, hardware or other services include businesses of many sizes, government
agencies, educational institutions and our channel partners, which include resellers and system integrators.
The timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to our customers. We record an unbilled receivable, which is included within
accounts receivable on our consolidated balance sheets, when revenue is recognized prior to invoicing. We record deferred revenues on our consolidated
balance sheets when revenues are to be recognized subsequent to cash collection for an invoice. Our standard payment terms are generally net 30 days but
may vary. Invoices for cloud license and on-premise licenses and hardware products are generally issued when the license is made available for customer use
or upon delivery to the customer of the hardware product. Invoices for license support and hardware support contracts are generally invoiced annually in
advance. Cloud SaaS and cloud infrastructure contracts are generally invoiced annually, quarterly or monthly in advance. Services are generally invoiced in
advance or as the services are performed. Most contracts that contain a financing component are contracts financed through our Oracle financing division.
The transaction price for a contract that is financed through our Oracle financing division is adjusted to reflect the time value of money and interest revenue is
recorded as a component of non-operating expenses or income, net within our consolidated statements of operations based on market rates in the country in
which the transaction is being financed.  
Our revenue arrangements generally include standard warranty or service level provisions that our arrangements will perform and operate in all material
respects as defined in the respective agreements, the financial impacts of which have historically been and are expected to continue to be insignificant. Our
arrangements generally do not include a general right of return relative to the delivered products or services. We recognize revenues net of any taxes
collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Revenue Recognition for Cloud Services
Revenues from cloud services provided on a subscription basis are generally recognized ratably over the contractual period that the cloud services are
delivered, beginning on the date our service is made available to a customer. We recognize revenue ratably because the customer receives and consumes the
benefits of the cloud services throughout the contract period. Revenues from cloud services that are provided on a consumption basis, such as metered
services, are generally recognized based on the utilization of the services by the customer.
Revenue Recognition for License Support and Hardware Support
Oracle’s primary performance obligations with respect to license support contracts and hardware support contracts are to provide customers with technical
support as needed and unspecified software product upgrades, maintenance releases and patches during the term of the support period, if and when they
are available, and hardware product repairs, as applicable. Oracle is obligated to make the license and hardware support services
73

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
available continuously throughout the contract period. Therefore, revenues for license support contracts and hardware support contracts are generally
recognized ratably over the contractual periods that the support services are provided.  
Revenue Recognition for Cloud Licenses and On-Premise Licenses
Revenues from distinct cloud license and on-premise license performance obligations are generally recognized upfront at the point in time when the software
is made available to the customer to download and use. Revenues from usage-based royalty arrangements for distinct cloud licenses and on-premise licenses
are recognized at the point in time when the software end user usage occurs. For usage-based royalty arrangements with a fixed minimum guarantee amount,
the minimum amount is generally recognized upfront when the software is made available to the royalty customer.
Revenue Recognition for Hardware Products
The hardware product and related software, such as an operating system or firmware, are highly interdependent and interrelated and are accounted for as a
combined performance obligation. The revenues for this combined performance obligation are generally recognized at the point in time that the hardware
product is delivered and ownership is transferred to the customer.
Revenue Recognition for Services
Services revenues are generally recognized over time as the services are performed. Revenues for fixed price services are generally recognized over time
applying input methods to estimate progress to completion. Revenues for consumption-based services are generally recognized as the services are
performed.
Allocation of the Transaction Price for Contracts that have Multiple Performance Obligations
Many of our contracts include multiple performance obligations. Judgment is required in determining whether each performance obligation is distinct. Oracle
products and services generally do not require a significant amount of integration or interdependency; therefore, our products and services are generally not
combined. We allocate the transaction price for each contract to each performance obligation based on the relative standalone selling price (SSP) for each
performance obligation within each contract.
We use judgment in determining the SSP for products and services. For substantially all performance obligations except cloud licenses and on-premise
licenses, we are able to establish the SSP based on the observable prices of products or services sold separately in comparable circumstances to similar
customers. We typically establish an SSP range for our products and services which is reassessed on a periodic basis or when facts and circumstances change.
Our cloud licenses and on-premise licenses have not historically been sold on a standalone basis, as the vast majority of all customers elect to purchase
license support contracts at the time of a cloud license and on-premise license purchase. License support contracts are generally priced as a percentage of the
net fees paid by the customer to access the license. We are unable to establish the SSP for our cloud licenses and on-premise licenses based on observable
prices given the same products are sold for a broad range of amounts (that is, the selling price is highly variable) and a representative SSP is not discernible
from past transactions or other observable evidence. As a result, the SSP for a cloud license and an on-premise license included in a contract with multiple
performance obligations is generally determined by applying a residual approach whereby all other performance obligations within a contract are first
allocated a portion of the transaction price based upon their respective SSPs, with any residual amount of transaction price allocated to cloud license and on-
premise license revenues.
74

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
Remaining Performance Obligations from Customer Contracts
Trade receivables, net of allowance for credit losses, and deferred revenues are reported net of related uncollected deferred revenues in our consolidated
balance sheets as of May 31, 2022 and 2021. The amount of revenues recognized during the year ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, that were
included in the opening deferred revenues balance as of May 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, was approximately $8.8 billion and $8.0 billion, respectively.
Revenues recognized from performance obligations satisfied in prior periods and impairment losses recognized on our receivables were immaterial during
each year ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020.  
Remaining performance obligations represent contracted revenues that had not yet been recognized, and include deferred revenues; invoices that have been
issued to customers but were uncollected and have not been recognized as revenues; and amounts that will be invoiced and recognized as revenues in future
periods. The volumes and amounts of customer contracts that we book and total revenues that we recognize are impacted by a variety of seasonal factors. In
each fiscal year, the amounts and volumes of contracting activity and our total revenues are typically highest in our fourth fiscal quarter and lowest in our first
fiscal quarter. These seasonal impacts influence how our remaining performance obligations change over time and, combined with foreign exchange rate
fluctuations and other factors, influence the amount of remaining performance obligations that we report at a point in time. As of May 31, 2022, our
remaining performance obligations were $46.6 billion, approximately 57% of which we expect to recognize as revenues over the next twelve months, 32%
over the subsequent month 13 to month 36, and the remainder thereafter.
Sales of Financing Receivables
We offer certain of our customers the option to acquire certain of our cloud and license, hardware and services offerings through separate long-term payment
contracts. We generally sell these contracts that we have financed for our customers on a non-recourse basis to financial institutions within 90 days of the
contracts’ dates of execution. We record the transfers of amounts due from customers to financial institutions as sales of financing receivables because we are
considered to have surrendered control of these financing receivables. During fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, $1.8 billion, $1.7 billion and $1.5 billion,
respectively, of our financing receivables were sold to financial institutions.
Business Combinations
We apply the provisions of ASC 805, Business Combinations (ASC 805), in accounting for our acquisitions. ASC 805 requires that we evaluate whether a
transaction pertains to an acquisition of assets, or to an acquisition of a business. A business is defined as an integrated set of assets and activities that is
capable of being conducted and managed for the purpose of providing a return to investors. Asset acquisitions are accounted for by allocating the cost of the
acquisition to the individual assets and liabilities assumed on a relative fair value basis; whereas the acquisition of a business requires us to recognize
separately from goodwill the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at the acquisition date fair values. Goodwill as of the business acquisition date is
measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While
we use our best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the business acquisition date as well as any
contingent consideration, where applicable, our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period,
which may be up to one year from the business acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding
offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of a business acquisition’s measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities
assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our consolidated statements of operations. Costs to exit or restructure certain
activities of an acquired company or our internal operations are accounted for as termination and exit costs pursuant to ASC 420, Exit or Disposal Cost
Obligations, and are accounted for separately from the business
75

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
combination. A liability for costs associated with an exit or disposal activity is recognized and measured at its fair value in our consolidated statement of
operations in the period in which the liability is incurred. Abandoned operating leases related to an acquired company or our internal operations are
accounted for as Right-of-Use (ROU) asset impairment charges pursuant to ASC 842, Leases and are accounted for separately from the business combination.
In all periods presented, when estimating the asset impairment charges, assumptions were applied regarding estimated sub-lease payments to be received,
which can differ from actual results. This may require us to revise our initial estimates which may affect our results of operations and financial position in the
period the revision is made.
For a given business acquisition, we may identify certain pre-acquisition contingencies as of the acquisition date and may extend our review and evaluation of
these pre-acquisition contingencies throughout the measurement period in order to obtain sufficient information to assess whether we include these
contingencies as a part of the fair value estimates of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and, if so, to determine their estimated amounts. If we cannot
reasonably determine the fair value of a non-income tax related pre-acquisition contingency by the end of the measurement period, which is generally the
case given the nature of such matters, we will recognize an asset or a liability for such pre-acquisition contingency if: (1) it is probable that an asset existed or
a liability had been incurred at the business acquisition date and (2) the amount of the asset or liability can be reasonably estimated. Subsequent to the
measurement period or final determination of the net asset values for the business combination, whichever comes first, changes in our estimates of such
contingencies will affect earnings and could have a material effect on our results of operations and financial position.
In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax related valuation allowances assumed in a business combination are initially estimated as of the acquisition date.
We reevaluate these items quarterly based upon facts and circumstances that existed as of the business acquisition date with any adjustments to our
preliminary estimates being recorded to goodwill if identified within the measurement period. Subsequent to the measurement period or our final
determination of the tax allowance’s or contingency’s estimated value, whichever comes first, changes to these uncertain tax positions and tax related
valuation allowances will affect our provision for income taxes in our consolidated statement of operations and could have a material impact on our results of
operations and financial position.
Marketable and Non-Marketable Investments
In accordance with ASC 320, Investments—Debt Securities, and based on our intentions regarding these instruments, we classify substantially all of our
marketable debt securities investments as available-for-sale. We carry these securities at fair value, and report the unrealized gains and losses, net of taxes, as
a component of stockholders’ equity, except for any unrealized losses determined to be related to credit losses, which we record within non-operating
expenses or income, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. We periodically evaluate our investments to determine if impairment
charges are required. Substantially all of our marketable debt securities investments are classified as current based on the nature of the investments and their
availability for use in current operations.
Investments in equity securities, other than any equity method investments, are generally recorded at their fair values, if the fair values are readily
determinable. Non-marketable equity securities where we do not have control of, nor significant influence in, the investee are recorded at cost, less any
impairment, adjusted for observable price changes from orderly transactions for identical or similar investments of the same issuer with any gains or losses
recorded as a component of non-operating expenses or income, net as of and for each reporting period. For investments through which we have significant
influence in, but not control of, the investee, we account for such investments pursuant to the equity method of accounting whereby we record our
proportionate share of the investee’s earnings or losses, amortization of differences between our investment basis and the proportional book equity of the
investee, and impairment, if any, as a component of non-operating expenses or income, net for each reporting period.
76

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
Our non-marketable debt investments and equity securities and related instruments totaled $1.2 billion and $971 million as of May 31, 2022 and 2021,
respectively, are subject to periodic impairment reviews and are generally classified as a part of non-current assets in the accompanying consolidated balance
sheets. Certain of these instruments are adjusted for observable price changes from orderly transactions. The substantial majority of the non-marketable debt
investments and equity securities and related instruments held as of May 31, 2022 and 2021 were with a related party entity for which we follow the equity
method of accounting. We are also a counterparty to certain options to acquire additional equity interests in that entity at various times through December
2023 and we could obtain control of that entity should such options be exercised.
Fair Values of Financial Instruments
We apply the provisions of ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement (ASC 820), to our assets and liabilities that we are required to measure at fair value pursuant to
other accounting standards, including our investments in marketable debt and equity securities and our derivative financial instruments.
The additional disclosures regarding our fair value measurements are included in Note 4.
Allowances for Credit Losses
We record allowances for credit losses based upon a specific review of all significant outstanding invoices. For those invoices not specifically reviewed,
provisions are provided at differing rates, based upon the age of the receivable, the collection history associated with the geographic region that the
receivable was recorded in and current and expected future economic conditions. We write-off a receivable and charge it against its recorded allowance when
we have exhausted our collection efforts without success.
Concentrations of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that are potentially subject to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities,
derivatives and trade receivables. Our cash and cash equivalents are generally held with large, diverse financial institutions worldwide to reduce the amount
of exposure to any single financial institution. Investment policies have been implemented that limit purchases of marketable debt securities to investment-
grade securities. Our derivative contracts are transacted with various financial institutions with high credit standings and any exposure to counterparty credit-
related losses in these contracts is largely mitigated with collateral security agreements that provide for collateral to be received or posted when the net fair
values of these contracts fluctuate from contractually established thresholds. We generally do not require collateral to secure accounts receivable. The risk
with respect to trade receivables is mitigated by credit evaluations we perform on our customers, the short duration of our payment terms for the significant
majority of our customer contracts and by the diversification of our customer base. No single customer accounted for 10% or more of our total revenues in
fiscal 2022, 2021 or 2020.
We outsource the manufacturing, assembly and delivery of the substantial majority of our hardware products to a variety of companies, many of which are
located outside the U.S. Further, we have simplified our supply chain processes by reducing the number of third-party manufacturing partners and the
number of locations where these third-party manufacturers build our hardware products. Any inability of these third-party manufacturing partners to deliver
the contracted services for our hardware products could adversely impact future operating results of our cloud and license and hardware businesses.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is computed using standard cost, which approximates actual cost, on a first-in, first-out
basis. We evaluate our ending inventories for estimated excess quantities and obsolescence. This evaluation includes analysis of sales levels by product and
projections of future
77

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
demand within specific time horizons (generally six to nine months). Inventories in excess of future demand are written down and charged to hardware
expenses. In addition, we assess the impact of changing technology to our inventories and we write down inventories that are considered obsolete. At the
point of loss recognition, a new, lower-cost basis for that inventory is established, and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the
restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis. Inventories are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets in our consolidated balance
sheets and totaled $314 million and $142 million at May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Other Receivables
Other receivables represent value-added tax and sales tax receivables associated with the sale of our products and services to third parties. Other receivables
are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets in our consolidated balance sheets and totaled $791 million and $798 million at May 31, 2022 and
2021, respectively.
Deferred Sales Commissions
We defer sales commissions earned by our sales force that are considered to be incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a cloud, license support and
hardware support contract. Initial sales commissions for the majority of these aforementioned contracts are generally deferred and amortized on a straight-
line basis over a period of benefit that we estimate to be four years. We determine the period of benefit by taking into consideration the historical and
expected durations of our customer contracts, the expected useful lives of our technologies, and other factors. Sales commissions for renewal contracts
relating to certain of our cloud-based arrangements are generally deferred and then amortized on a straight-line basis over the related contractual renewal
period, which is generally one to three years. Amortization of deferred sales commissions is included as a component of sales and marketing expenses in our
consolidated statements of operations and asset balances for deferred sales commissions are included in other current assets and other non-current assets in
our consolidated balance sheets.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost, less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method based on estimated
useful lives of the assets, which range from one to 40 years. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the lesser of the estimated useful lives of the
improvements or the lease terms, as appropriate. Property, plant and equipment are periodically reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We did not recognize any significant property impairment charges in
fiscal 2022, 2021 or 2020.
Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Impairment Assessments
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price in a business combination over the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Intangible
assets that are not considered to have an indefinite useful life are itemized in Note 6 below and are amortized over their useful lives, which generally range
from one to 10 years. Each period we evaluate the estimated remaining useful lives of purchased intangible assets and whether events or changes in
circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization.
The carrying amounts of our goodwill and intangible assets are periodically reviewed for impairment (at least annually for goodwill and indefinite lived
intangible assets) and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable. When goodwill is
assessed for impairment, we have the option to perform an assessment of qualitative factors of impairment (optional assessment) prior to necessitating a
quantitative impairment test. Should the optional assessment be used for any given fiscal year, qualitative factors considered for a reporting unit include: cost
factors; financial performance; legal, regulatory, contractual, political, business, or other factors; entity specific factors; industry and market considerations;
macroeconomic conditions; and other relevant events and factors affecting the reporting unit. If we determine in
78

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
the qualitative assessment that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a quantitative test is then
performed. Otherwise, no further testing is required. For those reporting units tested using a quantitative approach, we compare the fair value of each
reporting unit with the carrying amount of the reporting unit, including goodwill. To determine the fair value of each reporting unit we utilize estimates,
judgments and assumptions including estimated future cash flows the reporting unit is expected to generate on a discounted basis; the discount rate used as
a part of the discounted cash flow analysis; future economic and market conditions; and market comparables of peer companies, among others. If, as per the
quantitative test, the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount of the reporting unit, impairment is recognized for the
difference, limited to the amount of goodwill recognized for the reporting unit. Our most recent goodwill impairment analysis was performed on March 1,
2022 and did not result in a goodwill impairment charge. We did not recognize impairment charges in fiscal 2021 or 2020.
Recoverability of finite lived intangible assets is measured by comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to the future undiscounted cash flows that are
expected to be generated by the lowest level associated asset grouping. Recoverability of indefinite lived intangible assets is measured by comparison of the
carrying amount of the asset to its fair value. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between
the carrying value and the fair value of the impaired asset. We did not recognize any intangible asset impairment charges in fiscal 2022, 2021 or 2020. At least
annually, we assess the useful lives of our finite lived intangible assets and may adjust the period over which these assets are amortized whenever events or
changes in circumstances indicate that a shorter amortization period is more reflective of the period in which these assets contribute to our cash flows.
Derivative Financial Instruments
During fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, we used derivative financial instruments to manage foreign currency and interest rate risks. We do not use derivative
financial instruments for trading purposes. We account for these instruments in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (ASC 815), which requires
that every derivative instrument be recorded on the balance sheet as either an asset or liability measured at its fair value as of each reporting date. ASC 815
also requires that changes in our derivatives’ fair values be recognized in earnings, unless specific hedge accounting and documentation criteria are met (i.e.,
the instruments are accounted for as hedges).
The accounting for changes in the fair value of a derivative depends on the intended use of the derivative and the resulting designation. For a derivative
instrument designated as a fair value hedge, loss or gain attributable to the risk being hedged is recognized in earnings in the period of change with a
corresponding earnings offset recorded to the item for which the risk is being hedged.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at its inception. Operating lease liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the present
value of lease payments over the lease term. We generally use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease
commencement date in determining the present value of future payments, because the implicit rate of the lease is generally not known. ROU assets related
to our operating lease liabilities are measured at lease inception based on the initial measurement of the lease liability, plus any prepaid lease payments and
less any lease incentives. Our lease terms that are used in determining our operating lease liabilities at lease inception may include options to extend or
terminate the leases when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise such options. We amortize our ROU assets as operating lease expense generally on a
straight-line basis over the lease term and classify both the lease amortization and imputed interest as operating expenses. We have lease agreements with
lease and non-lease components, and in such cases, we generally account for the components as a single lease component. We do not recognize lease assets
and lease liabilities for any lease with an original lease term of less than one year.
79

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
ROU assets related to our operating leases are included in other non-current assets, short-term operating lease liabilities are included in other current
liabilities, and long-term operating lease liabilities are included in other non-current liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. Cash flow movements
related to our lease activities are included in prepaid expenses and other assets and accounts payable and other liabilities as presented in net cash provided
by operating activities in our consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021. Note 10 below provides additional
information regarding our leases.
Legal and Other Contingencies
We are currently involved in various claims and legal proceedings. Quarterly, we review the status of each significant matter and assess our potential financial
exposure. Descriptions of our accounting policies associated with contingencies assumed as a part of a business combination are provided under “Business
Combinations” above. For legal and other contingencies that are not a part of a business combination or related to income taxes, we accrue a liability for an
estimated loss if the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable, and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Note 16 below
provides additional information regarding certain of our legal contingencies.
Foreign Currency
We transact business in various foreign currencies. In general, the functional currency of a foreign operation is the local country’s currency. Consequently,
revenues and expenses of operations outside the U.S. are translated into U.S. Dollars using weighted-average exchange rates while assets and liabilities of
operations outside the U.S. are translated into U.S. Dollars using exchange rates at the balance sheet dates. The effects of foreign currency translation
adjustments are substantially included in stockholders’ equity as a component of AOCL in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets and related periodic
movements are summarized as a line item in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income. Net foreign exchange transaction losses included in non-
operating expenses or income, net in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations were $199 million, $112 million and $185 million in fiscal
2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for share-based payments to employees, including grants of service-based restricted stock unit awards, service-based employee stock options,
performance-based stock options (PSOs), and purchases under employee stock purchase plans in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation—Stock
Compensation, which requires that share-based payments (to the extent they are compensatory) be recognized in our consolidated statements of operations
based on their fair values. We account for forfeitures of stock-based awards as they occur.
For our service-based stock awards, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the service period of the award, which is
generally four years.
For our PSOs, we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis related to awards that are probable of achievement over the longer of
the (a) estimated implicit service period for performance-metric achievement, or (b) derived service period for market-based metric achievement. During our
interim and annual reporting periods, stock-based compensation expense is recorded based on expected attainment of performance targets. Changes in our
estimates of the expected attainment of performance targets that result in a change in the number of shares that are expected to vest, or changes in our
estimates of implicit service periods, may cause the amount of stock-based compensation expense that we record for each interim reporting period to vary.
Any changes in estimates that impact our expectation of the number of shares that are expected to vest are reflected in the amount of stock-based
compensation expense that we recognize for each PSO tranche on a cumulative catch up basis during each interim reporting period in which such estimates
are altered. Changes in estimates of the implicit service periods are recognized prospectively.
80

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
We record deferred tax assets for stock-based compensation awards that result in deductions on certain of our income tax returns based on the amount of
stock-based compensation recognized in each reporting period and the fair values attributable to the vested portion of stock awards assumed in connection
with a business combination at the statutory tax rates in the jurisdictions that we are able to recognize such tax deductions. The impacts of the actual tax
deductions for stock-based awards that are realized in these jurisdictions are generally recognized in the reporting period that a restricted stock-based award
vests or a stock option is exercised with any shortfall/windfall relative to the deferred tax asset established recorded as a discrete detriment/benefit to our
provision for income taxes in such period. Note 12 below provides additional information regarding our stock-based compensation plans and related
expenses.
Advertising
Substantially all advertising costs are expensed as incurred. Advertising expenses, which were included within sales and marketing expenses, were $273
million, $202 million and $178 million in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and Development Costs and Software Development Costs
All research and development costs are expensed as incurred in accordance with ASC 730, Research and Development. Software development costs required
to be capitalized under ASC 985-20, Costs of Software to be Sold, Leased or Marketed, and under ASC 350-40, Internal-Use Software, were not material to our
consolidated financial statements in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020.
Acquisition Related and Other Expenses
Acquisition related and other expenses primarily consist of personnel related costs for transitional and certain other employees, certain business combination
adjustments, including adjustments after the measurement period has ended, and certain other operating items, net. For fiscal 2022, acquisition related and
other expenses included certain litigation related charges that we generally do not expect to recur as further described in Note 16 below.
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Transitional and other employee related costs
  $
10    $
5    $
12 
Business combination adjustments, net
   
9     
4     
(7)
Other, net
   
4,694     
129     
51 
Total acquisition related and other expenses
  $
4,713    $
138    $
56
 
Non-Operating (Expenses) Income, net
Non-operating (expenses) income, net consists primarily of interest income, net foreign currency exchange losses, the noncontrolling interests in the net
profits of our majority-owned subsidiaries (primarily Oracle Financial Services Software Limited and Oracle Corporation Japan), net gains and losses related to
equity investments including losses attributable to equity method investments and net other income and expenses, including net unrealized gains and losses
from our investment portfolio related to our deferred compensation plan, and non-service net periodic pension income and losses.
81

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Interest income
  $
94    $
101    $
527 
Foreign currency losses, net
   
(199)    
(112)    
(185)
Noncontrolling interests in income
   
(184)    
(180)    
(164)
(Losses) gains in equity investments, net
   
(147)    
262     
— 
Other (losses) gains, net
   
(86)    
211     
(16)
Total non-operating (expenses) income, net
  $
(522)   $
282    $
162
 
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes (ASC 740). Deferred income taxes are recorded for the expected tax consequences of
temporary differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and amounts recognized for income tax purposes. We
record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount of future tax benefit that is more likely than not to be realized.
A two-step approach is applied pursuant to ASC 740 in the recognition and measurement of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax
return. The first step is to determine if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained in an
audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than
50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in our provision for income taxes line
of our consolidated statements of operations.
A description of our accounting policies associated with tax related contingencies and valuation allowances assumed as a part of a business combination is
provided under “Business Combinations” above.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Financial Instruments: In March 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of
the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting (ASU 2020-04) and also issued subsequent amendments to the initial guidance (collectively, Topic
848). Topic 848 provides optional guidance for contract modifications and certain hedging relationships associated with the transition from reference rates
that are expected to be discontinued. We will adopt Topic 848 when our relevant contracts are modified upon transition to alternative reference rates and
expect this to occur through December 31, 2022. We do not expect our adoption of Topic 848 to have a material impact on our consolidated financial
statements.
2.
ACQUISITIONS
Acquisition of Cerner Corporation
On December 20, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (Merger Agreement) with Cerner Corporation (Cerner), a provider of digital
information systems used within hospitals and health systems that are designed to enable medical professionals to deliver better healthcare to individual
patients and communities.
On January 19, 2022, pursuant to the Merger Agreement, we commenced a tender offer to purchase all of the issued and outstanding shares of common
stock of Cerner at a purchase price of $95.00 per share, net to the seller in cash, without interest thereon, based upon the terms and subject to the conditions
set forth in the Offer to Purchase dated January 19, 2022, and the related Letter of Transmittal.
82

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
On June 8, 2022, pursuant to the terms of the tender offer and applicable Delaware law, we acquired all the outstanding Cerner shares and effectuated the
merger of Cerner with and into a wholly-owned subsidiary of Oracle and Cerner became an indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary of Oracle. Vested equity awards
outstanding immediately prior to the consummation of the merger were cancelled in exchange for the right to receive an amount in cash based on a formula
contained in the Merger Agreement. The unvested equity awards to acquire Cerner common stock that were outstanding immediately prior to the conclusion
of the merger were converted into equity awards denominated in shares of Oracle common stock based on formulas contained in the Merger Agreement. We
will include the financial results of Cerner in our consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition.
The total preliminary purchase price for Cerner is approximately $28.2 billion, which consisted of approximately $28.2 billion in cash and $43 million for the
fair values of restricted stock-based awards and stock options assumed. In connection with the acquisition of Cerner, we assumed $1.6 billion of senior notes
and other borrowings, of which $1.5 billion were paid on June 8, 2022.
Other Fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020 Acquisitions
During fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, we acquired certain other companies and purchased certain technology and development assets primarily to expand our
products and services offerings. These acquisitions were not significant individually or in the aggregate to our consolidated financial statements.
3.
CASH, CASH EQUIVALENTS AND MARKETABLE SECURITIES
Cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of deposits held at major banks, money market funds and other securities with original maturities of 90 days or
less. Marketable securities consist of time deposits and certain other securities.
The amortized principal amounts of our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities approximated their fair values at May 31, 2022 and 2021. We use
the specific identification method to determine any realized gains or losses from the sale of our marketable securities classified as available-for-sale. Such
realized gains and losses were insignificant for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020. The following table summarizes the components of our cash equivalents and
marketable securities held, substantially all of which were classified as available-for-sale:
 
May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
 
Money market funds
  $
12,842 
 $
12,263 
Time deposits and other
   
520 
  
9,470 
Commercial paper debt securities
   
— 
  
11,712 
Total investments
  $
13,362 
 $
33,445 
Investments classified as cash equivalents
  $
12,843 
 $
16,989 
Investments classified as marketable securities
  $
519 
 $
16,456
 
As of May 31, 2022 and 2021, substantially all of our marketable debt securities investments mature within one year. Our investment portfolio is subject to
market risk due to changes in interest rates. As described above, we limit purchases of marketable debt securities to investment-grade securities, which have
high credit ratings and also limit the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. As stated in our investment policy, we are averse to principal loss and seek
to preserve our invested funds by limiting default risk and market risk.
Restricted cash that was included within cash and cash equivalents as presented within our consolidated balance sheets as of May 31, 2022 and 2021 and our
consolidated statements of cash flows for the years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 was nominal.
83

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
4.
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
We perform fair value measurements in accordance with ASC 820. ASC 820 defines fair value as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid
to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. When determining the fair value measurements for
assets and liabilities required to be recorded at their fair values, we consider the principal or most advantageous market in which we would transact and
consider assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the assets or liabilities, such as inherent risk, transfer restrictions and risk of
nonperformance.
ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy that requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when
measuring fair value. An asset’s or a liability’s categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair
value measurement. ASC 820 establishes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
•
Level 1: quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities;
•
Level 2: inputs other than Level 1 that are observable, either directly or indirectly, such as quoted prices in active markets for similar assets or
liabilities, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, or other inputs that are observable or can be
corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities; or
•
Level 3: unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the fair values of the assets or liabilities.
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
Our assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis consisted of the following (Level 1 and Level 2 inputs are defined above):
 
 
May 31, 2022
   
May 31, 2021
 
 
 
Fair Value Measurements
Using Input Types
     
 
   
Fair Value Measurements
Using Input Types
     
 
 
(in millions)
 
Level 1
   
Level 2
   
Total
   
Level 1
   
Level 2
   
Total
 
Assets:
   
      
      
      
      
      
  
Money market funds
  $
12,842    $
—    $
12,842    $
12,263    $
—    $
12,263 
Time deposits and other
   
240     
280     
520     
1,250     
8,220     
9,470 
Commercial paper debt securities
   
—     
—     
—     
—     
11,712     
11,712 
Derivative financial instruments
   
—     
—     
—     
—     
73     
73 
Total assets
  $
13,082    $
280    $
13,362    $
13,513    $
20,005    $
33,518 
Liabilities:
   
      
      
      
      
      
  
Derivative financial instruments
  $
—    $
97    $
97    $
—    $
—    $
—
 
Our marketable securities investments consist of money market funds, time deposits and certain other securities. Marketable securities as presented per our
consolidated balance sheets included debt securities with original maturities at the time of purchase greater than three months and the remainder of the
debt securities were included in cash and cash equivalents. As of May 31, 2022 and May 31, 2021, substantially all of our marketable debt securities
investments mature within one year. Our valuation techniques used to measure the fair values of our instruments that were classified as Level 1 in the table
above were derived from quoted market prices and active markets for these instruments that exist. Our valuation techniques used to measure the fair values
of Level 2 instruments listed in the table above were derived from the following: non-binding market consensus prices that were corroborated by observable
market data, quoted market prices for similar instruments, or pricing models, such as discounted cash flow techniques, with all significant inputs derived from
or corroborated by observable market data including reference rate yield curves, among others.
84

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
Based on the trading prices of the $75.9 billion and $84.2 billion of senior notes and the related fair value hedges (refer to Note 7 for additional information)
that we had outstanding as of May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, the estimated fair values of the senior notes and the related fair value hedges using Level
2 inputs at May 31, 2022 and 2021 were $67.0 billion and $89.6 billion, respectively.
5.
PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Property, plant and equipment, net consisted of the following:
 
Estimated
 
May 31,
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
Useful Life
 
2022
 
 
2021
 
Computer, network, machinery and equipment
 
1-5 years 
$
12,844 
 $
9,508 
Buildings and improvements
 
1-40 years 
 
4,729 
  
4,734 
Furniture, fixtures and other
 
5-15 years 
 
423 
  
454 
Land
 
— 
 
1,166 
  
871 
Construction in progress
 
— 
 
512 
  
233 
Total property, plant and equipment
 
1-40 years 
 
19,674 
  
15,800 
Accumulated depreciation
   
 
 
(9,958)
  
(8,751)
Total property, plant and equipment, net
 
 
 
$
9,716 
 $
7,049
 
6.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS AND GOODWILL
The changes in intangible assets for fiscal 2022 and the net book value of intangible assets as of May 31, 2022 and 2021 were as follows:
 
Intangible Assets, Gross
   
Accumulated Amortization
   
Intangible Assets, Net
   
Weighted
Average
Useful
Life(2)
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
May 31,
2021
   
Additions &
Adjustments, net
(1)
   
Retirements
   
May 31,
2022
   
May 31,
2021
   
Expense
   
Retirements
   
May 31,
2022
   
May 31,
2021
   
May 31,
2022
   
 
Developed technology
  $
4,237    $
165    $
(436)   $
3,966    $
(3,621)   $
(475)   $
436    $
(3,660)   $
616    $
306     
3 
Cloud services and license support
agreements and related relationships
   
5,497     
(5)    
(232)    
5,260     
(3,834)    
(592)    
232     
(4,194)    
1,663     
1,066   
N/A 
Other
   
1,269     
—     
(48)    
1,221     
(1,118)    
(83)    
48     
(1,153)    
151     
68   
N/A 
Total intangible assets, net
  $
11,003    $
160    $
(716)   $
10,447    $
(8,573)   $
(1,150)   $
716    $
(9,007)   $
2,430    $
1,440     
 
 
(1)
Amounts also included any changes in intangible asset balances for the periods presented that resulted from foreign currency translations.
(2)
Represents weighted-average useful lives (in years) of intangible assets acquired during fiscal 2022.
85

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
As of May 31, 2022, estimated future amortization expenses related to intangible assets were as follows (in millions):
Fiscal 2023
 
$
750 
Fiscal 2024
 
 
508 
Fiscal 2025
 
 
148 
Fiscal 2026
 
 
24 
Fiscal 2027
 
 
6 
Thereafter
 
 
4 
Total intangible assets, net
 
$
1,440
 
The changes in the carrying amounts of goodwill, net, which is generally not deductible for tax purposes, for our operating segments for fiscal 2022 and 2021
were as follows:
(in millions)
 
Cloud and License
   
Hardware
   
Services
   
Total Goodwill, net
 
Balances as of May 31, 2020
  $
39,637 
 $
2,367 
 $
1,765 
 $
43,769 
Goodwill adjustments, net(1)
   
149 
  
— 
  
17 
  
166 
Balances as of May 31, 2021
   
39,786 
  
2,367 
  
1,782 
  
43,935 
Goodwill adjustments, net(1)
   
152     
—     
(276)    
(124)
Balances as of May 31, 2022
  $
39,938    $
2,367    $
1,506    $
43,811
 
(1)
Amounts include any changes in goodwill balances for the period presented that substantially resulted from foreign currency translations and, during fiscal 2022, the realignment of an operating segment
component.
 
86

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
7.
NOTES PAYABLE AND OTHER BORROWINGS
Notes payable and other borrowings consisted of the following:
 
 
 
 
May 31,
 
 
 
 
2022
 
2021
(Amounts in millions)
 
Date of
Issuance
 
Amount
   
Effective
Interest
Rate
 
Amount
   
Effective
Interest
Rate
Fixed-rate senior notes:
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
    
 
$1,500, 2.80%, due July 2021(1)
 
July 2014
 
$
—   
N.A 
$
1,500   
2.82%
$4,250, 1.90%, due September 2021
 
July 2016
 
 
—   
N.A 
 
4,250   
1.94%
$2,500, 2.50%, due May 2022
 
May 2015
 
 
—   
N.A 
 
2,500   
2.56%
$2,500, 2.50%, due October 2022
 
October 2012
 
 
2,500   
2.51% 
 
2,500   
2.51%
$1,250, 2.625%, due February 2023
 
November 2017
 
 
1,250   
2.64% 
 
1,250   
2.64%
$1,000, 3.625%, due July 2023
 
July 2013
 
 
1,000   
3.73% 
 
1,000   
3.73%
$2,500, 2.40%, due September 2023
 
July 2016
 
 
2,500   
2.40% 
 
2,500   
2.40%
$2,000, 3.40%, due July 2024
 
July 2014
 
 
2,000   
3.43% 
 
2,000   
3.43%
$2,000, 2.95%, due November 2024
 
November 2017
 
 
2,000   
2.98% 
 
2,000   
2.98%
$3,500, 2.50%, due April 2025
 
April 2020
 
 
3,500   
2.51% 
 
3,500   
2.51%
$2,500, 2.95%, due May 2025
 
May 2015
 
 
2,500   
3.00% 
 
2,500   
3.00%
€750, 3.125%, due July 2025(2)(3)
 
July 2013
 
 
803   
3.17% 
 
916   
3.17%
$2,750, 1.65%, due March 2026
 
March 2021
 
 
2,750   
1.66% 
 
2,750   
1.66%
$3,000, 2.65%, due July 2026
 
July 2016
 
 
3,000   
2.69% 
 
3,000   
2.69%
$2,250, 2.80%, due April 2027
 
April 2020
 
 
2,250   
2.83% 
 
2,250   
2.83%
$2,750, 3.25%, due November 2027
 
November 2017
 
 
2,750   
3.26% 
 
2,750   
3.26%
$2,000, 2.30%, due March 2028
 
March 2021
 
 
2,000   
2.34% 
 
2,000   
2.34%
$3,250, 2.95%, due April 2030
 
April 2020
 
 
3,250   
2.96% 
 
3,250   
2.96%
$500, 3.25%, due May 2030
 
May 2015
 
 
500   
3.30% 
 
500   
3.30%
$3,250, 2.875%, due March 2031
 
March 2021
 
 
3,250   
2.89% 
 
3,250   
2.89%
$1,750, 4.30%, due July 2034
 
July 2014
 
 
1,750   
4.30% 
 
1,750   
4.30%
$1,250, 3.90%, due May 2035
 
May 2015
 
 
1,250   
3.95% 
 
1,250   
3.95%
$1,250, 3.85%, due July 2036
 
July 2016
 
 
1,250   
3.85% 
 
1,250   
3.85%
$1,750, 3.80%, due November 2037
 
November 2017
 
 
1,750   
3.83% 
 
1,750   
3.83%
$1,250, 6.50%, due April 2038
 
April 2008
 
 
1,250   
6.52% 
 
1,250   
6.52%
$1,250, 6.125%, due July 2039
 
July 2009
 
 
1,250   
6.19% 
 
1,250   
6.19%
$3,000, 3.60%, due April 2040
 
April 2020
 
 
3,000   
3.62% 
 
3,000   
3.62%
$2,250, 5.375%, due July 2040
 
July 2010
 
 
2,250   
5.45% 
 
2,250   
5.45%
$2,250, 3.65%, due March 2041
 
March 2021
 
 
2,250   
3.70% 
 
2,250   
3.70%
$1,000, 4.50%, due July 2044
 
July 2014
 
 
1,000   
4.50% 
 
1,000   
4.50%
$2,000, 4.125%, due May 2045
 
May 2015
 
 
2,000   
4.15% 
 
2,000   
4.15%
$3,000, 4.00%, due July 2046
 
July 2016
 
 
3,000   
4.00% 
 
3,000   
4.00%
$2,250, 4.00%, due November 2047
 
November 2017
 
 
2,250   
4.03% 
 
2,250   
4.03%
$4,500, 3.60%, due April 2050
 
April 2020
 
 
4,500   
3.62% 
 
4,500   
3.62%
$3,250, 3.95%, due March 2051
 
March 2021
 
 
3,250   
3.96% 
 
3,250   
3.96%
$1,250, 4.375%, due May 2055
 
May 2015
 
 
1,250   
4.40% 
 
1,250   
4.40%
$3,500, 3.85%, due April 2060
 
April 2020
 
 
3,500   
3.87% 
 
3,500   
3.87%
$1,500, 4.10%, due March 2061
 
March 2021
 
 
1,500   
4.11% 
 
1,500   
4.11%
Other borrowings due August 2025
 
November 2016
 
 
113   
3.53% 
 
113   
3.53%
Total senior notes and other borrowings
 
  
$
76,166   
  
$
84,529   
 
Unamortized discount/issuance costs
 
 
 
 
(284)  
  
 
(315)  
 
Hedge accounting fair value adjustments(1)(3)
 
 
 
 
(23)  
  
 
31   
 
Total notes payable and other borrowings
 
 
 
$
75,859   
  
$
84,245   
 
Notes payable, current
 
 
 
$
3,749   
  
$
8,250   
 
Notes payable and other borrowings, non-current
 
  
$
72,110   
  
$
75,995   
 
(1)
We entered into certain interest rate swap agreements that had the economic effects of modifying the fixed-interest obligations associated with the 2.80% senior notes that were outstanding as of May
31, 2021 and that were due and were settled in July 2021 (July 2021 Notes) so that the interest payable on these notes effectively became variable based on LIBOR. The effective interest rates after
consideration of these fixed to variable interest rate swap agreements was 0.87% for the July 2021 Notes as of May 31, 2021. Refer to Note 1 for a description of our accounting for fair value hedges.
 
87

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
(2)
In July 2013, we issued €750 million of 3.125% senior notes due July 2025 (July 2025 Notes). Principal and unamortized discount/issuance costs for the July 2025 Notes in the table above were calculated
using foreign currency exchange rates, as applicable, as of May 31, 2022 and May 31, 2021, respectively. The July 2025 Notes are registered and trade on the New York Stock Exchange.
(3)
In fiscal 2018 we entered into certain cross-currency interest rate swap agreements that have the economic effect of converting our fixed-rate, Euro-denominated debt, including annual interest
payments and the payment of principal at maturity, to a variable-rate, U.S. Dollar-denominated debt of $871 million based on LIBOR. The effective interest rates as of May 31, 2022 and 2021 after
consideration of the cross-currency interest rate swap agreements were 4.10% and 3.15%, respectively, for the July 2025 Notes. Refer to Note 1 for a description of our accounting for fair value hedges.
Future principal payments (adjusted for the effects of the cross-currency interest rate swap agreements associated with the July 2025 Notes) for all of our
borrowings at May 31, 2022 were as follows (in millions):
Fiscal 2023
 
$
3,750 
Fiscal 2024
 
 
3,500 
Fiscal 2025
 
 
10,000 
Fiscal 2026
 
 
3,734 
Fiscal 2027
 
 
5,250 
Thereafter
 
 
50,000 
Total
 
$
76,234
 
Senior Notes
Interest is payable semi-annually for the senior notes listed in the above table except for the Euro Notes for which interest is payable annually. We may
redeem some or all of the senior notes of each series prior to their maturity, subject to certain restrictions, and the payment of an applicable make-whole
premium in certain instances.
The senior notes rank pari passu with any other notes we may issue in the future pursuant to our commercial paper program (see additional discussion
regarding our commercial paper program below) and all existing and future unsecured senior indebtedness of Oracle Corporation including the Revolving
Credit Agreement and Bridge Credit Agreement, each as described further below. All existing and future liabilities of the subsidiaries of Oracle Corporation are
or will be effectively senior to the senior notes, any future borrowings pursuant to the Revolving Credit Agreement and borrowings made on June 8, 2022
under the Bridge Credit Agreement, and any future issuances of commercial paper notes. We were in compliance with all debt-related covenants at May 31,
2022.
Credit Agreements
In March 2022, we entered into the following two credit agreements:
•
a $6.0 billion, five-year revolving credit agreement (the Revolving Credit Agreement), which provides for an unsecured $6.0 billion, five-year
revolving credit facility (the Revolving Facility) to be used for our working capital purposes and for other general corporate purposes. Subject to
certain conditions stated in the Revolving Credit Agreement, we may borrow, prepay and reborrow amounts under the Revolving Facility during
the term of the Revolving Credit Agreement. All amounts borrowed under the Revolving Credit Agreement will become due on March 8, 2027,
unless the commitments are terminated earlier either at our request or, if an event of default occurs, by the lenders (or automatically in the case
of certain bankruptcy-related events). Interest is based on either (a) a Term Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR)-based formula plus a margin
of 87.5 basis points to 150.0 basis points, depending on the credit rating assigned to our long-term senior unsecured debt, or (b) a Base Rate
formula plus a margin of 0.0 basis point to 50.0 basis points, depending on the same such credit rating, each as set forth in the Revolving Credit
Agreement; and
88

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
•
a $15.7 billion delayed draw term loan credit agreement (the Bridge Credit Agreement), which provides for an unsecured $15.7 billion, 364-day
term loan commitment (the Bridge Facility), subject to the satisfaction of certain customary conditions. The Bridge Credit Agreement provides
that, subject to certain exceptions, net cash proceeds received by us from certain debt and equity issuances shall result in mandatory
prepayments or commitment reductions under the Bridge Credit Agreement. The proceeds of borrowings under the Bridge Facility were used to
finance the acquisition of Cerner, our refinancing of indebtedness in connection with such acquisition and to pay related fees and expenses. All
amounts borrowed under the Bridge Credit Agreement will become due on March 7, 2023, unless settled earlier pursuant to the terms of the
Bridge Credit Agreement. Interest is based on either (a) a Term SOFR-based formula plus a margin of 100.0 basis points to 137.5 basis points,
depending on the credit rating assigned to our long-term senior unsecured debt, or (b) a Base Rate formula plus a margin of 0.0 basis point to
37.5 basis points, depending on the same such credit rating, each as set forth in the Bridge Credit Agreement.
No amounts were outstanding pursuant to either of the credit agreements as of May 31, 2022. On June 8, 2022, we drew down the full amount of the Bridge
Credit Agreement to finance the acquisition of Cerner.
Each of the abovementioned credit agreements contains certain customary representations and warranties, covenants and events of default, including the
requirement that the ratio of “Consolidated EBITDA” to “Consolidated Net Interest Expense” (each term as defined in the respective credit agreements) of
Oracle and its subsidiaries shall not be less than 3.0 to 1.0 at the end of any fiscal quarter during the period that the credit agreement is effective. If an event
of default occurs under one of the credit agreements and is not cured within applicable grace periods or waived, any unpaid amounts under the applicable
credit agreement may be declared immediately due and payable and the commitments under that agreement may be terminated. We were in compliance
with the two credit agreements’ covenants as of May 31, 2022.
Commercial Paper Program and Commercial Paper Notes
Our existing $3.0 billion commercial paper program allows us to issue and sell unsecured short-term promissory notes pursuant to a private placement
exemption from the registration requirements under federal and state securities laws pursuant to dealer agreements with various banks and an Issuing and
Paying Agency Agreement with Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas. As of May 31, 2022 and 2021, we did not have any outstanding commercial paper
notes.
8.
RESTRUCTURING ACTIVITIES
Fiscal 2022 Oracle Restructuring Plan
During fiscal 2022, our management approved, committed to and initiated plans to restructure and further improve efficiencies in our operations due to our
acquisitions and certain other operational activities (2022 Restructuring Plan). In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, our management supplemented the 2022
Restructuring Plan to reflect additional actions that we expect to take. The total estimated restructuring costs associated with the 2022 Restructuring Plan are
up to $392 million and will be recorded to the restructuring expense line item within our consolidated statements of operations as they are incurred. We
recorded $223 million of restructuring expenses in connection with the 2022 Restructuring Plan in fiscal 2022 and we expect to incur the majority of the
estimated remaining $169 million through the end of fiscal 2023. Any changes to the estimates or timing of executing the 2022 Restructuring Plan will be
reflected in our future results of operations.
Fiscal 2019 Oracle Restructuring Plan
During fiscal 2019, our management approved, committed to and initiated plans to restructure and further improve efficiencies in our operations due to our
acquisitions and certain other operational activities (2019 Restructuring Plan). In fiscal 2021, our management supplemented the 2019 Restructuring Plan to
reflect additional actions that we expected to take. Restructuring costs associated with the 2019 Restructuring Plan were
89

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
recorded to the restructuring expense line item within our consolidated statements of operations as they were incurred. We recorded $430 million and $261
million of restructuring expenses in connection with the 2019 Restructuring Plan in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The total costs recorded in our
consolidated statements of operations in connection with the 2019 Restructuring Plan were $1.2 billion. Actions pursuant to the 2019 Restructuring Plan were
substantially complete as of May 31, 2021.
Summary of All Plans
Fiscal 2022 Activity
 
 
Accrued
May 31,
2021(2)
   
Year Ended May 31, 2022
   
Accrued
May 31,
2022(2)
   
Total
Costs
Accrued
to Date
   
Total
Expected
Program
Costs
 
(in millions)
 
   
Initial
Costs(3)
   
Adj. to
Cost(4)
   
Cash
Payments
   
Others(5)
   
   
   
 
Fiscal 2022 Oracle Restructuring Plan(1)
   
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
  
Cloud and license
  $
—   $
90   $
(2)  $
(52)  $
(2)  $
34   $
88   $
184 
Hardware
   
—    
11    
—    
(4)   
—    
7    
11    
22 
Services
   
—    
16    
—    
(7)   
—    
9    
16    
32 
Other
   
—    
105    
3    
(29)   
(69)   
10    
108    
154 
Total Fiscal 2022 Oracle Restructuring Plan
  $
—   $
222   $
1   $
(92)  $
(71)  $
60   $
223   $
392 
Total other restructuring plans(6)
  $
225   $
—   $
(32)  $
(109)  $
(13)  $
71    
     
  
Total restructuring plans
  $
225   $
222   $
(31)  $
(201)  $
(84)  $
131    
     
 
 
Fiscal 2021 Activity
 
 
Accrued
May 31,
2020
   
Year Ended May 31, 2021
   
Accrued
May 31,
2021(2)
 
(in millions)
 
   
Initial
Costs(3)
   
Adj. to
Cost(4)
   
Cash
Payments
   
Others(5)
   
 
Fiscal 2019 Oracle Restructuring Plan(1)
 
 
      
      
      
      
      
  
Cloud and license
 
$
75    $
225   $
(22)  $
(171)  $
12   $
119 
Hardware
 
 
14     
39    
(2)   
(34)   
(1)   
16 
Services
 
 
27    
54    
(4)   
(56)   
3    
24 
Other
 
 
22    
137    
3    
(110)   
5    
57 
Total Fiscal 2019 Oracle Restructuring Plan
 
$
138    $
455    $
(25)   $
(371)   $
19    $
216 
Total other restructuring plans(6)
 
$
13    $
2    $
(1)   $
(5)   $
—    $
9 
Total restructuring plans
 
$
151    $
457    $
(26)   $
(376)   $
19    $
225
 
Fiscal 2020 Activity
 
 
Accrued
May 31,
2019
   
Year Ended May 31, 2020
   
Accrued
May 31,
2020
 
(in millions)
 
   
Initial
Costs(3)
   
Adj. to
Cost(4)
   
Cash
Payments
   
Others(5)
   
 
Fiscal 2019 Oracle Restructuring Plan(1)
 
 
      
      
      
      
      
  
Cloud and license
 
$
72    $
140   $
(24)  $
(112)  $
(1)  $
75 
Hardware
 
 
18     
28    
(1)   
(31)   
—    
14 
Services
 
 
15    
51    
(2)   
(37)   
—    
27 
Other
 
 
108    
59    
10    
(111)   
(44)   
22 
Total Fiscal 2019 Oracle Restructuring Plan
 
$
213    $
278    $
(17)   $
(291)   $
(45)   $
138 
Total other restructuring plans(6)
 
$
49    $
—    $
(11)   $
(8)   $
(17)   $
13 
Total restructuring plans
 
$
262    $
278    $
(28)   $
(299)   $
(62)   $
151
 
(1)
Restructuring costs recorded to each of the operating segments presented primarily related to employee severance costs. Other restructuring costs represented employee severance costs not related to
our operating segments and certain other restructuring plan costs.
90

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
(2)
As of May 31, 2022 and 2021, substantially all restructuring liabilities have been recorded in other current liabilities within our consolidated balance sheets.
(3)
Costs recorded for the respective restructuring plans during the period presented.
(4)
All plan adjustments were changes in estimates whereby increases and decreases in costs were generally recorded to operating expenses in the period of adjustments.
(5)
Represents foreign currency translation and certain other non-cash adjustments.
(6)
Other restructuring plans presented in the tables above included condensed information for other Oracle based plans and other plans associated with certain of our acquisitions whereby we continued to
make cash outlays to settle obligations under these plans during the periods presented but for which the periodic impact to our consolidated statements of operations was not significant.
9.
DEFERRED REVENUES
Deferred revenues consisted of the following:
 
May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
 
 
2021
 
Cloud services and license support
  $
7,406    $
7,728 
Hardware
   
555     
618 
Services
   
360     
399 
Cloud license and on-premise license
   
36     
30 
Deferred revenues, current
   
8,357     
8,775 
Deferred revenues, non-current (in other non-current liabilities)
   
753     
679 
Total deferred revenues
  $
9,110    $
9,454
 
Deferred cloud services and license support revenues and deferred hardware revenues substantially represent customer payments made in advance for cloud
or support contracts that are typically billed in advance with corresponding revenues generally being recognized ratably or based upon customer usage over
the respective contractual periods. Deferred services revenues include prepayments for our services business and revenues for these services are generally
recognized as the services are performed. Deferred cloud license and on-premise license revenues typically resulted from customer payments that related to
undelivered products and services or specified enhancements.
10.
LEASES, OTHER COMMITMENTS AND CERTAIN CONTINGENCIES
Leases
We have operating leases that primarily relate to certain of our facilities, data centers and vehicles. As of May 31, 2022, our operating leases substantially
have remaining terms of one year to eleven years, some of which include options to extend and/or terminate the leases.
Operating lease expenses totaled $766 million, net of sublease income of $12 million in fiscal 2022 and $654 million, net of sublease income of $13 million in
fiscal 2021. At May 31, 2022, ROU assets, current lease liabilities and non-current lease liabilities for our operating leases were $3.5 billion, $727 million and
$2.9 billion, respectively. We recorded ROU assets of $1.9 billion in exchange for operating lease obligations during the year ended May 31, 2022. Cash paid
for amounts included in the measurement of operating lease liabilities was $808 million and $696 million for the year ended May 31, 2022 and 2021,
respectively. As of May 31, 2022, the weighted average remaining lease term for operating leases was approximately seven years and the weighted average
discount rate used for calculating operating lease obligations was 2.9%. As of May 31, 2022, we have $4.1 billion of additional operating lease commitments,
primarily for data centers, that are expected to commence in fiscal 2023 for terms of one to fifteen years that were not reflected on our consolidated balance
sheet as of May 31, 2022 or in the maturities table below.
91

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
Maturities of operating lease liabilities were as follows as of May 31, 2022 (in millions):
 
Fiscal 2023
 
$
763 
Fiscal 2024
 
 
642 
Fiscal 2025
 
 
578 
Fiscal 2026
 
 
524 
Fiscal 2027
 
 
415 
Thereafter
 
 
1,159 
Total operating lease payments
 
 
4,081 
Less: imputed interest
 
 
(423)
Total operating lease liability
 
$
3,658
 
Unconditional Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into certain unconditional purchase obligations with our suppliers, which are agreements that are enforceable
and legally binding and specify terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the
approximate timing of the payment. We utilize several external manufacturers to manufacture sub-assemblies, perform final assemblies and perform testing
of our hardware products. We also obtain individual components for our hardware products from a variety of individual suppliers based on projected demand
information. Such purchase commitments are based on our forecasted component and manufacturing requirements and typically provide for fulfillment
within agreed upon lead-times and/or commercially standard lead-times for the particular part or product and have been included in the amounts disclosed
below. Certain routine arrangements for other materials and goods that are not related to our external manufacturers and certain other suppliers and that are
entered into in the ordinary course of business are not included in the amounts below, as they are generally entered into in order to secure pricing or other
negotiated terms and are difficult to quantify in a meaningful way.
As of May 31, 2022, our unconditional purchase and certain other obligations were as follows (in millions):
Fiscal 2023
 
$
4,090 
Fiscal 2024
 
 
185 
Fiscal 2025
 
 
133 
Fiscal 2026
 
 
106 
Fiscal 2027
 
 
83 
Thereafter
 
 
192 
Total
 
$
4,789
 
As described in Note 7 above, as of May 31, 2022 we have senior notes and other borrowings that mature at various future dates and derivative financial
instruments outstanding that we leverage to manage certain risks and exposures.
Guarantees
Our cloud, license and hardware sales agreements generally include certain provisions for indemnifying customers against liabilities if our products infringe a
third party’s intellectual property rights. To date, we have not incurred any material costs as a result of such indemnifications and have not accrued any
material liabilities related to such obligations in our consolidated financial statements. Certain of our sales agreements also include provisions indemnifying
customers against liabilities in the event we breach confidentiality or service level requirements. It is not possible to determine the maximum potential
amount under these indemnification agreements due to our
92

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
limited and infrequent history of prior indemnification claims and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement.
Our Oracle Cloud Services agreements generally include a warranty that the cloud services will be performed in all material respects as defined in the
agreement during the service period. Our license and hardware agreements also generally include a warranty that our products will substantially operate as
described in the applicable program documentation for a period of one year after delivery. We also warrant that services we perform will be provided in a
manner consistent with industry standards for a period of 90 days from performance of the services.
We occasionally are required, for various reasons, to enter into financial guarantees with third parties in the ordinary course of our business including, among
others, guarantees related to taxes, import licenses and letters of credit on behalf of parties with whom we conduct business. Such agreements have not had
a material effect on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
11.
STOCKHOLDERS’ (DEFICIT) EQUITY
Common Stock Repurchases
Our Board of Directors has approved a program for us to repurchase shares of our common stock. On December 9, 2021, we announced that our Board of
Directors approved an expansion of our stock repurchase program by an additional $10.0 billion. As of May 31, 2022, approximately $9.4 billion remained
available for stock repurchases pursuant to our stock repurchase program. We repurchased 185.8 million shares for $16.2 billion (including 0.3 million shares
for $19 million that were repurchased but not settled), 329.2 million shares for $21.0 billion, and 361.0 million shares for $19.2 billion in fiscal 2022, 2021 and
2020, respectively, under the stock repurchase program.
Our stock repurchase authorization does not have an expiration date and the pace of our repurchase activity will depend on factors such as our working
capital needs, our cash requirements for acquisitions and dividend payments, our debt repayment obligations or repurchases of our debt, our stock price, and
economic and market conditions. Our stock repurchases may be effected from time to time through open market purchases or pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1
plan. Our stock repurchase program may be accelerated, suspended, delayed or discontinued at any time.
Dividends on Common Stock
During fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, our Board of Directors declared cash dividends of $1.28, $1.04 and $0.96 per share of our outstanding common stock,
respectively, which we paid during the same period.
In June 2022, our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.32 per share of our outstanding common stock. The dividend is payable on July
26, 2022 to stockholders of record as of the close of business on July 12, 2022. Future declarations of dividends and the establishment of future record and
payment dates are subject to the final determination of our Board of Directors.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss
The following table summarizes, as of each balance sheet date, the components of our AOCL, net of income taxes:
 
May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
 
 
2021
 
Foreign currency translation losses
  $
(1,482)   $
(775)
Unrealized losses on defined benefit plans, net
   
(210)    
(400)
Total accumulated other comprehensive loss
  $
(1,692)   $
(1,175)
93

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
12.
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
Stock-Based Compensation Plans
Stock Plans
In fiscal 2021, we adopted the 2020 Equity Incentive Plan to replace the Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity Incentive Plan (the 2000 Plan) which
provides for the issuance of long-term performance awards, including restricted stock-based awards, non-qualified stock options and incentive stock options,
as well as stock purchase rights and stock appreciation rights, to our eligible employees, officers and directors who are also employees or consultants,
independent consultants and advisers. In fiscal 2022, our stockholders, upon the recommendation of our Board of Directors (the Board), approved the
adoption of the Amended and Restated 2020 Equity Incentive Plan (the 2020 Plan and, together with the 2000 Plan, the Plans), which increased the number
of authorized shares of stock that may be issued under the 2020 Plan by 300 million shares.
The total number of shares authorized under the 2020 Plan is (i) 390 million shares, plus (ii) the number of shares that were unissued and available for grant
under the 2000 Plan as of the date that the 2020 Plan was originally adopted, plus (iii) the number of shares granted and outstanding as of the date that the
2020 Plan was originally adopted which would have been available again for issuance under the terms of the 2000 Plan had the 2020 Plan not been adopted.
Under the 2020 Plan, for each share granted as a full value award in the form of a restricted stock unit (RSU) or a performance-based restricted stock award
(PSU), an equivalent of 2.5 shares is deducted from our pool of shares available for grant.
As of May 31, 2022, 125 million unvested RSUs, 36 million performance-based stock options (PSOs), of which 6 million shares were vested, and service-based
stock options (SOs) to purchase 60 million shares of common stock, of which 59 million shares were vested, were outstanding under the Plans. Approximately
371 million shares of common stock were available for future awards under the 2020 Plan as of May 31, 2022. To date, we have not issued any stock options
under the 2020 Plan or any stock purchase rights or stock appreciation rights under either of the Plans.
The vesting schedule for all awards granted under the Plans is established by the Compensation Committee of the Board. RSUs generally require service-based
vesting of 25% annually over four years. SOs were previously granted under the 2000 Plan at not less than fair market value, become exercisable generally
25% annually over four years of service, and generally expire 10 years from the date of grant.
PSOs granted under the 2000 Plan to our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Technology Officer in fiscal 2018 consisted of seven numerically equivalent vesting
tranches that potentially could vest. One tranche, which was based solely on the attainment of a market-based metric, was achieved and vested in fiscal 2022.
Each of the remaining six tranches requires the attainment of both a performance metric and a market capitalization metric by May 31, 2022, which was
subsequently extended by three additional fiscal years to May 31, 2025 via an amendment approved by the Compensation Committee of the Board during
fiscal 2022. If any of the remaining operational and market capitalization performance goals are achieved before May 31, 2025 additional tranches may vest,
assuming continued employment and service through the date the Compensation Committee of the Board certifies that performance has been achieved.
Upon amendment of the PSOs in fiscal 2022, we estimated the revised fair values of the six unvested tranches of the PSOs using a Monte Carlo simulation
approach. We are recognizing incremental stock-based compensation expense related to these amended awards for any of the remaining unvested tranches
that are probable of achievement over the longer of the (a) estimated implicit service period for performance-metric achievement, or (b) derived service
period for market-based metric achievement. Stock-based compensation associated with a vesting tranche where vesting is no longer determined to be
probable is reversed on a cumulative basis and is no longer prospectively recognized in the period when such a determination is made. We have preliminarily
estimated service periods for those tranches that have been deemed probable of achievement as of the amendment date to be approximately three to four
years.
94

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
In connection with certain of our acquisitions, we assumed certain outstanding restricted stock-based awards and stock options under each acquired
company’s respective stock plans, or we substituted substantially similar awards under the Plans. These restricted stock-based awards and stock options
assumed or substituted generally retained all of the rights, terms and conditions of the respective plans under which they were originally granted. As of May
31, 2022, stock options to purchase approximately 485,000 shares of common stock were outstanding under acquired company stock plans that Oracle
assumed.
In fiscal 1993, the Board adopted the 1993 Directors’ Stock Plan (the Directors’ Plan), which provides for the issuance of RSUs and other stock-based awards,
including non-qualified stock options, to non-employee directors. The Directors’ Plan has from time to time been amended and restated. Under the terms of
the Directors’ Plan, 10 million shares of common stock are reserved for issuance (including a fiscal 2013 amendment to increase the number of shares of our
common stock reserved for issuance by 2 million shares). In prior years, we granted stock options at not less than fair market value, that vest over four years,
and expire no more than 10 years from the date of grant. Currently, we only grant RSUs that vest fully on the one-year anniversary of the date of grant. The
Directors’ Plan was most recently amended on April 29, 2016 and permits the Compensation Committee of the Board to determine the amount and form of
automatic grants of stock awards, if any, to each non-employee director upon first becoming a director and thereafter on an annual basis, as well as automatic
grants for chairing certain Board committees, subject to certain stockholder approved limitations set forth in the Directors’ Plan. In April 2020, the
Compensation Committee reduced the maximum value of the annual automatic RSU grants to each non-employee director from $400,000 to $350,000 and
eliminated all equity grants for chairing board committees. As of May 31, 2022, approximately 59,000 unvested RSUs and stock options to purchase
approximately 474,000 shares of common stock (all of which were vested) were outstanding under the Directors’ Plan. As of May 31, 2022, approximately 1
million shares were available for future stock awards under this plan.
The following table summarizes restricted stock-based award activity granted pursuant to Oracle-based stock plans for our last three fiscal years ended May
31, 2022:
 
Restricted Stock-Based Awards Outstanding
 
(in millions, except fair value)
 
Number of
Shares
   
Weighted-Average
Grant Date Fair Value
 
Balance, May 31, 2019
 
 
99   
$
43.01 
Granted
 
 
50   
$
53.38 
Vested and issued
 
 
(34)  
$
42.67 
Canceled
 
 
(14)  
$
46.81 
Balance, May 31, 2020
 
 
101   
$
48.36 
Granted
 
 
54   
$
54.95 
Vested and issued
 
 
(34)  
$
46.88 
Canceled
 
 
(11)  
$
50.40 
Balance, May 31, 2021
 
 
110   
$
51.87 
Granted
 
 
65   
$
85.07 
Vested and issued
 
 
(38)  
$
50.52 
Canceled
 
 
(9)  
$
63.25 
Balance, May 31, 2022
 
 
128   
$
68.34
 
The total grant date fair values of restricted stock-based awards that were vested and issued in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020 were $1.9 billion, $1.6 billion and
$1.5 billion, respectively. As of May 31, 2022, total unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to non-vested restricted stock-based awards was
$5.9 billion and is expected to be recognized over the remaining weighted-average vesting period of 2.93 years.
95

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
The following table summarizes stock option activity, including SOs and PSOs, and includes awards granted pursuant to the Plans and stock plans assumed
from our acquisitions for our last three fiscal years ended May 31, 2022:
 
 
Options Outstanding
 
(in millions, except exercise price)
 
Shares Under
Stock Option
   
Weighted-Average
Exercise Price
 
Balance, May 31, 2019
 
 
222   
$
37.78 
Granted and assumed
 
 
—   
$
— 
Exercised
 
 
(44)  
$
33.18 
Canceled
 
 
(2)  
$
44.76 
Balance, May 31, 2020
 
 
176   
$
38.86 
Granted and assumed
 
 
—   
$
— 
Exercised
 
 
(52)  
$
32.05 
Canceled
 
 
(17)  
$
51.02 
Balance, May 31, 2021
 
 
107   
$
40.14 
Granted
 
 
—   
$
— 
Exercised
 
 
(10)  
$
34.34 
Canceled
 
 
—   
$
— 
Balance, May 31, 2022
 
 
97   
$
40.70
 
 
Stock options outstanding that have vested and that are expected to vest as of May 31, 2022 were as follows:
 
Outstanding
Stock Options
(in millions)
   
Weighted-Average
Exercise Price
   
Weighted-Average
Remaining Contract Term
(in years)
   
Aggregate
Intrinsic Value(1)
(in millions)
 
Vested
   
65    $
35.81     
1.83    $
2,360 
Expected to vest(2)
   
12    $
50.38     
3.67     
245 
Total
   
77    $
37.97     
2.10    $
2,605
 
(1)
The aggregate intrinsic value was calculated based on the gross difference between our closing stock price on the last trading day of fiscal 2022 of $71.92 and the exercise prices for all “in-the-money”
options outstanding, excluding tax effects.
(2)
The unrecognized compensation expense calculated under the fair value method for shares expected to vest (unvested shares net of expected forfeitures) as of May 31, 2022 was approximately $190
million and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.98 years. Approximately 20 million shares outstanding as of May 31, 2022 were not expected to vest.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense and Valuations of Restricted Stock-Based Awards
We estimated the fair values of our restricted stock-based awards that are solely subject to service-based vesting requirements based upon their market
values as of the grant dates, discounted for the present values of expected dividends.
96

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
Stock-based compensation expense was included in the following operating expense line items in our consolidated statements of operations:
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Cloud services and license support
  $
205    $
134    $
110 
Hardware
   
15     
11     
11 
Services
   
67     
55     
54 
Sales and marketing
   
448     
313     
261 
Research and development
   
1,633     
1,188     
1,035 
General and administrative
   
245     
136     
119 
Total stock-based compensation
   
2,613     
1,837     
1,590 
Estimated income tax benefit included in provision for income taxes
   
(593)    
(413)    
(343)
Total stock-based compensation, net of estimated income tax benefit
  $
2,020    $
1,424    $
1,247
 
Tax Benefits from Exercises of Stock Options and Vesting of Restricted Stock-Based Awards
Total cash received as a result of stock option exercises was approximately $319 million, $1.7 billion and $1.5 billion for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020,
respectively. The total aggregate intrinsic value of restricted stock-based awards that vested and were issued and stock options that were exercised was $3.7
billion for each of fiscal 2022 and 2021 and $2.9 billion for fiscal 2020. In connection with the vesting and issuance of restricted stock-based awards and stock
options that were exercised, the tax benefits realized by us were $843 million, $842 million and $638 million for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
We have an Employee Stock Purchase Plan (Purchase Plan) that allows employees to purchase shares of common stock at a price per share that is 95% of the
fair market value of Oracle stock as of the end of the semi-annual option period. As of May 31, 2022, 39 million shares were reserved for future issuances
under the Purchase Plan. We issued approximately 2 million shares in each of fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively, under the Purchase Plan. The
Compensation Committee last amended the Purchase Plan on May 3, 2022.
Defined Contribution and Other Postretirement Plans
We offer various defined contribution plans for our U.S. and non-U.S. employees. Total defined contribution plan expense was $412 million, $380 million and
$376 million for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In the U.S., regular employees can participate in the Oracle Corporation 401(k) Savings and Investment Plan (Oracle 401(k) Plan). Participants can generally
contribute up to 40% of their eligible compensation on a per-pay-period basis as defined by the Oracle 401(k) Plan document or by the section 402(g) limit as
defined by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). We match a portion of employee contributions, currently 50% up to 6% of compensation each pay period,
subject to maximum aggregate matching amounts. Our contributions to the Oracle 401(k) Plan, net of forfeitures, were $164 million, $150 million and $152
million in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We also offer non-qualified deferred compensation plans to certain employees whereby they may defer a portion of their annual base and/or variable
compensation until retirement or a date specified by the employee in accordance with the plans. Deferred compensation plan assets and liabilities were each
approximately $756 million and approximately $813 million as of May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, and were presented in other non-current assets and
other non-current liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
97

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
We sponsor certain defined benefit pension plans that are offered primarily by certain of our foreign subsidiaries. Many of these plans were assumed through
our acquisitions or are required by local regulatory requirements. We may deposit funds for these plans with insurance companies, third-party trustees, or
into government-managed accounts consistent with local regulatory requirements, as applicable. Our total defined benefit plan pension expenses were $67
million, $105 million and $97 million for fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The aggregate projected benefit obligation and aggregate net liability
(funded status, which is substantially included in other non-current liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets) of our defined benefit plans as of May 31,
2022 were $1.1 billion and $580 million, respectively, and as of May 31, 2021 were $1.4 billion and $889 million, respectively.
13.
INCOME TAXES
Our effective tax rates for each of the periods presented are the result of the mix of income and losses earned in various tax jurisdictions that apply a broad
range of income tax rates. Our (provision for) benefit from income taxes varied from that computed at the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate for fiscal
2022, 2021 and 2020 primarily due to earnings in foreign operations, state taxes, the U.S. research and development tax credit, settlements with tax
authorities, the tax effects of stock-based compensation, the Foreign Derived Intangible Income deduction and the tax effect of Global Intangible Low-Taxed
Income. In addition, for fiscal 2021, our benefit from income taxes varied from the tax computed at the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate primarily due to
a total net deferred tax benefit of $2.3 billion as a result of a partial realignment of our legal entity structure that resulted in the intra-group transfer of certain
intellectual property rights.
In November 2021, the U.S. House of Representatives passed the “Build Back Better Act” budget reconciliation bill (the Bill). To date, the Bill has failed to
advance in the Senate. If the Bill as currently drafted (or a modified version containing similar revenue provisions) were enacted, it would substantially
increase U.S. taxes on corporations, including, among other changes, raising the level of U.S. tax on profits earned outside the U.S. and further restricting the
deductibility of interest expense. Such changes, if enacted, likely would have a material adverse impact on our future tax liabilities and consolidated financial
results.
The following is a geographical breakdown of income before income taxes:
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Domestic
  $
(629)   $
4,375    $
3,890 
Foreign
   
8,278     
8,624     
8,173 
Income before income taxes
  $
7,649    $
12,999    $
12,063
 
98

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
The (provision for) benefit from income taxes consisted of the following:
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Current provision:
   
      
      
  
Federal
  $
(709)   $
(516)   $
(1,616)
State
   
(186)    
(233)    
(19)
Foreign
   
(1,183)    
(929)    
(1,144)
Total current provision
  $
(2,078)   $
(1,678)   $
(2,779)
Deferred benefit:
   
      
      
  
Federal
  $
1,661    $
(8,631)   $
983 
State
   
139     
77     
(50)
Foreign
   
(654)    
10,979     
(82)
Total deferred benefit
  $
1,146    $
2,425    $
851 
Total (provision for) benefit from income taxes
  $
(932)   $
747    $
(1,928)
Effective income tax expense (benefit) rate
 
12.2%   
(5.7%)   
16.0%
 
The (provision for) benefit from income taxes differed from the amount computed by applying the federal statutory rate to our income before income taxes as
follows:
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(Dollars in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
U.S. federal statutory tax rate
 
21.0%   
21.0%   
21.0% 
Tax provision at statutory rate
  $
(1,606)  
$
(2,730)  
$
(2,533)
Foreign earnings at other than United States rates
   
536   
 
580   
 
496 
Net impact of intra-entity IP transfer
   
—   
 
2,266   
 
— 
State tax expense, net of federal benefit
   
(132)  
 
(206)  
 
(172)
Settlements and releases from judicial decisions and statute expirations, net
   
263   
 
582   
 
137 
Tax contingency interest accrual, net
   
(44)  
 
(55)  
 
(163)
Domestic tax contingency, net
   
(441)  
 
(282)  
 
(58)
Federal research and development credit
   
222   
 
169   
 
151 
Stock-based compensation
   
263   
 
300   
 
166 
Other, net
   
7   
 
123   
 
48 
Total (provision for) benefit from income taxes
  $
(932)  
$
747   
$
(1,928)
99

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
The components of our deferred tax assets and liabilities were as follows:
 
 
May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
 
Deferred tax assets:
   
      
  
Accruals and allowances
  $
493    $
452 
Employee compensation and benefits
   
818     
755 
Differences in timing of revenue recognition
   
623     
547 
Lease liabilities
   
688     
524 
Basis of property, plant and equipment and intangible assets
   
11,362     
12,161 
Tax credit and net operating loss carryforwards
   
4,409     
3,934 
Other
   
141     
— 
Total deferred tax assets
   
18,534     
18,373 
Valuation allowance
   
(1,742)    
(1,526)
Total deferred tax assets, net
   
16,792     
16,847 
Deferred tax liabilities:
   
      
  
Unrealized gain on stock
   
(78)    
(78)
Acquired intangible assets
   
(126)    
(266)
GILTI deferred
   
(8,937)    
(9,883)
ROU assets
   
(668)    
(488)
Withholding taxes on foreign earnings
   
(232)    
(195)
Other
   
—     
(165)
Total deferred tax liabilities
   
(10,041)    
(11,075)
Net deferred tax assets
  $
6,751    $
5,772 
Recorded as:
   
      
  
Non-current deferred tax assets
  $
12,782    $
13,636 
Non-current deferred tax liabilities
   
(6,031)    
(7,864)
Net deferred tax assets
  $
6,751    $
5,772
 
We provide for United States income taxes on the undistributed earnings and the other outside basis temporary differences of foreign subsidiaries unless they
are considered indefinitely reinvested outside the United States. At May 31, 2022, the amount of temporary differences related to undistributed earnings and
other outside basis temporary differences of investments in foreign subsidiaries upon which U.S. income taxes have not been provided was approximately
$7.9 billion. If the undistributed earnings and other outside basis differences were recognized in a taxable transaction, they would generate foreign tax credits
that would reduce the federal tax liability associated with the foreign dividend or the otherwise taxable transaction. At May 31, 2022, assuming a full
utilization of the foreign tax credits, the potential net deferred tax liability associated with these other outside basis temporary differences would be
approximately $1.5 billion.
Our net deferred tax assets were $6.8 billion and $5.8 billion as of May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We believe that it is more likely than not that the net
deferred tax assets will be realized in the foreseeable future. Realization of our net deferred tax assets is dependent upon our generation of sufficient taxable
income in future years in appropriate tax jurisdictions to obtain benefit from the reversal of temporary differences, net operating loss carryforwards and tax
credit carryforwards. The amount of net deferred tax assets considered realizable is subject to adjustment in future periods if estimates of future taxable
income change.
The valuation allowance was $1.7 billion and $1.5 billion as of May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. A majority of the valuation allowances as of May 31, 2022
and 2021 related to tax assets established in purchase accounting and other tax credits. Any subsequent reduction of that portion of the valuation allowance
and the recognition of the associated tax benefits associated with our acquisitions will be recorded to our provision for income taxes
100

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
subsequent to our final determination of the valuation allowance or the conclusion of the measurement period (as defined above), whichever comes first.
At May 31, 2022, we had federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $446 million, which are subject to limitation on their utilization.
Approximately $372 million of these federal net operating losses expire in various years between fiscal 2023 and fiscal 2038. Approximately $74 million of
these federal net operating losses are not currently subject to expiration dates. We had state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $1.8 billion at
May 31, 2022, which expire between fiscal 2023 and fiscal 2042 and are subject to limitations on their utilization. We had total foreign net operating loss
carryforwards of approximately $1.9 billion at May 31, 2022, which are subject to limitations on their utilization. Approximately $1.8 billion of these foreign
net operating losses are not currently subject to expiration dates. The remainder of the foreign net operating losses, approximately $53 million, expire
between fiscal 2023 and fiscal 2041. At May 31, 2022, we had federal capital loss carryforwards of approximately $193 million, which expire in fiscal 2026. We
had state capital loss carryforwards of approximately $366 million, which expire between fiscal 2026 and fiscal 2036. We had tax credit carryforwards of
approximately $1.3 billion at May 31, 2022, which are subject to limitations on their utilization. Approximately $854 million of these tax credit carryforwards
are not currently subject to expiration dates. The remainder of the tax credit carryforwards, approximately $407 million, expire in various years between fiscal
2023 and fiscal 2042.
We classify our unrecognized tax benefits as either current or non-current income taxes payable in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. The
aggregate changes in the balance of our gross unrecognized tax benefits, including acquisitions, were as follows:
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Gross unrecognized tax benefits as of June 1
  $
6,912    $
6,972    $
6,348 
Increases related to tax positions from prior fiscal years
   
66     
225     
624 
Decreases related to tax positions from prior fiscal years
   
(24)    
(836)    
(298)
Increases related to tax positions taken during current fiscal year
   
919     
531     
628 
Settlements with tax authorities
   
(117)    
(51)    
(177)
Lapses of statutes of limitation
   
(333)    
(66)    
(116)
Cumulative translation adjustments and other, net
   
(139)    
137     
(37)
Total gross unrecognized tax benefits as of May 31
  $
7,284    $
6,912    $
6,972
 
As of May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, $4.3 billion, $4.4 billion and $4.3 billion, respectively, of unrecognized tax benefits would affect our effective tax rate if
recognized. We recognized interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in our (provision for) benefit from income taxes line of our consolidated
statements of operations of $93 million, $166 million and $202 million during fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Interest and penalties accrued were
$1.6 billion as of May 31, 2022 and 2021.
Domestically, U.S. federal and state taxing authorities are currently examining income tax returns of Oracle and various acquired entities for years through
fiscal 2020. Many issues are at an advanced stage in the examination process, the most significant of which include issues related to transfer pricing, domestic
production activity, foreign tax credits, research and development credits, state economic nexus, and qualification as a state manufacturer. With respect to all
of these domestic audit issues considered in the aggregate, we believe that it was reasonably possible that, as of May 31, 2022, our gross unrecognized tax
benefits could decrease (whether by payment, release, or a combination of both) in the next 12 months by as much as $994 million ($825 million net of
offsetting tax benefits). Our U.S. federal income tax returns have been examined for all years prior to fiscal 2011 and, with some exceptions, we are no longer
subject to audit for those periods. Our U.S. state income tax returns, with some exceptions, have been examined for all years prior to fiscal 2007, and we are
no longer subject to audit for those periods.
101

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
Internationally, tax authorities for numerous non-U.S. jurisdictions are also examining or have examined returns of Oracle and various acquired entities for
years through fiscal 2021. Many of the relevant tax years are at an advanced stage in examination or subsequent controversy resolution processes, the most
significant of which include issues related to transfer pricing and withholding tax. The manner in which those issues are resolved and the timing thereof could
potentially result in a range of decreases or increases in our unrecognized tax benefits over the next 12 months. We believe it was reasonably possible that, as
of May 31, 2022, the gross unrecognized tax benefits could decrease (whether by payment, release, or a combination of both) in the next 12 months by as
much as $287 million ($109 million net of offsetting tax benefits). We also believe it was reasonably possible that, as of May 31, 2022, the gross unrecognized
tax benefits could increase in the next 12 months by as much as $869 million ($227 million net of offsetting US tax benefits). With some exceptions, we are
generally no longer subject to tax examinations in non-U.S. jurisdictions for years prior to fiscal 2001.
We are under audit by the IRS and various other domestic and foreign tax authorities with regards to income tax and indirect tax matters and are involved in
various challenges and litigation in a number of countries, including, in particular, Australia, Brazil, Canada, India, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Mexico, New Zealand,
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, South Korea and Spain, where the amounts under controversy are significant. In some, although not all, cases, we have reserved for
potential adjustments to our provision for income taxes and accrual of indirect taxes that may result from examinations by, or any negotiated agreements
with, these tax authorities or final outcomes in judicial proceedings, and we believe that the final outcome of these examinations, agreements or judicial
proceedings will not have a material effect on our results of operations. If events occur which indicate payment of these amounts is unnecessary, the reversal
of the liabilities would result in the recognition of benefits in the period we determine the liabilities are no longer necessary. If our estimates of the federal,
state, and foreign income tax liabilities and indirect tax liabilities are less than the ultimate assessment, it could result in a further charge to expense.
We believe that we have adequately provided under GAAP for outcomes related to our tax audits. However, there can be no assurances as to the possible
outcomes or any related financial statement effect thereof.
14.
SEGMENT INFORMATION
ASC 280, Segment Reporting, establishes standards for reporting information about operating segments. Operating segments are defined as components of an
enterprise about which separate financial information is available that is evaluated regularly by the chief operating decision maker, or decision-making group,
in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. Our chief operating decision makers (CODMs) are our Chief Executive Officer and Chief
Technology Officer. We are organized by line of business and geographically. While our CODMs evaluate results in a number of different ways, the line of
business management structure is the primary basis for which the allocation of resources and financial results are assessed. The tabular information below
presents financial information that is provided to our CODMs for their review and assists our CODMs with evaluating the company’s performance and
allocating company resources.
We have three businesses—cloud and license, hardware and services—each of which is comprised of a single operating segment. All three of our businesses
market and sell our offerings globally to businesses of many sizes, government agencies, educational institutions and resellers with a worldwide sales force
positioned to offer the combinations that best meet customer needs.
Our cloud and license business engages in the sale, marketing and delivery of our enterprise applications and infrastructure technologies through cloud and
on-premise deployment models including our cloud services and license support offerings; and our cloud license and on-premise license offerings. Cloud
services and license support revenues are generated from offerings that are typically contracted with customers directly, billed to customers in advance,
delivered to customers over time with our revenue recognition occurring over the contractual terms, and renewed by customers upon completion of the
contractual terms. Cloud services and license support contracts provide customers with access to the latest updates to the applications and infrastructure
technologies as they become available and for which the customer contracted and also include
102

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
related technical support services over the contractual term. Cloud license and on-premise license revenues represent fees earned from granting customers
licenses, generally on a perpetual basis, to use our database and middleware and our applications software products within cloud and on-premise IT
environments. We generally recognize revenues at the point in time the software is made available to the customer to download and use, which typically is
immediate upon signature of the license contract. In each fiscal year, our cloud and license business’ contractual activities are typically highest in our fourth
fiscal quarter and the related cash flows are typically highest in the following quarter (i.e., in the first fiscal quarter of the next fiscal year) as we receive
payments from these contracts.
Our hardware business provides infrastructure technologies including Oracle Engineered Systems, servers, storage, industry-specific hardware, operating
systems, virtualization, management and other hardware-related software to support diverse IT environments. Our hardware business also offers hardware
support, which provides customers with software updates for the software components that are essential to the functionality of their hardware products and
can also include product repairs, maintenance services and technical support services that are typically delivered and recognized ratably over the contractual
term.
Our services business provides services to customers and partners to help maximize the performance of their investments in Oracle applications and
infrastructure technologies.
We do not track our assets for each business. Consequently, it is not practical to show assets by operating segment.
The following table presents summary results for each of our three businesses for each of fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020:
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Cloud and license:
   
      
      
  
Revenues(1)
  $
36,052    $
34,101    $
32,523 
Cloud services and license support expenses
   
4,915     
4,133     
3,803 
Sales and marketing expenses
   
7,054     
6,799     
7,159 
Margin(2)
  $
24,083    $
23,169    $
21,561 
Hardware:
   
      
      
  
Revenues
  $
3,183    $
3,359    $
3,443 
Hardware products and support expenses
   
944     
945     
1,084 
Sales and marketing expenses
   
361     
388     
456 
Margin(2)
  $
1,878    $
2,026    $
1,903 
Services:
   
      
      
  
Revenues
  $
3,205    $
3,021    $
3,106 
Services expenses
   
2,539     
2,393     
2,656 
Margin(2)
  $
666    $
628    $
450 
Totals:
   
      
      
  
Revenues(1)
  $
42,440    $
40,481    $
39,072 
Expenses
   
15,813     
14,658     
15,158 
Margin(2)
  $
26,627    $
25,823    $
23,914
 
(1)
Cloud and license revenues and total revenues presented for management reporting for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 included revenues related to cloud and license obligations that would have otherwise
been recorded by the acquired businesses as independent entities but were not recognized in our consolidated statements of operations due to business combination accounting rules that were
applicable to acquisitions closed prior to fiscal 2022. The table below provides a reconciliation of our total operating segment revenues to our total revenues as reported in our consolidated statements of
operations for all periods presented.
103

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
(2)
The margins reported reflect only the direct controllable costs of each line of business and do not include allocations of research and development, general and administrative and certain other allocable
expenses, net. Additionally, the margins reported above do not reflect amortization of intangible assets, acquisition related and other expenses, restructuring expenses, stock-based compensation,
interest expense or certain other non-operating expenses or income, net. Refer to the table below for a reconciliation of our total margin for operating segments to our income before income taxes as
reported per our consolidated statements of operations.
 
The following table reconciles total operating segment revenues to total revenues as well as total operating segment margin to income before income taxes:
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Total revenues for operating segments
  $
42,440    $
40,481    $
39,072 
Cloud and license revenues(1)
   
—     
(2)    
(4)
Total revenues
  $
42,440    $
40,479    $
39,068
 
Total margin for operating segments
  $
26,627    $
25,823    $
23,914 
Cloud and license revenues(1)
   
—     
(2)    
(4)
Research and development
   
(7,219)    
(6,527)    
(6,067)
General and administrative
   
(1,317)    
(1,254)    
(1,181)
Amortization of intangible assets
   
(1,150)    
(1,379)    
(1,586)
Acquisition related and other
   
(4,713)    
(138)    
(56)
Restructuring
   
(191)    
(431)    
(250)
Stock-based compensation for operating segments
   
(735)    
(513)    
(436)
Expense allocations and other, net
   
(376)    
(366)    
(438)
Interest expense
   
(2,755)    
(2,496)    
(1,995)
Non-operating (expenses) income, net
   
(522)    
282     
162 
Income before income taxes
  $
7,649    $
12,999    $
12,063
 
(1)
Cloud and license revenues presented for management reporting for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 included revenues related to cloud and license obligations that would have otherwise been recorded by
the acquired businesses as independent entities but were not recognized in our consolidated statements of operations due to business combination accounting rules that were applicable to acquisitions
closed prior to fiscal 2022. This table includes a reconciliation of our total operating segment revenues to our total revenues as reported in our consolidated statements of operations for all periods
presented.
Disaggregation of Revenues
We have considered information that is regularly reviewed by our CODMs in evaluating financial performance, and disclosures presented outside of our
financial statements in our earnings releases and used in investor presentations to disaggregate revenues to depict how the nature, amount, timing and
uncertainty of revenues and cash flows are affected by economic factors. The principal category we use to disaggregate revenues is the nature of our products
and services as presented in our consolidated statements of operations, the total of which is reconciled to revenues from our reportable segments as per the
preceding tables of this footnote.
The following table is a summary of our total revenues by geographic region:
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Americas
  $
23,679    $
21,828    $
21,563 
EMEA(1)
   
12,011     
11,894     
11,035 
Asia Pacific
   
6,750     
6,757     
6,470 
Total revenues
  $
42,440    $
40,479    $
39,068
 
(1)
Comprised of Europe, the Middle East and Africa  
104

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
The following table presents our cloud services and license support revenues by applications and infrastructure ecosystems:
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Applications cloud services and license support
  $
12,612    $
11,712    $
11,015 
Infrastructure cloud services and license support
   
17,562     
16,988     
16,377 
Total cloud services and license support revenues
  $
30,174    $
28,700    $
27,392
 
Geographic Information
Disclosed in the table below is geographic information for each country that comprised greater than three percent of our total revenues for any of fiscal 2022,
2021 or 2020:
 
 
 
As of and for the Year Ended May 31,
 
 
 
2022
 
 
2021
 
 
2020
 
(in millions)
 
Revenues
   
Long-Lived
Assets(1)
   
Revenues
   
Long-Lived
Assets(1)
   
Revenues
   
Long-Lived
Assets(1)
 
United States
  $
20,246    $
10,300    $
18,734    $
6,826    $
18,428    $
6,012 
United Kingdom
   
2,335     
805     
2,110     
685     
1,904     
472 
Japan
   
1,847     
788     
1,988     
650     
1,977     
655 
Germany
   
1,799     
813     
1,744     
561     
1,510     
418 
Canada
   
1,347     
298     
1,281     
199     
1,162     
169 
Other countries
   
14,866     
3,140     
14,622     
2,464     
14,087     
1,977 
Total
  $
42,440    $
16,144    $
40,479    $
11,385    $
39,068    $
9,703
 
(1)
Long-lived assets exclude goodwill, intangible assets, equity investments and deferred taxes, which are not allocated to specific geographic locations as it is impracticable to do so.
15.
EARNINGS PER SHARE
Basic earnings per share is computed by dividing net income for the period by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the
period. Diluted earnings per share is computed by dividing net income for the period by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during
the period, plus the dilutive effect of outstanding restricted stock-based awards, stock options, and shares issuable under the employee stock purchase plan
as applicable pursuant to the treasury stock method. The following table sets forth the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share:
 
 
Year Ended May 31,
 
(in millions, except per share data)
 
2022
   
2021
   
2020
 
Net income
  $
6,717    $
13,746    $
10,135 
Weighted average common shares outstanding
   
2,700     
2,945     
3,211 
Dilutive effect of employee stock plans
   
86     
77     
83 
Dilutive weighted average common shares outstanding
   
2,786     
3,022     
3,294 
Basic earnings per share
  $
2.49    $
4.67    $
3.16 
Diluted earnings per share
  $
2.41    $
4.55    $
3.08 
Shares subject to anti-dilutive restricted stock-based awards and stock options excluded from calculation(1)
   
34     
36     
56
 
(1)
Substantially all of these weighted shares related to contingently issuable shares pursuant to PSO arrangements that could be dilutive in the future. See Note 12 for information regarding the exercise
prices of our outstanding, unexercised stock options.
 
105

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
16.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Hewlett-Packard Company Litigation
On June 15, 2011, Hewlett-Packard Company, now Hewlett Packard Enterprise Company (HP), filed a complaint in the California Superior Court, County of
Santa Clara against Oracle Corporation alleging numerous causes of action including breach of contract, breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing,
defamation, intentional interference with prospective economic advantage and violation of the California Unfair Business Practices Act. The complaint alleged
that when Oracle announced on March 22 and 23, 2011 that it would no longer develop future versions of its software to run on HP’s Itanium-based servers,
it breached a settlement agreement signed on September 20, 2010 (the HP Settlement Agreement), resolving litigation between HP and one of Oracle’s
former CEOs who had previously acted as HP’s chief executive officer and chairman of HP’s board of directors. HP sought a judicial declaration of the parties’
rights and obligations under the HP Settlement Agreement and other equitable and monetary relief. Oracle answered the complaint and filed cross-claims.
After a bench trial on the meaning of the HP Settlement Agreement, the court found that the HP Settlement Agreement required Oracle to continue to
develop certain of its software products for use on HP’s Itanium-based servers at no cost to HP. The case proceeded to a jury trial in May 2016. On June 30,
2016, the jury returned a verdict in favor of HP on its claims for breach of contract and breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing and
against Oracle on its cross-claims. The jury awarded HP $3.0 billion in damages. Under the court’s rulings, HP is entitled to post-judgment interest, but not
pre-judgment interest, on this award.
After the trial court denied Oracle’s motion for a new trial, Oracle filed a notice of appeal on January 17, 2017. On February 2, 2017, HP filed a notice of
appeal of the trial court’s denial of pre-judgment interest. Oral argument was held on May 27, 2021. On June 14, 2021, the Court of Appeal affirmed both the
judgment against Oracle noted above, and the denial of pre-judgment interest. On June 29, 2021, Oracle filed a Petition for Rehearing with the Court of
Appeal, which was denied on July 8, 2021. On July 26, 2021, Oracle filed a Petition for Review with the California Supreme Court, which was denied on
September 29, 2021.
During fiscal 2022, Oracle remitted the entirety of the $3.0 billion judgment and related $1.7 billion of accrued post-judgment interest and awarded costs and
recorded such amounts as acquisition related and other expenses as presented per our consolidated statements of operations.
On January 27, 2022, Oracle filed a Petition for a Writ of Certiorari with the U.S. Supreme Court, which was denied on May 16, 2022. This matter is now
concluded.
Derivative Litigation Concerning Oracle’s NetSuite Acquisition
On May 3 and July 18, 2017, two alleged stockholders filed separate derivative lawsuits in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware, purportedly on
Oracle’s behalf. Thereafter, the court consolidated the two derivative cases and designated the July 18, 2017 complaint as the operative complaint. The
consolidated lawsuit was brought against all the then-current members and one former member of our Board of Directors, and Oracle as a nominal
defendant. Plaintiff alleged that the defendants breached their fiduciary duties by causing Oracle to agree to purchase NetSuite Inc. (NetSuite) at an excessive
price. The complaint sought (and the operative complaint continues to seek) declaratory relief, unspecified monetary damages (including interest), and
attorneys’ fees and costs. The defendants filed a motion to dismiss, which the court denied on March 19, 2018.
On May 4, 2018, our Board of Directors established a Special Litigation Committee (the SLC) to investigate the allegations in this derivative action. Three non-
employee directors served on the SLC. On August 15, 2019, the SLC filed a letter with the court, stating that the SLC believed that plaintiff should be allowed
to proceed with the derivative litigation on behalf of Oracle. After the SLC advised the Board that it had fulfilled its duties and obligations, the Board withdrew
the SLC’s authority, except that the SLC maintained certain authority to respond to discovery requests in the litigation.
106

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
After plaintiff filed the July 18, 2017 complaint, an additional plaintiff joined the case. Plaintiffs filed several amended complaints, and filed their most recent
amended complaint on December 11, 2020. The operative complaint asserts claims for breach of fiduciary duty against our Chief Executive Officer, our Chief
Technology Officer, the estate of Mark Hurd (our former Chief Executive Officer who passed away on October 18, 2019), and two other members of our Board
of Directors. Oracle is named as a nominal defendant. On December 11, 2020, the estate of Mark Hurd and the two other members of our Board of Directors
moved to dismiss this complaint, and a hearing on this motion was held on February 16, 2021. On June 21, 2021, the court granted this motion as to the
estate of Mark Hurd and one Board member and denied the motion as to the other Board member, who filed an answer to the complaint on August 9, 2021.
On December 28, 2020, our Chief Executive Officer, our Chief Technology Officer, and Oracle as a nominal defendant filed answers to the operative complaint.
Expert discovery has concluded. On December 23, 2021, the Board member defendant brought a motion for summary judgment, and on May 20, 2022, the
court granted this motion in part and denied this motion in part.  This Board member remains a defendant in this case. Trial is scheduled to commence on July
18, 2022.
While Oracle continues to evaluate these claims, we do not believe this litigation will have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
Securities Class Action and Derivative Litigation Concerning Oracle’s Cloud Business
On August 10, 2018, a putative class action, brought by an alleged stockholder of Oracle, was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
California against us, our Chief Technology Officer, our then-two Chief Executive Officers, two other Oracle executives, and one former Oracle executive. As
noted above, Mr. Hurd, one of our then-two Chief Executive Officers, passed away on October 18, 2019. On March 8, 2019, plaintiff filed an amended
complaint. Plaintiff alleges that the defendants made or are responsible for false and misleading statements regarding Oracle’s cloud business. Plaintiff further
alleges that the former Oracle executive engaged in insider trading. Plaintiff seeks a ruling that this case may proceed as a class action, and seeks damages,
attorneys’ fees and costs, and unspecified declaratory/injunctive relief. On April 19, 2019, defendants moved to dismiss plaintiff’s amended complaint. On
December 17, 2019, the court granted this motion, giving plaintiffs an opportunity to file an amended complaint, which plaintiff filed on February 17, 2020.
On April 23, 2020, defendants filed a motion to dismiss, and the court held a hearing on this motion on September 24, 2020. On March 22, 2021, the court
granted in part and denied in part this motion. The court dismissed the action as to one Oracle executive and the former Oracle executive. The court
permitted plaintiff to proceed with only a narrow omissions theory against the remaining defendants. On April 21, 2021, defendants filed an answer to the
complaint. On October 8, 2021, plaintiffs filed a motion for class certification, which the court granted on May 9, 2022. On May 23, 2022, defendants filed a
petition in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals for permission to appeal the court’s order granting class certification, and plaintiffs filed an opposition on June 2,
2022. On June 3, 2022, the court “So Ordered” a stipulation by the parties, which vacated all dates in this case because the parties had reached an agreement
to settle this action, subject to the court’s approval. On June 8, 2022, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals granted defendants’ unopposed motion to stay the
petition for permission to appeal in light of the proposed settlement.
On February 12 and May 8, 2019, two stockholder derivative lawsuits were filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. The
cases were consolidated, and on July 8, 2019, a single plaintiff filed a consolidated complaint. The consolidated complaint brought various claims relating to
the 10b-5 class action described immediately above. The parties agreed to stay the derivative case pending resolution of defendants’ motion to dismiss the
securities case, which the court granted in part and denied in part on March 22, 2021.
Plaintiff filed an amended complaint on June 4, 2021. The derivative suit is brought by an alleged stockholder of Oracle, purportedly on Oracle’s behalf, against
our Chief Technology Officer, our Chief Executive Officer, and the estate of Mark Hurd. Plaintiff claims that the alleged actions described in the class action
discussed above caused harm to Oracle, and that defendants violated their fiduciary duties of candor, good faith, loyalty, and due care by
107

Table of Contents
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS—(Continued)
May 31, 2022
failing to prevent this alleged harm. Plaintiff also brings derivative claims for violations of federal securities laws. Plaintiffs seek a ruling that this case may
proceed as a derivative action, a finding that defendants are liable for breaching their fiduciary duties, damages, an order directing defendants to enact
corporate reforms, attorneys’ fees and costs, and unspecified relief. On June 14, 2021, the court “so ordered” a stipulation from the parties, staying this case
pending resolution of the 10b-5 action.
While Oracle continues to evaluate these claims, we do not believe these matters will have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
Other Litigation
We are party to various other legal proceedings and claims, either asserted or unasserted, which arise in the ordinary course of business, including
proceedings and claims that relate to acquisitions we have completed or to companies we have acquired or are attempting to acquire. While the outcome of
these matters cannot be predicted with certainty, we do not believe that the outcome of any of these matters, individually or in the aggregate, will result in
losses that are materially in excess of amounts already recognized, if any.
17.
SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Acquisition of Cerner Corporation and Related Borrowings
On June 8, 2022, pursuant to the terms of the tender offer and applicable Delaware law, we acquired all of the outstanding shares of Cerner’s common stock
and effectuated the merger of Cerner with and into a wholly-owned subsidiary of Oracle, and Cerner became an indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary of Oracle.
The initial purchase accounting for this transaction has not yet been completed given the short period of time between the acquisition date and issuance of
these consolidated financial statements and the financial results of Cerner will be included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the
acquisition. Refer to Note 2 above for more information about our acquisition of Cerner.
In connection with the acquisition of Cerner:
•
we borrowed $15.7 billion on June 8, 2022 pursuant to the Bridge Credit Agreement. The amount is due and payable in full on March 7, 2023
unless settled earlier pursuant to the terms of the Bridge Credit Agreement. Additional information with respect to the Bridge Credit Agreement
is included in Note 7 above; and
•
we assumed $1.6 billion of senior notes and other borrowings, of which $1.5 billion were paid on June 8, 2022.
108

Table of Contents 
Index to Financial Statements
Item 16.Form 10-K Summary
None.
109

Table of Contents 
Index to Financial Statements
ORACLE CORPORATION
INDEX OF EXHIBITS
The following exhibits are filed or furnished herewith or are incorporated by reference to exhibits previously filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission.
 
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
No.
 
Exhibit Description
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Exhibit   Filing Date  
Filed By
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.01§
 Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated December 20,
2021, among Oracle Corporation, Cerner Corporation,
OC Acquisition LLC and Cedar Acquisition Corporation
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
2.1
 
12/21/21  
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.01
 
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of
Oracle Corporation and Certificate of Amendment of
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of
Oracle Corporation
 
8-K 12G3
 
000-51788
 
3.01
 
2/6/06
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.02
 Amended and Restated Bylaws of Oracle Corporation
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
3.02
 
6/16/16
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.01
 
Specimen Certificate of Oracle Corporation’s Common
Stock
 
S-3 ASR
 
333-166643
 
4.04
 
5/7/10
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.02
 
Indenture dated January 13, 2006, among Ozark
Holding Inc., Oracle Corporation and Citibank, N.A.
 
8-K
 
000-14376
 
10.34
 
1/20/06
 
Oracle Systems
Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.03
 
First Supplemental Indenture dated May 9, 2007 among
Oracle Corporation, Citibank, N.A. and The Bank of New
York Trust Company, N.A.
 
S-3 ASR
 
333-142796
 
4.3
 
5/10/07
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.04
 
Form of 6.50% Note due 2038, together with Officers’
Certificate issued April 9, 2008 setting forth the terms
of the Note
 
8-K
 
000-51788
 
4.09
 
4/8/08
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.05
 
Form of 6.125% Note due 2039,  together with Officers’
Certificate issued July 8, 2009 setting forth the terms of
the Note
 
8-K
 
000-51788
 
4.08
 
7/8/09
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.06
 
Form of 2040 Note, together with Officers’ Certificate
issued July 19, 2010 setting forth the terms of the Note  
10-Q
 
000-51788
 
4.08
 
9/20/10
 
Oracle Corporation
110

Table of Contents 
Index to Financial Statements
 
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
No.
 
Exhibit Description
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Exhibit   Filing Date  
Filed By
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.07
 Form of New 2040 Note
 
S-4
 
333-176405
 
4.5
 
8/19/11
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.08
 
Form of 2.50% Note due 2022, together with Officers’
Certificate issued October 25, 2012 setting forth the
terms of the Note
 
8-K
 
000-51788
 
4.10
 
10/25/12  
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.09
 
Form of 3.125% Note due 2025, together with Officers’
Certificate issued July 10, 2013 setting forth the terms
of the Note
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
4.11
 
7/10/13
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.10
 
Form of 3.625% Note due 2023, together with Officers’
Certificate issued July 16, 2013 setting forth the terms
of the Note
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
4.12
 
7/16/13
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.11
 
Forms of 3.40% Note due 2024, 4.30% Note due 2034
and 4.50% Note due 2044, together with Officers’
Certificate issued July 8, 2014 setting forth the terms of
the Notes
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
4.13
 
7/8/14
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.12
 
Forms of 2.50% Notes due 2022, 2.95% Notes due
2025, 3.25% Notes due 2030, 3.90% Notes due 2035,
4.125% Notes due 2045 and 4.375% Notes due 2055,
together with Officers’ Certificate issued May 5, 2015
setting forth the terms of the Notes
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
4.13
 
5/5/15
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.13
 
Forms of 2.40% Notes due 2023, 2.65% Notes due
2026, 3.85% Notes due 2036 and 4.00% Notes due
2046, together with Officers’ Certificate issued July 7,
2016 setting forth the terms of the Notes
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
4.1
 
7/7/16
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.14
 
Forms of 2.625% Notes due 2023, 2.950% Notes due
2024, 3.250% Notes due 2027, 3.800% Notes due 2037
and 4.000% Notes due 2047, together with Officers’
Certificate issued November 9, 2017 setting forth the
terms of the Notes
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
4.1
 
11/9/17
 
Oracle Corporation
111

Table of Contents 
Index to Financial Statements
 
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
No.
 
Exhibit Description
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Exhibit   Filing Date  
Filed By
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.15
 
Forms of 2.500% Notes due 2025, 2.800% Notes due
2027, 2.950% Notes due 2030, 3.600% Notes due 2040,
3.600% Notes due 2050 and 3.850% Notes due 2060,
together with Officers’ Certificate issued April 1, 2020
setting forth the terms of the Notes
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
4.1
 
4/1/20
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.16
 
Forms of 1.650% Notes due 2026, 2.300% Notes due
2028, 2.875% Notes due 2031, 3.650% Notes due 2041,
3.950% Notes due 2051 and 4.100% Notes due 2061,
together with Officers’ Certificate issued March 24,
2021 setting forth the terms of the Notes
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
4.1
 
3/24/21
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.17
 
Description 
of 
Oracle 
Corporation’s 
Securities
Registered Under Section 12 of the Exchange Act
 
10-K
 
001-35992
 
4.15
 
6/21/19
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.01*
 
Oracle Corporation Deferred Compensation Plan, as
amended and restated as of July 1, 2015
 
10-Q
 
001-35992
 
10.01
 
9/18/15
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.02‡*
 
Oracle Corporation Employee Stock Purchase Plan
(1992), as amended and restated as of May 3, 2022
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.03*
 
Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated 1993
Directors’ Stock Plan, as amended and restated on April
29, 2016
 
10-K
 
001-35992
 
10.03
 
6/22/16
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.04*
 
Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity
Incentive Plan, as approved on November 15, 2017
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
10.04
 
11/17/17  
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.05*
 
Form of Stock Option Agreement under the Amended
and Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity Incentive Plan for
U.S. Executive Vice Presidents and Section 16 Officers
 
10-Q
 
001-35992
 
10.05
 
9/18/17
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.06*
 
Form of Stock Option Agreement under the Oracle
Corporation Amended and Restated 1993 Directors’
Stock Plan
 
10-K
 
001-35992
 
10.06
 
6/25/15
 
Oracle Corporation
112

Table of Contents 
Index to Financial Statements
 
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
No.
 
Exhibit Description
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Exhibit   Filing Date  
Filed By
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.07*
 
Form of Indemnity Agreement for Directors and
Executive Officers
 
10-Q
 
000-51788
 
10.07
 
12/23/11  
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.08*
 
Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated Executive
Bonus Plan, as amended and restated as of February
12, 2019
 
10-Q
 
001-35992
 
10.09
 
3/18/19
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.09*
 
Oracle Corporation Stock Unit Award Deferred
Compensation Plan, as amended and restated as of July
1, 2015
 
10-Q
 
001-35992
 
10.15
 
9/18/15
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.10*
 
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement under
the Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated 1993
Directors’ Stock Plan
 
10-K
 
001-35992
 
10.17
 
6/25/15
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.11*
 
Form of Performance-Based Stock Option Agreement
under the Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term
Equity Incentive Plan for Named Executive Officers
 
10-Q
 
001-35992
 
10.16
 
9/18/17
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.12*
 
First Amendment to Performance-Based Stock Option
Agreement with Lawrence J. Ellison and Safra A. Catz
under the Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term
Equity Incentive Plan
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
10.15
 
7/7/21
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.13*
 
Form of Stock Unit Award Agreement under the
Amended and Restated 2000 Long-Term Equity
Incentive Plan for U.S. Employees (Including Section 16
Officers)
 
10-Q
 
001-35992
 
10.17
 
9/18/17
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.14*  Oracle Corporation Amended and Restated 2020 Equity
Incentive Plan (as approved by the stockholders on
November 10, 2021)
 
8-K
 
001-35992
 
10.16
 
11/12/21  
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.15*
 
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement under the
2020 Equity Incentive Plan for U.S. Employees
 
10-Q
 
001-35992
 
10.16
 
12/11/20  
Oracle Corporation
113

Table of Contents 
Index to Financial Statements
 
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
No.
 
Exhibit Description
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Exhibit   Filing Date  
Filed By
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.16§  $6,000,000,000 5-Year Revolving Credit Agreement
dated as of March 8, 2022 among Oracle Corporation
and the lenders and agents named therein
 
10-Q
 
001-35992
 
10.16
 
3/11/22
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.17§
 
$15,700,000,000 364-Day Delayed Draw Term Loan
Credit Agreement dated as of March 8, 2022 among
Oracle Corporation and the lenders and agents named
therein
 
10-Q
 
001-35992
 
10.17
 
3/11/22
 
Oracle Corporation
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.01‡
 Subsidiaries of the Registrant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.01‡
 
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting
Firm
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31.01‡
 
Rule 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a) Certification of Principal
Executive and Financial Officer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32.01†
 
Section 1350 Certification of Principal Executive and
Financial Officer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101‡
 
Interactive Data Files Pursuant to Rule 405 of
Regulation 
S-T, 
formatted 
in 
Inline 
XBRL: 
(1)
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of May 31, 2022 and
2021, (2) Consolidated Statements of Operations for
the years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, (3)
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for
the years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, (4)
Consolidated Statements of Stockholders’ (Deficit)
Equity for the years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and
2020, (5) Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the
years ended May 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 and (6)
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114

Table of Contents 
Index to Financial Statements
 
 
 
 
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
No.
 
Exhibit Description
 
Form
 
File No.
 
Exhibit   Filing Date  
Filed By
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
104‡
 
The cover page from the Company’s Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended May 31, 2022, formatted
in Inline XBRL and contained in Exhibit 101
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*
Indicates management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
§
Certain schedules and attachments have been omitted pursuant to Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K. The Company agrees to provide, on a supplemental basis, a copy of any omitted
schedules and attachments to the SEC or its staff upon its request.
‡
Filed herewith.
†
Furnished herewith.
115

Table of Contents 
Index to Financial Statements
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
  ORACLE CORPORATION
 
 
 
 
Date: June 21, 2022
  By:   /s/  Safra A. Catz
 
   
  Safra A. Catz
 
   
  Chief Executive Officer and Director
 
   
  (Principal Executive and Financial Officer)
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed by the following persons on behalf of the Registrant and in
the capacities and on the date indicated.
Name
 
Title
 
Date
 
 
 
 
/s/  Safra A. Catz
  Chief Executive Officer and Director
(Principal Executive and Financial Officer)
 
June 21, 2022
Safra A. Catz
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/  William Corey West
  Executive Vice President, Chief Accounting Officer
(Principal Accounting Officer)
 
June 21, 2022
William Corey West
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/  Lawrence J. Ellison
  Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chief Technology Officer
 
June 21, 2022
Lawrence J. Ellison
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/  Jeffrey O. Henley
  Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors
 
June 21, 2022
Jeffrey O. Henley
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/  Awo Ablo
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Awo Ablo
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/  Jeffrey S. Berg
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Jeffrey S. Berg
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/  Michael J. Boskin
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Michael J. Boskin
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/  Bruce R. Chizen
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Bruce R. Chizen
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/  George H. Conrades
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
George H. Conrades
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/  Rona A. Fairhead
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Rona A. Fairhead
   
   
 
 
 
 
/s/  Renée J. James
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Renée J. James
   
   
 
 
 
 
/s/  Charles W. Moorman IV
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Charles W. Moorman IV
   
   
 
 
 
 
/s/  Leon E. Panetta
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Leon E. Panetta
   
   
/s/  William G. Parrett
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
William G. Parrett
   
   
 
 
 
 
/s/  Naomi O. Seligman
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Naomi O. Seligman
   
   
 
 
 
 
/s/   Vishal Sikka
  Director
 
June 21, 2022
Vishal Sikka
   
   
 
   
   
116

Exhibit 10.02
AMENDED AND RESTATED
ORACLE CORPORATION EMPLOYEE STOCK PURCHASE PLAN (1992)
(as amended and restated on May 3, 2022)
 
The following constitute the provisions of the Amended and Restated Oracle Corporation Employee Stock Purchase Plan (1992), which was originally adopted
on August 24, 1992, and was amended and restated on March 22, 2002, February 8, 2005, October 1, 2009 and May 3, 2022.  This version of the Plan is
effective on and after October 1, 2022.  For Offering Periods under the Plan ending on or before September 30, 2022, refer to the version of the Plan as in
effect for the applicable Offering Period.
1. PURPOSE
This Plan is established to provide employees of Oracle and other Group Companies with an opportunity to purchase Common Stock through
accumulated payroll deductions. It is the intention of Oracle that the Plan qualify as an “Employee Stock Purchase Plan” under Section 423 of the Code. The
provisions of the Plan shall, accordingly, be construed so as to extend and limit participation in a manner consistent with the requirements of that section of
the Code.  In addition, the Plan authorizes the grant of options under a non-423 plan which do not qualify under Section 423 of the Code pursuant to rules,
procedures or sub-plans adopted by Oracle designed to achieve desired tax or other objectives in particular locations outside the United States.  The term
“Plan” used herein applies to both the Section 423 plan and the non-423 plan.
Unless otherwise determined by the Board, each offering under the Plan in which Employees of Oracle and one or more Participating Subsidiaries
may participate shall be deemed a separate offering for purposes of Section 423 of the Code, even if the dates of the applicable Offering Periods of each such
offering are identical, and the provisions of the Plan shall separately apply to each offering.  The terms of such separate offerings need not be identical
provided that all Employees granted options in a particular offering shall have the same rights and privileges in accordance with Section 16 below, except as
otherwise may be permitted by Section 423 of the Code.
2. DEFINITIONS
 
(a)
“Affiliate” means (i) any Subsidiary and (ii) any other entity in which Oracle has a controlling equity interest.
 
(b)
“Board” means the Board of Directors of Oracle or committees appointed by such Board in accordance with Section 12 below.
 
(c)
“Code” means the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 
(d)
“Common Stock” means the Common Stock, $0.01 par value, of Oracle.
 
(e)
“Compensation” means all base salary, wages, commissions, overtime, shift premiums and bonuses, plus draws against commissions.
 
(f)
“Employee” means, unless the Board determined otherwise in connection with a particular Offering Period, any person, including an officer, who is
customarily employed for more than twenty (20) hours per week and more than five (5) months in a calendar year by a Group Company, provided,
however, that if applicable law (as determined by the Board) requires that individuals who are customarily employed for less than such number of
hours or months per year be considered Employees for purposes of eligibility for the Plan, then such individuals will also be considered as
Employees for purposes of the Plan.
 
(g)
“Exchange Act” means the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
1

 
 
(h)
“Exercise Date” means the last day of each Offering Period of the Plan.
 
(i)
“Group Company(ies)” means Oracle, any and all Participating Subsidiaries and any and all Participating Affiliates.
 
(j)
“New Exercise Date” has the meaning set forth in Section 18 hereof.
 
(k)
“Offering Date” means the first day of each Offering Period of the Plan.
 
(l)
“Offering Period” has the meaning set forth in Section 4 hereof.
 
(m)
“Oracle” means Oracle Corporation, a Delaware corporation.
 
(n)
“Participating Affiliate” means any Affiliate designated from time to time by the Board whose employees are eligible to participate in the Plan for
purposes of the grant of options that do not qualify under Section 423 of the Code pursuant to rules, procedures or sub-plans adopted by the
Board designed to achieve desired tax or other objectives in particular locations outside the U.S. A list of Participating Affiliates is attached to this
Plan as Appendix 1 and shall be maintained by the Board or its officer designee in accordance with Section 12(c) below.
 
(o)
“Participating Subsidiaries” means any Subsidiary which has not been excluded by the Board in its sole discretion as eligible to participate in the
Plan. A list of Participating Subsidiaries is attached to this Plan as Appendix 1 and shall be maintained by the Board or its officer designee in
accordance with Section 12(c) below.
 
(p)
“Plan” means this Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as amended from time to time.
 
(q)
“Reserves” has the meaning set forth in Section 18 hereof.
 
(r)
“Rule 16b-3” means Rule 16b-3 promulgated under the Exchange Act, or any successor provision.
 
(s)
“Section 16(b)” means Section 16(b) of the Exchange Act, or any successor provision.
 
(t)
“Subsidiary” means any corporation (other than Oracle) in an unbroken chain of corporations beginning with Oracle if, at the time of granting
options under the Plan, each of the corporations (other than the last corporation) in the unbroken chain owns stock possessing 50% or more of the
total combined voting power of all classes of stock in one of the other corporations in such chain.
3. ELIGIBILITY
(a)
Any Employee who shall be employed by Oracle or a Group Company on the date his or her participation in the Plan is effective shall be
eligible to participate in the Plan, subject to limitations imposed by Section 423(b) of the Code, without regard to paragraph (4) of that section.
(b)
Unless expressly excluded from participation in the Plan by the Board, any eligible employee of any Participating Subsidiary is eligible to
participate in the Plan. Any eligible employee of any Participating Affiliate so designated by the Board is also eligible to participate in the Plan.  Any such
exclusions or designations by the Board will comply with Section 16.
(c)
Any provisions of the Plan to the contrary notwithstanding, no Employee shall be granted an option under the Plan (i) if, immediately after
the grant, such Employee (or any other person whose stock would be attributed to such Employee pursuant to Section 424(d) of the Code) would own stock
and/or hold outstanding options to purchase stock possessing five percent (5%) or more of the total combined voting power or value of all classes of stock of
Oracle or of any Subsidiary of Oracle, or (ii) which permits his or her rights to purchase stock under all employee stock purchase plans of Oracle and its
Subsidiaries to accrue at a rate which exceeds U.S. Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars (U.S. $25,000) of fair market value of such stock (determined at the time
such option is granted) for each calendar year in which such option is outstanding at any time.  The determination of the accrual of the right to purchase stock
shall be made in accordance with Section 423(b)(8) of the Code and the regulations thereunder.
2

4. OFFERING PERIODS
The Plan shall be implemented by two offerings during each year of the Plan, commencing on or about October 1 and April 1 of each year, or as
otherwise determined by the Board, and continuing thereafter for a period of six (6) months (each, an “Offering Period”). The first Offering Period under the
Plan shall commence on October 1, 1992. The Board shall have the power to change the duration of Offering Periods (both before and after any such Offering
Period has commenced) with respect to future offerings without stockholder approval. In no event, however, will any such Offering Period be longer than
twenty-seven (27) months.
5. PARTICIPATION
(a)
An eligible Employee may become a participant in the Plan by (i) completing a subscription agreement authorizing payroll deductions (or
other contributions) on the form provided by Oracle (or by following an electronic or other enrollment process as prescribed by Oracle) and filing it no later
than the first day of an applicable Offering Period (or such earlier time as may be set by Oracle for administrative purposes) with Oracle or its designee, and (ii)
agreeing to any other terms and conditions of participation in the Plan provided by Oracle that are applicable to the Offering Period.  Once an Employee
becomes a participant in the Plan, such Employee will automatically participate in successive Offering Periods until such time as such Employee withdraws
from the Plan, and is not required to file any additional subscription amendments for subsequent Offering Periods to continue participation in the Plan,
provided, however, that Oracle may request an Employee to file a subscription amendment for legal or administrative reasons and, provided, further, that
participation in the Plan in any subsequent Offering Period will be governed by the terms and conditions of the Plan and the applicable subscription
agreement and other terms and conditions of participation in effect at such time, subject to a participant's right to withdraw from the Plan in accordance with
the withdrawal procedures and deadlines in effect at such time. However, eligible Employees may submit a new subscription agreement (or follow such
electronic process as prescribed by Oracle) for a subsequent Offering Period in accordance with Oracle’s procedures then in effect if the eligible Employee
desires to change any of the elections contained in the then effective subscription agreement.
(b)
Payroll deductions for a participant shall commence on the first payday following the Offering Date and shall end on the last payday before
the Exercise Date of the Offering Period to which such authorization is applicable, unless sooner terminated by the participant or as a result of a termination
of employment as provided in Section 10 or unless payroll deductions are determined by the Board to not be feasible in countries outside the U.S.
6. PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
(a)
At the time a participant becomes a participant in the Plan by following the procedures referred to in Section 5, he or she shall elect to have
payroll deductions made on each payday during the Offering Period in an amount not less than one percent (1%) and not exceeding any whole number
percentage up to ten percent (10%) (or such greater or smaller percentage, as specified by the Board) of the Compensation which he or she receives on each
payday during the Offering Period.  If the Board determines that payroll deductions are not permitted or feasible in a particular country outside the U.S., the
Board may permit an eligible Employee to participate in the Plan by an alternative means, such as by check; however, the percentage of Compensation
available for contributions must comply with the first sentence of this Section 6(a).
(b)
No interest shall be paid or credited to the participant with respect to such payroll deductions or other contributions except where required
by local law of the jurisdiction where payroll deductions are taken or contributions are made, as determined by the Board.
3

(c)
All payroll deductions made by a participant shall be credited to his or her account under the Plan. A participant may not make any additional
payments into such account, except as authorized by the Board in countries where payroll deductions are determined by the Board to not be permitted or
feasible.
(d)
Unless otherwise specified by the Board, payroll deductions made with respect to Employees paid in currencies other than U.S. dollars shall
be accumulated in local (non-U.S.) currency and converted to U.S. dollars as of the Exercise Date, using such foreign currency conversion rate as determined
by the Board.
(e)
A participant may discontinue his or her participation in the Plan as provided in Section 10, or may increase or decrease the rate of his or her
payroll deductions during the Offering Period by completing and filing with Oracle a new authorization for payroll deduction; provided that the Board may
limit the number of times during any Offering Period that a participant may so increase or decrease such participant’s deductions. Unless otherwise specified
by the Board, the change in rate shall be effective on the later of (i) fifteen (15) days after Oracle’s receipt of the new authorization, or (ii) the first payday after
Oracle’s receipt of the new authorization.
(f)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an Employee’s payroll deductions (and/or direct contributions, if applicable) shall be decreased down to 0%
during any Offering Period to the extent necessary to comply with Section 423(b)(8) of the Code.  Any other provision of the Plan notwithstanding, no
participant shall purchase shares of Common Stock under this Plan and all other employee stock purchase plans of Oracle or any parent or Subsidiary of
Oracle with an aggregate fair market value (measured as of the applicable Offering Date) in excess of U.S. $25,000, as determined in accordance with Section
423(b)(8) of the Code and the regulations thereunder.
(g)
The limitation set forth in Section 6(f) may be adjusted by the Board in its discretion to the extent necessary to comply with Section 423 of
the Code.
(h)
In the event payroll deductions are decreased pursuant to Section 6(f) hereof, payroll deductions shall recommence at the rate provided in
such participant’s subscription agreement at the beginning of the first Offering Period which is scheduled to end in the following calendar year, unless
terminated by the participant as provided in Section 10.
(i)
At any time, the applicable Group Company may withhold from the participant’s Compensation the amount necessary for the Group
Company to meet applicable withholding obligations related to the participant's Compensation or the benefit realized by the participant from participation in
the Plan, including any withholding required to make available to the Group Company any tax deductions or benefit attributable to the sale or early
disposition of Common Stock by the Employee.
7. GRANT OF OPTION
(a)
On the Offering Date of each Offering Period, each eligible Employee participating in the Plan shall be granted an option to purchase (at the
per share option price) up to a number of shares of Common Stock determined by dividing such Employee’s payroll deductions or contributions to be
accumulated during such Offering Period by ninety-five percent (95%) of the fair market value of a share of Common Stock on the Exercise Date, provided that
the number of shares subject to the option will be limited to 200% of the number of shares determined by dividing the amount accumulated in the
employees’ payroll deductions/contribution account by 95% of the fair market value of a share of Common Stock on the Offering Date, subject to the
limitations set forth in Sections 3(b) and 11 hereof. The fair market value of a share of Common Stock shall be determined as provided in Section 7(b) hereof.
(b)
The option price per share of the shares offered in a given Offering Period shall be 95% of the fair market value of a share of the Common
Stock on the Exercise Date. Unless otherwise determined by the Board, the fair market value of Common Stock on a given date shall be the closing price from
the previous business day’s trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
4

8. EXERCISE OF OPTION
Unless a participant withdraws from the Plan or terminates employment as provided in Section 10, his or her option for the purchase of shares will
be exercised automatically on the Exercise Date of the Offering Period and the maximum number of shares subject to option will be purchased for him or her
at the applicable option price with the accumulated payroll deductions or contributions in his or her account.  No fractional shares of Common Stock may be
issued pursuant to an option to purchase shares of Common Stock.  During his or her lifetime, a participant’s option to purchase shares hereunder is
exercisable only by him or her.
9. DELIVERY
(a)
As soon as practicable after the Exercise Date of each Offering Period, Oracle shall arrange for the electronic delivery to each participant, as
appropriate, of the shares purchased upon exercise of his or her option. Any cash remaining to the credit of a participant’s account under the Plan after a
purchase by him or her of shares at the termination of each Offering Period under the Plan which is insufficient to purchase a full share of Common Stock, will
be refunded, without interest (unless required by local law as determined by the Board), to him or her as soon as practicable.  The Board also may return cash
remaining in each participant’s payroll deduction or contribution account, without interest (unless required by local law as determined by the Board), if a
purchase of shares will not occur because the Board determines such purchase is not feasible or that the conditions for the issuance of shares have not been
met.
(b)
In the event that insufficient shares of Common Stock are available under the Plan for delivery to all participants in an Offering Period for
shares of Common Stock representing a full allocation of all payroll deductions or contributions for such Offering Period, the Board, in its discretion, may
authorize the delivery of shares of Common Stock representing a pro rata allocation of the shares remaining available for distribution and the return of cash
remaining in each participant’s payroll deduction account, without interest (unless required by local law as determined by the Board), in accordance with
Section 9(c). If the stockholders of Oracle vote against any such proposed increase, Oracle shall make a pro rata allocation of the shares available for
distribution and return cash remaining in each participant’s payroll deduction or contribution account, without interest (unless required by local law as
determined by the Board).
(c)
In the event of a pro rata allocation of shares in accordance with Section 9(b), Oracle shall give written notice of such reduction of the
number of shares subject to the option to each participant affected thereby and, at the discretion of the Board, shall terminate or reduce payroll deductions
before the Exercise Date if the Board has determined that insufficient shares are available for a full allocation. Any cash remaining in a participant’s payroll
deduction/contribution account due to an insufficient number of shares remaining in the Plan for distribution to all participating Employees shall be returned
to such Employees as soon as administratively feasible.
10. WITHDRAWAL: TERMINATION OR TRANSFER OF EMPLOYMENT
(a)
A participant may withdraw all but not less than all the payroll deductions credited to his or her account under the Plan at any time prior to
the Exercise Date of the Offering Period prior to the fifteenth (15th) day of the last month of the Offering Period. If a withdrawal request is complete as
confirmed by Oracle before such date, all of the participant’s payroll deductions credited to his or her account will be refunded, without interest (except
where required by local law as determined by the Board), to him or her as soon as practicable, his or her option for the then current Offering Period will be
automatically terminated, and no further payroll deductions for the purchase of shares will be made during the Offering Period. If a withdrawal request is
complete as confirmed by Oracle after such date, the participant’s payroll deductions credited to his or her account will be used to purchase stock on the next
Exercise Date and his or her participation will end at the beginning of the next Offering Period.
5

(b)
In the event that a participant’s employment with Oracle or another Group Company terminates for any reason (including death, disability,
or retirement), or if a participant becomes otherwise ineligible to participate in the Plan, in either case, on or prior to the fifteenth (15th) day of the last
month of an Offering Period, the payroll deductions credited to his or her account will be returned as soon as practicable and without interest (except where
required by local law as determined by the Board) to him or her or, in the case of his or her death, to the executor or administrator of the estate of the
participant, and his or her option will be automatically terminated. In the event that a participant’s employment with Oracle or another Group Company
terminates for any reason or a participant becomes otherwise ineligible to participate in the Plan after such date, the participant’s payroll deductions credited
to his or her account will be used to purchase stock on the Exercise Date for that Offering Period and his or her participation will end at the beginning of the
next Offering Period.
(c)
In the event an Employee fails to continue to meet the eligibility requirements of an Employee (as defined in Section 2(f)) during the entire
Offering Period, other than as set forth in Section 10(d) below, he or she will be deemed to have elected to withdraw from the Plan and the payroll deductions
credited to his or her account will be returned to him or her as soon as practicable and without interest (except where required by local law as determined by
the Board) and his or her option will be automatically terminated.
(d)
In the event that an Employee takes an unpaid leave of absence, his or her payroll deductions shall automatically cease (and no additional
contributions to the Plan may be made unless participation is required by local law while on unpaid leave); any amounts remaining in his or her payroll
deduction account shall be used to purchase stock on the next Exercise Date. Paid leaves of absence shall have no effect an Employee’s participation in the
Plan.
(e)
A participant’s withdrawal from an Offering Period will not have any effect upon his or her eligibility to participate in a succeeding Offering
Period, or in any similar plan period, which may hereafter be adopted by Oracle.
(f)
The Board may specify a date prior to each Exercise Date, which date will be no more than thirty (30) days prior to such Exercise Date, after
which a participant may not withdraw for any reason.
(g)
The Board may establish rules to govern transfers of employment between Group Companies, consistent with any applicable requirements
of Section 423 of the Code and the terms of the Plan. In addition, the Board may establish rules to govern transfers of employment between Group
Companies where such companies are participating in separate offerings under the Plan or in the Section 423 plan and the non-423 plan, respectively.
11. STOCK
(a)
The maximum number of shares of Common Stock which shall be made available for sale under the Plan shall be 405,000,000 shares (plus
any shares available under the prior plan as of September 30, 1992), subject to adjustment upon changes in capitalization of Oracle as provided in Section 18.
For the avoidance of doubt, up to the maximum number of shares reserved under this Section 11 may be used to satisfy purchases of shares under the
Section 423 plan and any remaining portion of such maximum number of shares may be used to satisfy purchases of shares under the  non-423 plan.  Such
shares may be authorized but unissued shares, treasury shares or shares purchased in the open market.
(b)
The participant will have no interest or voting right in shares covered by his or her option until such option has been exercised and the shares
of Common Stock have been registered in the name of the participant.
(c)
Shares to be delivered to a participant under the Plan will be registered in the name of the participant.
12. ADMINISTRATION
(a)
The Plan shall be administered by the Board or a committee of Board members appointed by the Board. The Board or its committee shall
have full and exclusive discretionary authority to construe, interpret and apply the terms of the Plan,
6

to determine eligibility and to adjudicate all disputed claims filed under the Plan. The Board’s discretionary authority under the Plan shall include, without
limitation, the authority to (i) change the Offering Periods, (ii) limit the frequency and/or number of changes in the amount withheld during Offering Periods,
(iii) establish the exchange ratio applicable to amounts withheld in a currency other than U.S. dollars, (iv) permit payroll withholding in excess of the amount
designated by a participant in order to adjust for delays or mistakes in the processing of properly completed withholding elections, (v) establish reasonable
waiting and adjustment periods and/or accounting and crediting procedures to ensure that amounts applied toward the purchase of Common Stock for each
participant properly correspond with amounts withheld from the participant’s Compensation, and (vi) establish such other limitations or procedures as the
Board determines in its sole discretion advisable. Every finding, decision and determination made by the Board shall, to the full extent permitted by law, be
final and binding upon all parties. Members of the Board who are eligible Employees are permitted to participate in the Plan except to the extent limited by
Subsection (b) of this Section 12. All references in this Plan to the Board shall mean the committee(s) appointed by the Board, if any.
(b)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (a) of this Section 12, in the event that Rule 16b-3 provides specific requirements for the
administrators of plans of this type, and the Board determines that compliance with such provisions is reasonable, the Plan (or, if permitted by Rule 16b-3,
transactions in the Plan by persons who are subject to Section 16(b)) shall be administered only by such a body and in such a manner as shall comply with the
applicable requirements of Rule 16b-3. Unless permitted by Rule 16b-3, no discretion concerning decisions regarding the Plan (or, if permitted by Rule 16b-3,
transactions in the Plan by persons who are subject to Section 16(b)) shall be afforded to any committee or person that is not “disinterested” as such term is
defined in Rule 16b-3.
(c)
To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, the Board may, from time to time, delegate some or all of its authority under the Plan to a
subcommittee or subcommittees of a committee appointed by the Board or to one or more of the Company’s officers or management team appointed by the
Board.
13. TRANSFERABILITY
Neither payroll deductions credited to a participant’s account nor any rights with regard to the exercise of an option or to receive shares under the
Plan may be assigned, transferred, pledged or otherwise disposed of in any way (other than by will or the applicable laws of descent and distribution) by the
participant. Any such attempt at assignment, transfer, pledge or other disposition shall be without effect, except that Oracle may treat such act as an election
to withdraw funds in accordance with Section 10.
14. USE OF FUNDS
All payroll deductions received or held by Oracle under the Plan may be used by Oracle for any corporate purpose, unless otherwise required by
the laws of the jurisdiction where the payroll deductions are taken or contributions are made, as determined by the Board, and Oracle shall not be obligated
to segregate such payroll deductions unless required by local law.
15. REPORTS AND INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNTS
Individual accounts will be maintained for each participant in the Plan. Statements of account will be available at the Plan broker to participating
Employees as soon as practicable following the Exercise Date, which statements will set forth the amounts of payroll deductions/contributions, the number of
shares purchased, the per share purchase price and the remaining cash balance, if any.
7

16. EQUAL RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES
All eligible Employees participating in the same offering under the Code Section 423 plan shall have equal rights and privileges with respect to the
same offering so that the Plan qualifies as an “employee stock purchase plan” within the meaning of Section 423 or any successor provision of the Code and
the related regulations. Any provision of the Plan which is intended to be part of the Code Section 423 plan and is inconsistent with Section 423 or any
successor provision of the Code shall without further act or amendment by Oracle or the Board be reformed to comply with the requirements of Section 423.
This Section 16 shall take precedence over all other provisions in the Plan with respect to the Section 423 plan, but shall not prevent the grant of options
under a non-423 plan which do not qualify under Section 423 of the Code pursuant to rules, procedures or sub-plans adopted by the Board designed to
achieve desired tax or other objectives in particular locations outside the U.S. as described in Section 23 herein.
17. APPLICABLE LAW
The Plan shall be governed by the substantive laws (excluding the conflict of laws rules) of the State of Delaware, U.S.
18. ADJUSTMENTS UPON CHANGES IN CAPITALIZATION, DISSOLUTION, MERGER OR ASSET SALE
(a)
Subject to any required action by the stockholders of Oracle, the number of shares of Common Stock and type or kind of securities covered
by each option under the Plan which has not yet been exercised and the number of shares of Common Stock and type of kind of securities which have been
authorized for issuance under the Plan, but have not yet been placed under option (collectively, the “Reserves”) as well as the price per share of Common
Stock covered by each option under the Plan which has not yet been exercised, shall be proportionately adjusted for any increase or decrease in the number
of issued shares of Common Stock resulting from a stock split, reverse stock split, combination or reclassification of the Common Stock, or the payment of a
dividend payable in shares of Oracle’s capital stock (but only on the Common Stock) or the securities of a Subsidiary or any other increase or decrease in the
number of shares of Common Stock effected without receipt of consideration by Oracle; provided, however, that conversion of any convertible securities of
Oracle shall not be deemed to have been “effected without receipt of consideration.” Such adjustment shall be made by the Board, whose determination in
that respect shall be final, binding and conclusive. Except as expressly provided herein, no issue by Oracle of shares of stock of any class, or securities
convertible into shares of stock of any class, shall affect, and no adjustment by reason thereof shall be made with respect to, the number or price of shares of
Common Stock subject to an option. The Board may, if it so determines in the exercise of its sole discretion, make provision for adjusting the Reserves, as well
as the price per share of Common Stock covered by each outstanding option, in the event Oracle effects one or more reorganizations, recapitalizations, rights
offerings or other increases or reductions of shares of its outstanding Common Stock.
(b)
In the event of the proposed dissolution or liquidation of Oracle, the Offering Period will terminate immediately prior to the consummation
of such proposed dissolution or liquidation, unless otherwise provided by the Board, and Oracle or the applicable Group Company shall return to each
participant, to the extent permitted by law, any amounts without interest (unless required by local law as determined by the Board) remaining in his or her
payroll deduction account.
(c)
In the event of a proposed sale of all or substantially all of the assets of Oracle, or the merger of Oracle with or into another corporation,
each option under the Plan shall be assumed or an equivalent option shall be substituted by such successor corporation or a parent or subsidiary of such
successor corporation, unless the Board determines, in the exercise of its sole discretion and in lieu of such assumption or substitution to shorten an Offering
Period then in progress by setting a new Exercise Date (the “New Exercise Date”). If the Board shortens the Offering Period then in progress in lieu of
assumption or substitution in the event of a merger or sale of assets, the Board shall notify each participant in writing, at
8

least ten (10) days prior to the New Exercise Date, that the Exercise Date for his or her option (including for purposes of determining the option price per
share under Section 7(b)) has been changed to the New Exercise Date and that his or her option will be exercised automatically on the New Exercise Date,
unless prior to such date he or she has withdrawn from the Offering Period as provided in Section 10.  For purposes of this Section, an option granted under
the Plan shall be deemed to be assumed if, following the sale of assets or merger, the option confers the right to purchase, for each share of Common Stock
subject to the option immediately prior to the sale of assets or merger, the consideration (whether stock, cash or other securities or property) received in the
sale of assets or merger by holders of Common Stock for each share of Common Stock held on the effective date of the transaction (and if such holders were
offered a choice of consideration, the type of consideration chosen by the holders of a majority of the outstanding shares of Common Stock); provided,
however, that if such consideration received in the sale of assets or merger was not solely common stock of the successor corporation or its parent (as defined
in Section 424(e) of the Code), the Board may, with the consent of the successor corporation, provide for the consideration to be received upon exercise of
the option to be solely common stock of the successor corporation or its parent equal in fair market value to the per share consideration received by holders
of Common Stock as a result of the sale of assets or merger.
19. AMENDMENT, SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF PLAN
The Board may at any time and for any reason terminate, suspend or amend the Plan. Except as provided in Section 18, no such termination can
affect options previously granted, provided that an Offering Period may be terminated by the Board on any Exercise Date if the Board determines that the
termination of the Plan is in the best interests of Oracle and its stockholders. Except as provided in Section 18, no amendment may make any change in any
option previously granted which adversely affects the rights of any participant without the consent of the participant, except to the extent as may be
necessary to qualify the Plan as an employee stock purchase plan pursuant to Code Section 423 or to comply with any applicable law, regulation or rule.
20. NOTICES
All notices or other communications by a participant to Oracle under or in connection with the Plan shall be deemed to have been duly given when
received in the form specified by Oracle at the location, or by the person, designated by Oracle for the receipt thereof.
21. STOCKHOLDER APPROVAL
The Plan shall become effective upon the earlier to occur of its adoption by the Board or its approval by the stockholders of Oracle. If stockholder
approval of the Plan is not obtained prior to the Exercise Date for the first Offering Period under the Plan, all options previously granted under the Plan shall
terminate on the Exercise Date and all amounts accrued in each participant’s account shall be refunded as soon as practicable, without interest (unless
required by local law as determined by the Board), to each participant. Whenever stockholder approval is sought under the Plan, either for its initial approval
or for a subsequent amendment, it may be obtained in any manner permitted by applicable corporate law. If stockholder approval is required under the Code
for an amendment to the Plan adopted or proposed to be adopted by the Board, such stockholder approval shall be obtained in any manner and within the
time periods required by the Code. The Board, in its discretion, also may obtain stockholder approval for any amendment to the Plan adopted by or proposed
to be adopted by the Board to the extent desirable to maintain compliance with Rule 16b-3.
9

22. CONDITIONS UPON ISSUANCE OF SHARES
Shares shall not be issued with respect to an option unless the exercise of such option and the issuance and delivery of such shares pursuant
thereto shall comply with all applicable provisions of law, domestic or foreign, including, without limitation, the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended, the
Exchange Act, the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the requirements of any stock exchange upon which the shares may then be listed, and
shall be further subject to the approval of counsel for Oracle with respect to such compliance. As a condition to the exercise of an option, Oracle may require
the person exercising such option to represent and warrant at the time of any such exercise that the shares are being purchased only for investment and
without any present intention to sell or distribute such shares if, in the opinion of counsel for Oracle, such a representation is required by any of the
aforementioned applicable provisions of law.
23. RULES FOR NON-U.S. JURISDICTIONS
(a)
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in this Plan, the Board may adopt rules or procedures relating to the operation and
administration of the Plan to accommodate and facilitate compliance with the specific requirements of local laws and procedures and to facilitate the
administration of the Plan in non-U.S. jurisdictions.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Board is specifically authorized to adopt rules and
procedures regarding the definition of Compensation, handling of payroll deductions, making of contributions to the Plan in forms other than payroll
deductions, establishment of bank or trust accounts to hold payroll deductions, payment of interest, conversion of local currency, obligations to pay payroll
tax, withholding procedures and delivery of shares which vary with local requirements.
(b)
The Board may also adopt rules, procedures or sub-plans applicable to particular Participating Subsidiaries or Participating Affiliates or
locations, which sub-plans may be designed to be outside the scope of Code Section 423.  The rules of such sub-plans may take precedence over other
provisions of this Plan, with the exception of Sections 11 and 21, but unless otherwise superseded by the terms of such sub-plan, the provisions of this Plan
shall govern the operation of such sub-plan.  To the extent inconsistent with the requirements of Code Section 423, such sub-plans shall be considered part of
the non-423 Plan, and the options granted thereunder shall not be considered to comply with Section 423.
10

 
Exhibit 21.01
ORACLE CORPORATION
Subsidiaries of the Registrant
 Name of Subsidiary
  
Place of Incorporation
 
  
 
 Oracle International Corporation
California
  
 
 Oracle Switzerland GmbH, US Branch
California
  
 
 Oracle America, Inc.  
Delaware
  
 
 Oracle Global Holdings, Inc.
Delaware
  
 
 Oracle Japan Holding, Inc.
Delaware
  
 
 Oracle Systems Corporation
Delaware
  
 
 StorageTek International Corporation
Delaware
  
 
 Delphi Asset Management Corporation
Nevada
  
 
 Oracle EMEA & CAPAC Holdings Limited
Bermuda
  
 
 Oracle International Holdings Limited
Bermuda
  
 
 Oracle Canada ULC
Canada
  
 
 Oracle Corporation UK Limited
England and Wales
  
 
 Oracle Deutschland B.V. & Co. KG
Germany
  
 
 OCAPAC Holding Company UC
Ireland
  
 
 OCAPAC Research Partner UC
Ireland
  
 
 Oracle EMEA Holdings Limited
Ireland
  
 
 Oracle EMEA Limited
Ireland
  
 
 Oracle Global Partners
Ireland
  
 
 Oracle International Group Limited
Isle of Man
  
 
 Oracle Corporation Japan
Japan
  
 
 Oracle Software (Schweiz) GmbH
Switzerland
 

 
Exhibit 23.01
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We consent to the incorporation by reference in the following Registration Statements:
(1)
Registration Statement (Form S-3 No. 333-254166) of Oracle Corporation, and
(2)
Registration Statement (Form S-8 Nos. 333-251303, 333-249880, 333-235503, 333-228899, 333-225829, 333-222139, 333-218996, 333-216796,
333-215835, 333-215171, 333-214106, 333-212182, 333-210287, 333-208632, 333-207038, 333-202870, 333-199617, 333-195502, 333-194705,
333-193006, 333-187924, 333-186971, 333-184062, 333-181023, 333-179586, 333-179132, 333-176986, 333-171939, 333-169089, 333-164734,
333-163147, 333-157758, 333-153660, 333-151045, 333-147400, 333-145162, 333-142776, 333-142225, 333-139901, 333-139875, 333-138694,
333-136275, 333-131988, 333-131427) pertaining to the equity incentive plans of Oracle Corporation;
of our reports dated June 21, 2022, with respect to the consolidated financial statements and schedule of Oracle Corporation and the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting of Oracle Corporation included in this Annual Report (Form 10-K) of Oracle Corporation for the year ended May 31, 2022.
/s/ Ernst & Young LLP
San Jose, California
June 21, 2022
 

Exhibit 31.01
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE AND FINANCIAL OFFICER PURSUANT TO
EXCHANGE ACT RULE 13a-14(a)/15d-14(a)
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Safra A. Catz, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of Oracle Corporation;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the
statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this
report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the
financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
I am responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and
internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
a)
designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision,
to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within
those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b)
designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for
external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c)
evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d)
disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent
fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to
materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s auditors and the Finance and
Audit Committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a)
all significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably
likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b)
any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal
control over financial reporting.    
 
Date: June 21, 2022
  By:
/s/  Safra A. Catz
   
Safra A. Catz
Chief Executive Officer and Director
(Principal Executive and Financial Officer)

 
Exhibit 32.01
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE AND FINANCIAL OFFICER
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350 AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
The certification set forth below is being submitted in connection with the report on Form 10-K of Oracle Corporation for the purpose of complying with Rule
13a-14(b) or Rule 15d-14(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Section 1350 of Chapter 63 of Title 18 of the United States Code.
Safra A. Catz, the Chief Executive Officer (Principal Executive and Financial Officer) of Oracle Corporation, certifies that, to the best of her knowledge:
1.
the Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
2.
the information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of Oracle
Corporation.
 
Date: June 21, 2022
  By:
/s/  Safra A. Catz
   
Safra A. Catz
Chief Executive Officer and Director
(Principal Executive and Financial Officer)
The foregoing certification is being furnished pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350. It is not being filed for purposes of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934, as amended, and it is not to be incorporated by reference into any filing of Oracle Corporation, regardless of any general incorporation language in
such filing.
 
