UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM   10-K
(Mark One)
 
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
                        For the Fis cal Year Ended December 31, 2016
 
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR   15(d)   OF   THE SECURITIES   EXCHANGE ACT
OF 1934
                        For the transition period from _________ to  ___________  
 
Commission
File Number
 
Exact Name of Registrant
as S pecified I n I ts C harter
 
State or Other Jurisdiction of
Incorporation or Organization
 
IRS Employer
Identification Number
1-12609
 PG&E CORPORATION
 
California
 
94-3234914
1-2348
 PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
 
California
 
94-0742640
 
 
77 Beale Street, P.O. Box 770000
San Francisco, California 94177
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
(415) 973-1000
(Registrant's telephone number, including area code)
77 Beale Street, P.O. Box 770000
San Francisco, California 94177
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
(415) 973-7000
(Registrant's telephone number, including area code)
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section   12(b) of the Act:
 
Title of each c lass
 
Name of e ach e xchange on w hich r egistered
PG&E Corporation: Common Stock, no par value
 
New York Stock Exchange
Pacific Gas and Electric Company: First Preferred Stock,
cumulative, par value $25 per share:
 
NYSE MKT LLC
Redeemable: 5% Series A, 5%, 4.80%, 4.50%, 4.36%
 
 
Nonredeemable: 6%, 5.50%, 5%
 
 
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section   12(g) of the Act: None
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act:
                     PG&E Corporation
Yes ☐ No ☑
                     Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Yes ☐ No ☑
 
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act:
                     PG&E Corporation
Yes ☐ No ☑
                     Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Yes ☐ No ☑
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1)   has filed all reports required to be filed by Section   13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the
preceding 12   months (or for such sho rter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2)   has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past 90   days.  
                    PG&E Corporation
Yes ☑ No ☐
                    Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Yes ☑ No ☐
1
 

 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule   405 of Regulation   S-T during the preceding 12   months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit
and post such files).    
 
PG&E Corporation
Yes  ☑ No  ☐
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Yes  ☑   No  ☐
 
 
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation   S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the best of
registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part   III of this Form   10-K or any amendment to this Form   10-K:
PG&E Corporation
☑
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
☑
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company (as defined in
Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). (Check one):
 
PG&E Corporation            
 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Large accelerated filer ☑
 
Large accelerated filer ☐
Accelerated filer ☐
 
Accelerated filer ☐
Non-accelerated filer ☐
 
Non-accelerated filer ☑
Smaller reporting company ☐
 
Smaller reporting company ☐
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).
 
                     PG&E Corporation
Yes ☐ No ☑
                     Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Yes ☐ No ☑
 
Aggregate market value of voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates of the registrants as of June   30, 201 6 , the last business day of the
most recently completed second fiscal quarter:
 
                 PG&E Corporation common stock     
                     $31,807 million
                 Pacific Gas and Electric Company common stock
                     Wholly owned by PG&E Corporation
 
Common Stock outstanding as of February 7 , 201 7 :
 
 
                PG&E Corporation:
507,782,249 shares
                Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
264,374,809 shares (wholly owned by PG&E Corporation)
 
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
 
Portions of the documents listed below have been incorporated by reference into the indicated parts of t his report, as specified in the responses to the item numbers
involved:
 
Designated portions of the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 201 7
Annual Meetings of Shareholders
Part   III (Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14)
 
2 

 
Contents
 
UNITS OF MEASUREMENT
GLOSSARY
PART 1
ITEM 1. BUSINESS
   Regulatory Environment
   Ratemaking Mechanisms
   Electric Utility Operations
Natural Gas Utility Operations
Competition
Environmental Regulation
ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS
ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
ITEM 2.   PROPERTIES
ITEM 3. LEGAL PROC EEDINGS
ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANTS
PART II
ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED SHAREHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES
ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
LIQUIDITY AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES
CONTRACTUAL COMMITMENTS
ENFORCEMENT AND LITIGATION MATTERS
REGULATORY MATTERS
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY INITIATIVES
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
CR ITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
PG&E Corporation
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1: ORGANIZATION AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION
NOTE 2: SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
NOTE 3: REGULATORY ASSETS, LIABILITIES, AND BALANCING ACCOUNTS
NOTE 4: DEBT
NOTE 5: COMMON STOCK AND SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION
NOTE 6: PREFERRED STOCK
NOTE 7: EARNINGS PER SHARE
NOTE 8: INCOME TAXES
NOTE 9: DERIVATIVES
NOTE 10: FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
NOTE 11: EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
NOTE 12: RELATED PARTY AGREEMENTS AND TRANSACTIONS
NOTE 13: CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS

 
3 
QUARTERLY CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA (UNAUDITED)
MANAGEMENT’S REPORT   ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER   FINANCIAL REPORTING
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTER ED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
ITEM   9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
ITEM   9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION
PART III
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
ITEM 13. CERTAIN R ELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
PART IV
ITEM   15.   EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
SIGNATURES
REPORT OF INDEPE NDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
EXHIBIT INDEX
4
 
 

 
UNITS OF MEASUREMENT
 
1 Kilowatt (kW)
=
One thousand watts
1 Kilowatt-Hour (kWh)
=
One kilowatt continuously for one hour
1 Megawatt (MW)
=
One thousand kilowatts
1 Megawatt-Hour (MWh)
=
One megawatt continuously for one hour
1 Gigawatt (GW)
=
One million kilowatts
1 Gigawatt-Hour (GWh)
=
One gigawatt continuously for one hour
1 Kilovolt (kV)
=
One thousand volts
1 MVA
=
One megavolt ampere
1 Mcf
=
One thousand cubic feet
1 MMcf
=
One million cubic feet
1 Bcf
=
One billion cubic feet
1 MDth
=
One thousand decatherms
5
 

 
GLOSSARY
 
The following terms and abbreviations appearing in the text of this report have the meanings indicated below.
 
2016 Form 10-K
PG&E Corporation's and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's combined Annual Report on Form   10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016
AB
Assembly Bill
AFUDC
allowance for funds used during construction
ALJ
administrative law judge
ARO
asset retirement obligation
ASU
accounting standard update issued by the FASB (see below)
CAISO
California Independent System Operator
Cal Fire
California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
CARB
California Air Resources Board
CCA
Community Choice Aggregator
Central Coast Board Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board
CEC
California Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission
CO 2
carbon dioxide
CPUC
California Public Utilities Commis sion
CRRs
congestion revenue rights
DER
distributed energy resources
Diablo Canyon
Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant
DOE
U.S. Department of Energy
DOGGR
Division of Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources
DOI
U.S. Department of the Interior
DTSC
Department of Toxic Substances Control
EMANI
European Mutual Association for Nuclear Insurance
EPA
Environmental Protection Agency
EPS
earnings per common share
EV
electric vehicle
FASB
Financial Accounting Standards Board
FERC
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
GAAP
U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
GHG
greenhouse gas
GRC
general rate case
GT&S
gas transmission and storage
IOUs
investor-owned utility(ies)
IRS
Internal Revenue Service
LTIP
long-term incentive plan
MD&A
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations set forth in Part II, Item 7, of this Form 10-K
MOU
memorandum of understanding
NAV
net asset value
NDTCP
Nuclear Decommissioning Cost Triennial Proceedings
NEIL
Nuclear Electric Insurance Limited
NEM
net energy metering
NRC
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
NTSB
National Transportation Safety Board
OII
order instituting investigation
ORA
Office of Ratepayer Advocates
PHMSA
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
PSEP
pipeline safety enhancement plan
QF
qualifying facility
Regional Board
California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Lahontan Region
6
 

 
REITS
real estate investment trust
RFO
requests for o ffers
ROE
return on equity
RPS
renewable portfolio standard
SB
Senate Bill
SEC
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
SED
Safety and Enforcement Division of the CPUC
TE
transportation electrification
TO
transmission owner
TURN
The Utility Reform Network
Utility
Pacific Gas   and Electric Company
VIE(s)
variable interest entity(ies)
Water Board
California State Water Resources Control Board
 
 
7
 

 
PART I
ITEM 1. BUSINESS
 
PG&E Corporation, incorporated in California in 1995, is a holding company whose primary operating subsidiary is Pacific Gas and Electric Company, a public
utility operating in northern and central California.  The Utility was incorporated in California in 1905.  PG&E Corporation became the holding comp any of the
Utility and its subsidiaries in 1997.  The Utility generates revenues mainly through the sale and delivery of electricity and natural gas to customers.  PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s operating revenues, income, and total assets can be fou nd below in Item 6. Selected Financial Data.
 
The principal executive offices of PG&E Corporation and the Utility are located at 77 Beale Street, P.O.   Box 770000, San Francisco, California   94177.  PG&E
Corporation’s telephone number is (415) 973-1000 and t he Utility’s telephone number is (415)   973-7000.
 
At December 31, 201 6 , PG&E Corporation and the Utility had approximately 24,000 regular employees, approximately 30 of which were employees of PG&E
Corporation .  Of the Utility’s regular employees, approximately 14,000 are covered by collective bargaining agreements with the local chapters of three labor unions: 
the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (“IBEW”); the Engineers and Scientists of California (“ESC”); and the Service Employees International Union
(“SEIU” ).  A new SEIU collective bargaining agreement was ratified in December 2016 and is effective August 1, 2016 through December 31, 2019.  T wo new
agreements (Physical and Clerical) with IBEW and an agreement with ESC were ratifie d in 2016 and were retroactive to January 1, 2016.  They will expire on
December 31, 2019. 
 
This is a combined Annual Report on Form 10-K for PG&E Corporation and the Utility.  PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Annual Reports on Form   10-K,
Quarterly R eports on Form   10-Q, Current Reports on Form   8-K, and proxy statements, are available free of charge on both PG&E Corporation's website,
www.pgecorp.com , and the Utility's website, www.pge.com , as promptly as practicable after they are filed with, or furni shed to, the SEC .  Additionally, PG&E
Corporation and the Utility routinely provide links to the Utility’s regulatory proceedings before the CPUC and the FERC at http://investor.pgecorp.com , under the
“Regulatory Filings” tab, so that such filings are availab le to investors upon filing with the relevant agency.  It is possible that these regulatory filings or information
included therein could be deemed to be material information.  The information contained on these websites is not part of this or any other report that PG&E
Corporation or th e Utility files with, or furnishes to, the SEC.
 
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that are necessarily subject to various risks and uncertainties.  For a discussion of the
significant risks that could affect the outcome o f these forward-looking statements and PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s future financial condition and results of
operations, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and the section entitled “Forward-Looking Statements” in MD&A.
 
Regulatory Environment  
 
The Utility's business is subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of various agencies at the federal, state, and local levels.  At the state level, the Utility is regulated
primarily by the CPUC.  At the federal level, the Utility is subject to the jurisdiction of the FERC and the NRC. The Utility is also subject to the requirements of other
federal, state and local regulatory agencies with respect to safety, the environment , and health. This section and the “Ratemaking Mechanisms” section below
summarize some o f the more significant laws, regulations, and regulatory proc eedings affecting the Utility.
 
PG&E Corporation is a “public utility holding company” as defined under the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005 and is subject to regulatory oversight by t
he FERC.  PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries are exempt from all requirements of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005 other than the obligation to
provide access to their books and records to the FERC and the CPUC for ratemaking purposes.
 
The California Public Utilities Commission
 
The CPUC is a regulatory agency that regulates privately owned public utilities in California.  The CPUC consists of five commissioners appointed by the Governor
of California and confirmed by the California State Senate for staggered six-year terms.  The CPUC has jurisdiction over the rates and terms and conditions of servi ce
for the Utility's electric and natural gas dist ribution operations, electric generation, and natural gas transmission and storage services.  The CPUC also has jurisdiction
over the Utility's issuances of securities, dispositions of utility assets and facilities, energy purchases on behalf of the Utility's electricity and natural gas retail
customers, rates of return, rates of depreciation, over sight of nuclear decommissioning, and aspects of the siting of facilities used in providing electric and natural gas
utility service.
 
8
 

 
The CPUC enforces state laws and regulations that set forth safety requirements pertaining to the design, construction, t esting, operation, and maintenance of utility
gas and electric facilities.   The CPUC can impose penalties of up to $50,000 per day, per violation, for violations that occurred after January 1, 2012.  (The statutory
maximum penalty for violations that occur red before January 1, 2012 is $20,000 per violation.)  The CPUC has wide discretion to determine the amount of penalties
based on the totality of the circumstances, including such factors as the gravity of the violations; the type of harm caused by the vio lations and the number of persons
affected; and the good faith of the entity charged in attempting to achieve compliance, after notification of a violation. The CPUC also is required to consider the
appropriateness of the amount of the penalty to the size of the entity charged.  
 
The CPUC has delegated authority to the SED to issue citations and impose penalties for violations identified through audits, investigations, or self-reports.  Under
both the gas and electric programs, the SED has discretion wheth er to issue a penalty for each violation, but if it assesses a penalty for a violation, it is required to
impose the maximum statutory penalty of $50,000.  The SED may, at its discretion, impose penalties on a daily basis, or on less than a daily basis, fo r violations that
continued for more than one day.  In September 2016, the CPUC adopted improvements and refinements to its gas and electric safety citation programs.  Specifically,
the final decision refines the criteria for the SED to use in determining whether to issue a citation and the amount of penalty, sets an administrative limit of $8 million
per citation issued, makes self-reporting voluntary in both gas and electric programs, adopts detailed criteria for the utilities to use to voluntarily self-r eport a potential
violation, and refines other issues in the programs.  The decision also merges the rules applicable to its gas and electric safety citation programs into a single set of
rules that replace s the previous safety citation programs .
 
The Cal ifornia State Legislature also directs the CPUC to implement state laws and policies, such as the laws relating to increasing renewable energy resources, the
development and widespread deployment of distributed generation and self-generation resources, the reduction of GHG emissions, the establishment of energy storage
procurement targets , and the development of a state-wide electric vehicle charging infrastructure.  T he CPUC is responsible for approving funding and administration
of state-mandated public p urpose programs such as energy efficiency and other customer programs.  The CPUC also conducts audits and reviews of the Utility’s
accounting, performance , and compliance with regulatory guidelines .
 
T he CPUC has imposed various conditions that govern the relationship between the Utility and PG&E Corporation and other affiliates, including financial conditions
that require PG&E Corporation’s Board of Directors to give first priority to the capital requirements of the Utility, as determined to be necessary a nd prudent to meet
the Utility's obligation to serve or to operate the Utility in a prudent and efficient manner. (For more information, see “Liquidity and Financial Resources” in MD&A
and Item 1A. Risk Factors.)  
 
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and the California Independent System Operator
 
The FERC has jurisdictio n over the Utility's electric transmission revenue requirements and rates, the licensing of substantially all of the Utility's hydroelectric
generation facilities, and the interstate sale and transportation of natural gas. The FERC regulates the interconnections of the Utility’s transmission systems with other
electric system and generation facilities, the tariffs and conditions of service of regional transmission organizations and the terms and rates of wholesale electricity
sales.  The FERC also is charged with adopting and enforcing mandatory standards governing the reliabi lity of the nation’s electric transmission grid, including
standards to protect the nation’s bulk power system a gainst potential disruptions from cyber and physical security breaches.  The FERC has authority to impose fines
of up to $1 million per day for violation s of certain federal statutes and regulations.
 
The CAISO is the FERC-approved regional transmission org anization for the Utility’s service territory.  The CAISO controls the operation of the electric
transmission system in California and provides open access transmission service on a non - discriminatory basis.  The CAISO also is responsible for planning tran
smission system additions, ensuring the maintenance of adequate reserves of generating capacity, and ensuring that the reliability of the transmission system is
maintained.
 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission
 
The NRC oversees the licensing, construction, operation and decommissioning of nuclear facilities, including the Utility’s two nuclear generating units at Diablo
Canyon and the Utility’s retired nuclear generating unit at Humboldt Bay.  (See “Electric ity Resources” below.)  NRC regulations require ext ensive monitoring and
review of the safety, radiological, seismic, environmental, and security aspects of these facilities.  In the event of non-compliance, the NRC has the authority to
impose fines or to force a shutdown of a nuclear plant, or both.  NRC safety and security requirements have, in the past, necessitated substantial capital expenditures at
Diablo Canyon, and substantial capital expenditures could be required in the future.   (For more information about Diablo Canyon, see “Regulatory Matters – Diablo
Canyon Nuclear Power Plant” in MD&A and Item 1A. Risk Factors below.)
 
9
 

 
Other Regula tors
 
The CEC is the state's primary energy policy and planning agency.  The CEC is responsible for licensing all thermal power plants over 50 MW within California.  
The CEC also is responsible for forecasts of future energy needs used by the CPUC in determining the adequacy of the utilities' electricity procurement plans and for
adopting building and appliance energy efficiency requirements.
 
The CARB is the state agency responsible for setting and monitoring GHG and other emission limits.  The CARB is also responsible for adopting and enforcing
regulations to implement state law requirements to gradually reduce GHG emissions in California.  (See “Environmental Regu lation - Air Quality and Climate
Change” below.)
 
In addition, the Utility obtains permits, authorizations, and licenses in connection with the construction and operation of the Utility's generation facilities, electricity
transmission lines, natural gas t ransportation pipelines, and gas compressor station facilities.  The Utility also periodically obtains permits, authorizations, and
licenses in connection with distribution of electricity and natural gas that grant the Utility rights to occupy and/or use p ublic property for the operation of the Utility's
business and to conduct certain related operations.  The Utility has franchise agreements with approximately 300 cities and counties that permit the Utility to install,
operate, and maintain the Utility's e lectric and natural gas facilities in the public streets and highway s.  In exchange for the right to use public streets and highway s,
the Utility pays annual fees to the cities and counties.  In most cases, the Utility’s franchise agreements are for an ind eterminate term, with no expiration date.
 
Ratemaking Mechanisms
 
The Utility’s rates for electricity and natural gas utility services are set at levels that are intended to allow the Utility to recover its costs of providing service including
a return on invested capital (“cost-of-service ratemaking”).  Before setting rates, the CPUC and the FERC conduct proceedings to determine the annual amount that
the Utility will be authorized to collect from its customers (“revenue requirements”).  The Utility’s reve nue requirements consist primarily of a base amount set to
enable the Utility to recover its reasonable operating expenses ( e.g., maintenance, administration and general expenses) and capital costs ( e.g., depreciation, tax, and
financing expenses).  In add ition, the CPUC authorizes the Utility to collect revenues to recover costs that the Utility is allowed to “pass-through” to customers
(referred to as “Utility Revenues and Costs that did not Impact Earnings” in MD&A) , including its costs to procure electr icity, natural gas and nuclear fuel, to
administer public purpose and customer programs, and to decommission its nuclear facilities.
 
The Utility’s rate of return on electric transmission assets is determined in the FERC TO proceedings.  The authorized rat e of return on all other Utility assets is set in
the CPUC’s cost of capital proceeding.  Other than its electric transmission and certain gas transmission and storage revenues, the Utility’s base revenues are
“decoupled” from its sales volume.  Regulatory balancing accounts, or revenue adjustment mechanisms, ensure that the Utility will fully collect its authorized base
revenue requirements.  The Utility’s earnings primarily depend on its ability to manage its base operating and capital costs (referred to as “Utility Revenues and Costs
that Impact ed Earnings” in MD&A) within its authorized base revenue requirements.
 
Both electric and gas rates vary depending on seasons mostly due to the influence of weather.   Electricity rates increase during the summer mo nths ( May – October)
because of higher demand, driven by air conditioning loads , while gas service rates generally increase during the winter months ( November – March) to account for
the gas peak due to heating.
 
During 201 6 , the CPUC continued to impleme nt state law requirements to reform residential electric rates to more closely reflect the utilities’ actual costs of service,
reduce cross-subsidization among customer rate classe s, implement new rules for net energy metering (which currently allow certai n self-generating customers to
receive bill credits for surplus power at the full retail rate) , and allow customers to have greater control over their energy use.  (See “Legislative and Regulatory
Initiatives” in MD&A for more information on specific CPUC proceedings . )
 
From time to time, the CPUC may use incentive ratemaking mechanisms that provide the Utility an opportunity to earn some additional revenues.  For example, the
Utility has earned incentives for the successful im plementation of e nergy efficiency programs.  (See “Regulatory Matters – 2014 – 2015 Energy Efficiency Incentive
Awards” in MD&A.)
 
10
 

 
Base Revenues
 
General Rate Cases
 
The GRC is the primary proceeding in which the CPUC determines the amount of base revenue requirements that the Utility is authorized to collect from customers to
recover the Utility’s anticipated costs, including return on rate base, related to its electricity distribution, natural gas distribution , and Utility owned ele ctricity
generation operations.  The CPUC generally conducts a GRC every three or four years.  The CPUC approves the annual revenue requirements for the first year (or
“test year”) of the GRC period and typically authorizes the Util ity to receive annual in creases in revenue requirements for the subsequent years of the GRC period
(know n as “attrition years ”) .  Attrition year rate adjustments are generally provided for cost increases related to increases in invested capital and inflation .  Parties in
the Util ity's GRC include the ORA and TURN, who generally represent the overall interests of residential customers, as well as a myriad of other intervenors who
represent other business, community, customer, environmental, and union interests.  ( For more informati on about the Utility’s current GRC proceeding, see “
Regulatory Matters −2017 General Rate Case” in MD&A. )
 
Natural Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Cases
 
The CPUC determines the Utility’s authorized revenue requirements and rates for its natural gas transmission and storage services in the GT&S rate case.   The CPUC
generally conducts a GT&S rate case every three or four years.   Similar to the GRC proceeding, t he CPUC approves the annual revenue requirements for the first
year (or “test year”) of the G T&S period and typically determines annual increases in revenue requirements for attrition years of the GT&S period.   Parties in the
Utility's GT&S rate case include the ORA and TURN, who generally represent the overall interests of residential customers, as well as other intervenors who represent
other business, community, customer, and union interests.   (For more information, see “Regulatory Matters – 2015 Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Case” in
MD&A.)  
 
Cost of Capital Proceedings
 
The CPUC periodica lly conducts a cost of capital proceeding to authorize the Utility's capital structure and rates of return for its electric generation, electric and
natural gas distribution, and natural gas transmission and storage rate base.  The CPUC has authorized the Utility’s capital structure through 2017, consisting of 52%
common equity, 47% long-term debt, and 1% preferred stock.  The CPUC also set the authorized ROE through 2017 at 10.40%.  The CPUC adopted an adjustment
mechanism to allow the Utility’s capital st ructure and ROE to be adjusted if the utility bond index changes by certain thresholds on an annual basis.  On February 25,
2016, the CPUC issued a decision granting a petition for modification filed by the Utility and the other California IOUs to clarify that the CPUC’s previously adopted
cost of capital adjustment mechanism would not be triggered for 2017.
 
On February 6, 2017, the Utility and other California IOUs entered into a MOU with the CPUC, ORA, and TURN to extend the next cost of capital applica tion filing
deadline two years to April 22, 2019 for the year 2020.  To implement the MOU, on February 7, 2016, the IOUs, ORA, and TURN filed with the CPUC a petition for
modification of prior CPUC decisions addressing cost of capital.  If the petition for modification is approved as submitted it would reduce the Utility’s ROE from
10.40% to 10.25% and reset the Utility’s authorized cost of long-term debt and preferred stock beginning January 1, 2018.  The Utility’s current capital structure of
52% common e quity, 47% long-term debt, and 1% preferred equity would remain unchanged.  The Utility’s cost of capital adjustment mechanism would not operate
in 2017 but could operate in 2018 to change the cost of capital for 2019.  If the mechanism is activated for 20 19, the Utility’s cost of capital, including its new ROE
of 10.25%, will be adjusted according to the existing terms of the mechanism.  Concurrently with the petition for modification, the Utility and other California IOUs
also sent a letter to the executi ve director of the CPUC requesting that the existing April 2017 filing due date for the 2018 cost of capital be deferred while the CPUC
is considering the petition for modification.  On February 13, 2017, the executive director of the CPUC granted the requ est.  As extended, the Utility and the other
California IOUs would file their next cost of capital applications 60 days after the effective date of the CPUC decision on the petition for modification, or April 20,
2017, whichever is later, if the CPUC does not grant the petition for modification.
 
The Utility expects that the CPUC may issue a decision in the first half of 2017.  (For more information, see “Regulatory Matters –CPUC Cost of Capital” in MD&A.)
 
11
 

 
Electricity Transmission Owner Rate Cases
 
The FERC determines the amount of authorized revenue requirement s , including the rate of return on electric transmission assets, that the Utility may collect in rates
in the TO rate case.  The Utility generally files a TO rate case every year.  The FERC typica lly authorizes the Utility to charge new rates based on the requested
revenue requirement, subject to refund, before the FERC has issued a final decision.  These FERC-approved rates are included : 1) by the CPUC in the Utility's retail
electric rates and ar e collected from retail electric customers ; and 2) by the CAISO in its Transmission Access Charges to wholesale customers .  ( For more
information, s ee “ Regulatory Matters – FERC Transmission Owner Rate Cases” in MD&A.)  The Utility also recovers a portion of its revenue requirements for its
wholesale electric transmission costs through charges collected under specific contracts with wholesale transmission customers that the Utility entered into before the
CAISO began its operations.  These wholesale custome rs are charged individualized rates based on the terms of their contracts.
 
Revenues to Recover Energy Procurement and Other Pass-Through Costs
 
Electricity Procurement Costs
 
California investor-owned electric utilities are responsible for procuring elec trical capacity required to meet bundled customer demand, plus applicable reserve
margins, that are not satisfied from their own generation facilities and existing electricity contracts.  The utilities are responsible for scheduling and bidding electric ge
neration resources, including certain electricity procured from third parties into the wholesale market, to meet customer demand according to which resources are the
least expensive (i.e., using the principles of “least-cost dispatch”).  In addition, the u tilities are required to obtain CPUC approval of their bundled customer
procurement plans based on long-term demand forecasts.  The Utility’s most recent bundled customer procurement plan was approved in October 2015, and will
remain in effect until the pl an is superseded by a subsequent CPUC-approved plan. 
 
California law allows electric utilities to recover the costs incurred in compliance with their CPUC-approved bundled customer procurement plans without further
after-the-fact reasonableness review by the CPUC.  The CPUC may disallow costs associated with electricity purchases if the costs were not incurred in compliance
with the CPUC-approved plan or if the CPUC determines that the utility failed to follow the principles of least-cost dispatch.  Addit ionally, the cost of replacement
power procured due to unplanned outages at Utility owned generation facilities may be disallowed.
 
The Utility recovers its electricity procurement costs annually primarily through the energy resource recovery account.  (Se e Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8.)  Each year, the CPUC reviews the Utility’s forecasted procurement costs related to power purchase agreements, derivative
instruments, GHG emissions costs, and generation fuel expens e, and approves a forecasted revenue requirement.  The CPUC may adjust the Utility’s retail electricity
rates more frequently if the forecasted aggregate over-collections or under-collections in the energy resource recovery account exceed 5% of its prior y ear electricity
procurement and utility-owned generation revenues.  The CPUC performs an annual compliance review of the transactions recorded in the energy resource recovery
account.
 
The CPUC has approved various power purchase agreements that the Utilit y has entered into with third parties in accordance with the Utility’s CPUC-approved
procurement plan, to meet mandatory renewable energy targets, and to comply with resource adequacy requirements.  (For more information, see “Electric Utility
Operations – Electricity Resources” below as well as Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
Natural Gas Procurement , Storage, and Transportation Costs
 
The Utility recovers the cost of gas used in generation facilities as a cost of electricity that is recovered annually through retail electricity rates.
 
The Utility sets the natural gas procurement rate for small commercial and residential customers (referred to as “core” customers) monthly, based on the forecasted
costs of natural gas, core pipeline capacity and storage costs.  The Utility recovers the cost of gas purchased on behalf of core customers as well as the cost of
derivative instruments for its core gas portfolio, through its retail gas rates, subject to limits as set fort h in its core procurement incentive mechanism described
below.  The Utility reflects the difference between actual natural gas purchase costs and forecasted natural gas purchase costs in several natural gas balancing
accounts, with under-collections and ov er-collections taken into account in subsequent monthly rate changes. 
 
12
 

 
The core procurement incentive mechanism protects the Utility against after-the-fact reasonableness reviews of its gas procurement costs for its core gas portfolio. 
Under the core pr ocurement incentive mechanism, the Utility’s natural gas purchase costs for a fixed 12-month period are compared to an aggregate market-based
benchmark based on a weighted average of published monthly and daily natural gas price indices at the points where the Utility typically purchases natural gas.  Costs
that fall within a tolerance band, which is 99% to 102% of the commodity benchmark, are considered reasonable and are fully recovered in customers’ rates.  One-half
of the costs above 102% of the benchma rk are recoverable in customers’ rates, and the Utility's customers receive in their rates 80% of any savings resulting from the
Utility’s cost of natural gas that is less than 99% of the benchmark.  The Utility retains the remaining amount of these saving s as incentive revenues, subject to a cap
equal to 1.5% of total natural gas commodity costs.  While this mechanism remains in place, changes in the price of natural gas, consistent with the market-based
benchmark, are not expected to materially impact net income.
 
The Utility incurs transportation costs under various agreements with interstate and Canadian third-party transportation service providers.  These providers transport
natural gas from the points at which the Utility takes delivery of natural gas (typically in Canada, the U.S. Rocky Mountains, and the southwestern United States) to
the points at which the Utility's natural gas transportation system begins.   These agreements are governed by FERC-approved tariffs that detail rates, rules, and terms
of service for the provision of natural gas transportation services to the Utility on interstate and Canadian pipelines.  The FERC approves the United States tariffs that
shippers, including the Utility, pay for pipeline service, and the applicable Canadia n tariffs are approved by the National Energy Board, a Canadian regulatory
agency.  The transportation costs the Utility incurs under these agreements are recovered through CPUC-approved rates as core natural gas procurement costs or as a
cost of electrici ty.
 
Costs Associated with Public Purpose and Customer Programs
 
The CPUC authorizes the Utility to recover the costs of various public purpose and other customer programs through the collection of rates from most Utility
customers.   These programs relate to energy efficiency, demand response, distributed generation, energy research and development, and other matters.   Additionally,
the CPUC has authorized the Utility to provide a discount rate for low-income customers, known as California Alternate Rates f or Energy (“CARE”), which is
subsidized by the Utility’s other customers.
 
Nuclear Decommissioning Costs
 
The Utility's nuclear power facilities consist of two units at Diablo Canyon and the retired facility at Humboldt Bay.  Nuclear decommissioning requir es the safe
removal of nuclear facilities from service and the reduction of residual radioactivity to a level that permits termination of the NRC license and release of the property
for unrestricted use.  Nuclear decommissioning costs are collected in adva nce through rates and are held in nuclear decommissioning trusts to be used for the eventual
decommissioning of each nuclear unit.  The Utility files an application with the CPUC every three years requesting approval of the Utility’s updated estimated deco
mmissioning costs and any rate change necessary to fully fund the nuclear decommissioning trusts to the levels needed to decommission the Utility’s nuclear plants.
 
On August 11, 2016, the Utility submitted an application to the CPUC to retire Diablo Canyo n at the expiration of its current operating licenses in 2024 and 2025 . 
(For more information, see “ Legislative and Regulatory Initiatives” in MD&A.)
 
Electric Utility Operations
 
The Utility generates electricity and provides electricity transmission and distribution services throughout its service territory in northern and central California to
residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural customers.  The Utility provides “bundled” services (i.e., electricity, transmission and distribution services) to
most customers in its service territory.  Customers also can obtain electricity from alternative providers such as municipalities or CCAs, as well as from self-
generation res ources, such as rooftop solar installations.
 
The Utility has continued to invest in its vision for a future electric grid which w ill allow customers to choose new, advanced energy supply technologies and services
to meet their needs consistent with safe, reliable and affordable electric service.  In addition, in December 2016, the CPUC issued a final decision establishing a three-
year EV program for the Utility to deploy up to 7,500 charging stations. (For more information, see “ Legislative and Regulatory Initiatives” in MD&A.)
 
13
 

 
Electricity Resources
 
The Utility is required to maintain generating capacity adequate to meet its customers’ demand for electricity (“load”), including peak demand and planning and
operating reserves, deliverable to the locations and at times as may be necessary to provide reliable electric service.  The Utility is required to dispatch, or schedule all
of the electricity resources within its portfolio in the most cost-effective way .
 
The following table shows the percentage of the Utility’s total deliveries of electricity to customers in 201 6 represented by each major electricity resource, and further
discussed below.
 
Total 201 6 Actual Electricity Generated and Procured – 68,441 GWh (1) :
 
 
 
 
Percent of B undled Retail Sales
Owned Generation Facilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nuclear
 
 
24.2
%    
 
 
 
 
Small Hydroelectric
 
 
1.3
%    
 
 
 
 
Large Hydroelectric
 
 
9.8
%    
 
 
 
 
Fossil fuel-fired
 
 
7.3
%    
 
 
 
 
Solar
 
 
0.5
%    
 
 
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
43.1
%  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Qualifying Facilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Renewable
 
 
2.6
%    
 
 
 
 
Non-Renewable
 
 
5.1
%    
 
 
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
7.7
%  
Irrigation Districts and Water Agencies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Large Hydroelectric
 
 
0.5
%    
 
 
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
0.5
%  
Other Third-Party Purchase Agreements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Renewable
 
 
28.4
%    
 
 
 
 
Large Hydroelectric
 
 
2.1
%    
 
 
 
 
Non-Renewable
 
 
4.8
%    
 
 
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
 
35.3
%  
Others, Net   (2)
 
 
 
 
 
13.4
%  
Total (3)
 
 
 
 
 
100
%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) This amount excludes electricity provided to direct access customers and CCAs who procure their own supplies of electricity.
(2) Mainly comprised of net   CAISO open market purchases.
(3) Non-renewable sources, including nuclear, large hydroelectric, and fossil fuel-fired are offset by transmission and distribution related system losses.
 
14
 

 
Renewable Energy Resources.   California law established an RPS that requires load-serving entities, such as the Utility, to gradually increase the amount of
renewable energy they deliver to their customers.  In October 2015, the California Governor signed SB 350, the Clean Energy and Pollution Reduction Act of 2015
into law.  SB 350 became effective January 1, 2016, and increases the amount of renewable energy that must be delivered by most load-serving entities, including the
Utility, to their customers fro m 33% of their total annual retail sales by the end of the 2017-2020 compliance period, to 50% of their total annual retail sales by the
end of the 2028- 2030 compliance period, and in each three-year compliance period thereafter, unless changed by legisla tive action.  SB 350 provides compliance
flexibility and waiver mechanisms, including increased flexibility to apply excess renewable energy procurement in one compliance period to future compliance
periods.  The Utility will incur additional costs to proc ure renewable energy to meet the new renewable energy targets, which the Utility expects will continue to be
recoverable from customers as “pass-through” costs.  The Utility also may be subject to penalties for failure to meet the higher targets.  The CPUC is required to open
a new rulemaking proceeding to adopt regulations to implement the higher renewable targets.   
 
As indicated below, the Utility’s application and joint proposal to retire Diablo Canyon include a voluntary increase in the Utility’s targ et for RPS-eligible resources
to 55%, effective in 2031 through 2045, as compared to the state’s goal of 50% renewables.   (For more information, see “ Legislative and Regulatory Initiatives” in
MD&A.)
 
Renewable generation resources, for purposes of the RPS requirements , include bioenergy such as biogas and biomass, certain hydroelectric facilities (30 MW or
less), wind, solar, and geothermal energy.  During 201 6 , 32.8 % of the Utility’s energy deliveries were from renewable energy sources, exceeding the annual RPS
target of 23.3%.  Approximately 2 8.4 % of the renewable energy delivered to the Utility’s customers was purchased from non-QF third parties.  Additional renewable
resources were provided by QFs ( 2 . 6 %), the Utility’s small hydroelectric facilities ( 1 . 3 %), and the Utility’s solar facilities (0. 5 %).
 
The total 201 6 renewable deliveries shown above were comprised of the following:
 
Type
 
GWh
 
Percent of Bundled Retail Sales
Biopower
 
2,958
 
4.3%
Geothermal
 
3,705
 
5.4%
Small Hydroelectric
 
1,800
 
2.6%
Solar
 
8,598
 
12.6%
Wind
 
5,419
 
7.9%
Total
 
22,480
 
32.8%
 
Energy Storage.  As required by California law, the CPUC has opened a proceeding to establish a multi-year energy storage procurement framework, including energy
storage procurement targets to be achieved by each load-serving entity under the CPUC jurisdiction, including the Utility.  Under the adopted energy storage
procurement framework, the Utility is required to procure 580 MW of qualifying storage capacity by 2020, with all energ y storage projects required to be operational
by the end of 2024.
 
The CPUC also adopted biennial interim storage targets for the Utility, beginning in 2014 and ending in 2020.  Under the adopted framework, the Utility is required to
conduct biennial compe titive RFOs to help meet its interim storage targets. 
 
The Utility conducted an RFO in 2014. The Utility’s 2014 energy storage target was 90 MW, some of which the Utility met through already existing projects, or
projects anticipated to resul t from other CPUC proceedings.  As a result of the 2014 RFO, 70 MW of transmission and distribution contracts have been approved by
the CPUC.  Contracts for 6MW were rejected by the CPUC, including a behind-the-meter project.  Additionally, contracts for 13 MW were withdrawn by the Utility. 
 
15
 

 
The Utility’s 2016 energy storage target is 120 MW.  On November 30, 2016, the Utility issued its 2016 RFO.  The Utility must submit all executed contracts from the
2016 RFO to the CPUC for approval by December 1, 2017 .  The Utility expects to increase the amount of storage it is attempting to procure in its 2016 RFO by the
shortfall from the 2014 target.
 
Owned Generation Facilities.  At December 31, 201 6 , the Utility owned the following generation facilities, all loca ted in California, listed by energy source and
further described below:
 
Generation Type
 County Location
 
Number of Units
 
Net Operating Capacity (MW)
Nuclear (1) :
  
 
 
 
 
  Diablo Canyon
 San Luis Obispo
 
2  
2,240
Hydroelectric (2) :
  
 
  
 
  Conventional
 16 counties in northern and central California
 
104  
2,684
  Helms pumped storage
 Fresno
 
3  
1,212
Fossil fuel-fired:
  
 
  
 
  Colusa Generating Station
 Colusa
 
1  
657
  Gateway Generating Station
 Contra Costa
 
1  
580
  Humboldt Bay Generating Station
 Humboldt
 
10  
163
Fuel Cell:
  
 
  
 
  CSU East Bay Fuel Cell
 Alameda
 
1  
1
  SF State Fuel Cell
 San Francisco
 
2  
2
Photovoltaic (3):
 Various
 
13  
152
Total
  
 
137  
7,691
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1 ) The Utility's Diablo Canyon power plant consists of two nuclear power reactor units, Units 1 and 2.  The NRC operating licenses expire in 2024 and 2025, respectively.  ( See “Diablo Canyon
Nuclear Power Plant ” in MD&A and Item 1A. Risk Factors.)
(2) The Utility’s hydroelectric syste m consists of 107 generating units at 67 powerhouses.  All of the Utility’s powerhouses are licensed by the FERC (except for two small powerhouses not subject
to FERC licensing requirements), with license terms between 30 and 50 years .
(3) The Utility’s large photovoltaic facilities are Five Points solar station (15 MW), Westside solar station (15 MW), Stroud solar station (20 MW), Huron solar station (20 MW), Cantua solar
station (20 MW), Giffen solar station (10 MW), Gates solar station (20 MW), West Ga tes solar station (10 MW) and Guernsey solar station (20 MW).  All of these facilities are located in
Fresno County, except for Guernsey solar station, which is located in Kings County.
 
Generation Resources from Third Parties. The Utility has entered into various agreements to purchase power and electric capacity, including agreements for
renewable energy resources, in accordance with its CPUC-approved procurement plan.  ( S ee “Ratemaking Mechanisms” above.)  For more information regarding the
Utility’s pow er purchase agreements, see Note 1 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
 
Electricity Transmission  
 
At December   31, 201 6 , the Utility owned approximately 18, 400 circuit miles of interconnected transmission lines operating at voltages ranging from 60 kV to 500
kV.  The Utility also operated 9 2 electric transmission substations with a capacity of approximately 64,600 M VA.  The Utility’s electric transmission system is
interconnected with electric power systems in the Western Electricity Coordinating Co uncil, which includes many western states, Alberta and British Columbia, and
parts of Mexico.
 
In 2013, the Utility, MidAmerican Transmission, LLC, and Citizens Energy Corporation were selected by the CAISO to jointly develop a new 230-kV transmission
line to address the growing power demand in the Fresno, Madera and Kings counties area.  The CAISO has stated that the 2022 in-service date for the 70-mile line has
been p ostponed, and has placed the project on hold .  The Utility has stopped all work on the project pending a decision from the CAISO that could defer or cancel
the project.  A decision by the CAISO is expected by March 2018.   In addition, as a part of the CAISO's 2016-2017 planning efforts, the CAISO co nducted a review
of a number of local area low voltage transmission projects in the Utility’s service territory that were predo minantly load forecast driven.  As a result of the review,
the CAISO found that a number of lower-voltage transmission projects were no lo nger required and  recommended cancelling or requiring further review in the 2017-
2018 planning cycle. 
 
On March 29, 2026 the Utility entered into an agreement with TransCanyon, LLC, a joint venture between subsidiaries of Berkshire Hathaway Energy and Pinnacle
West Capital Corporation, to jointly pursue competative transmission opportunities solicited by the CAISO.  The Utility and TransCanyon intend to jointly engage in
the development of future transmission infastructure and compete to develop, build, own and operate transmission projects approved by the CAISO.
 
16
 
 

Throughout 201 6 , the Utility upgraded several critical substations and re-conductored a number of transmission lines to improve maintenance and sy stem flexibility,
reliability and safety.  The Utility expects to undertake various additional transmission projects over the next several years to upgrade and expand the capacity of its
transmission system to secure access to renewable generation resource s and replace aging or obsolete equipment and improve system reliability.  The Utility also has
taken steps to improve the physical security of its transmission substations and equipment.
 
Electricity Distribution
 
The Utility's electricity distribution ne twork consists of a pproximately 142,000 circuit miles of distribution lines (of which approximately 20% are underground and
approximately 80% are overhead), 5 9 transmission switching substations, and 606 distribution substations, with a capacity of approxi mately 3 1 , 8 00 MVA.  The
Utility’s distribution network interconnects with its transmission system, primarily at switching and distribution substations, where equipment reduces the high-
voltage transmissio n voltages to lower voltages, ranging from 44 kV to 2.4 kV, suitable for distribution to the Utility’s customers.
 
These distribution substations serve as the central hubs for the Utility’s electric distribution network.  Emanating from each substation are primary and secondary
distribution lines connected to local transformers and switching equipment that link distribution lines and provide delivery to end-users.  In some cases, the Utility
sells electricity from its distribution facilities to entities, such as municipal and other utilities, that resell the electricity.  In 2016 the Utility commenced operations in a
new electric distribution control center facilit y in Concord, California ; along with the existing distribution control centers in Rocklin and Fresno, California, t hese
control centers form a key part of the Utility’s efforts to create a smarter, more resilient grid.
 
In 201 6 , the Utility continued to deploy its Fault Location, Isolation, and Service Restoration circuit technology which involves the rapid operation of s mart s
witches to reduce the duration of customer outages.   Another 8 9 circuits were outfitted with this equipment, bringing the total deployment to 7 89 of the Utility’s
3,200 distribution circuits.   The Utility pl ans to continue performing work to improve the reliability and safety of its electricity distribution operations in 2017 .  
 
 
17
 

 
Electricity Operating Statistics
 
The following table shows certain of the Utility’s operating statistics from 201 4 to 201 6 for e lectricity sold or delivered, including the classification of revenues by
type of service.   No single customer of the Utility accounted for 10% or more of consolidated revenues for electricity sold in 201 6 , 201 5 and 201 4 .
 
 
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
2014
Customers (average for the year)
 
 
5,349,691
 
 
5,311,178
 
 
5,276,025
Deliveries (in GWh) (1)  
 
 
83,017
 
 
85,860
 
 
86,303
Revenues (in millions):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Residential
 
$
5,409
 
$
5,032
 
$
4,784
      Commercial
 
 
5,396
 
 
5,278
 
 
5,141
      Industrial
 
 
1,525
 
 
1,555
 
 
1,543
      Agricultural
 
 
1,226
 
 
1,233
 
 
1,172
      Public street and highway lighting
 
 
80
 
 
83
 
 
79
      Other (2)
 
 
(68)
 
 
(84)
 
 
(172)
            Subtotal
 
 
13,568
 
 
13,097
 
 
12,547
Regulatory balancing accounts (3)
 
 
297
 
 
560
 
 
1,109
Total operating revenues
 
$
13,865
 
$
13,657
 
$
13,656
Selected Statistics:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Average annual residential usage (kWh)
 
 
6,115
 
 
6,294
 
 
6,458
Average billed revenues per kWh:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Residential
 
$
0.1887
 
$
0.1719
 
$
0.1603
      Commercial
 
 
0.1716
 
 
0.1640
 
 
0.1585
      Industrial
 
 
0.0990
 
 
0.0973
 
 
0.0998
      Agricultural
 
 
0.1814
 
 
0.1610
 
 
0.1516
Net plant investment per customer
 
$
7,195
 
$
6,660
 
$
6,339
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) These amounts include electricity provided to direct access customers and CCAs who procure their own supplies of electricity.
(2) This activity is primarily related to a remittance of revenue to the Department of Water Resources (“DWR”) (the Utility acts as a billing and collection agent on behalf of the DWR), par tially
offset by other miscellaneous revenue items.
(3) These amounts represent revenues authorized to be billed. 
 
Natural Gas Utility Operations  
 
The Utility provides natural gas transportation services to “core” customers (i.e., small commercial and residential customers) and to “non-core” customers (i.e.,
industrial, large commercial, and natural gas-fired electric generation facilities) that are connected to the Utility’s gas system in its service territory.   Core customers
can purchase natural gas procurement service (i.e. , natural gas supply) from either the Utility or non-utility third-party gas procurement service providers (referred to
as core transport agents).   When core customers purchase gas supply from a core transport agent, the Utility c ontinues to provide gas delivery, metering and billing
services to customers.     When the Utility provides both transportation and procurement services, the Utility refers to the combined service as “bundled” natural gas
service.   Currently, more th an 90% o f core customers, representing n early 78 % of the annual core market demand, receive bundled natural gas service from the
Utility.
 
The Utility does not provide procurement service to non-core customers, who must purchase their gas supplies from third-party suppliers.  The Utility offers backbone
gas transmission, gas delivery (local transmission and distribution), and gas storage services as separate and distinct services to its non-core customers.   Access to the
Utility's backbone gas transmission system is available for all natural gas marketers and shippers, as well as non-core customers.   The Utility also delivers gas to off-
system customers ( i.e ., outside of the Utility’s service territory) and to third-party natural gas storage customers.
 
18
 

 
Natural Gas Supplies
 
The Utility can receive natural gas from all the major natural gas basins in western North America, including basins in western Canada, the Rocky Mountains, and the
southwestern United States.  The Utility can also receive natural gas from fields in California.  The Utility purchases natural gas to serve its core customers directly
from producers and marketers in both Canada and the United States.  The contract lengths and natural gas sources of the Utility’s portfolio of natural gas purchase
cont racts have fluctuated generally based on market conditions.  During 201 6 , the Utility purchased appr oximately 307,100 MMcf o f natural gas (net of the sale of
excess supply of gas).  Substantially all of this natural gas was purch ased under contracts with a term of one year or less.  The Utility’s largest individual supplier
represented approximately 14% of the total natural gas volume the Utility purchased during 201 6 .
 
Natural Gas System Assets
 
The Utility owns and operates an integrated natural gas transmission, storage, and distribution system that includes most of northern and central California.  At
December 31, 201 6 , the Utility’s natural gas system consisted of approximately 42, 800 miles of dis tribution pipelines, over 6, 7 00 miles of backbone and local
transmission pipelines, and various storage facilities.  The Utility owns and operates eight natural gas compressor stations on its backbone transmission system and
one small station on its local transmission system that are used to move gas through the Utility’s pipelines.  The Utility’s backbone transmission system, composed
primarily of Lines 300, 400, and 401, is used to transport gas from the Utility’s interconnection with interstate pipelines , other local distribution companies, and
California gas fields to the Utility’s local transmission and distribution systems.
 
The Utility has firm transportation agreements for delivery of natural gas from western Canada to the United States-Canada border with TransCanada NOVA Gas
Transmission,   Ltd. and TransCanada Foothills Pipe Lines   Ltd., B.C. System.  These companies’ pipeline systems connect at the border to the pipeline system
owned by Gas Transmission Northwest, LLC, which provides natural gas trans portation services to a point of interconnection with the Utility’s natural gas
transportation system on the Oregon-California border near Malin, Oregon.  The Utility also has firm transportation agreements with Ruby Pipeline, LLC to transport
natural gas from the U.S . Rocky Mountains to the interconnection point with the Utility’s natural gas transportation system in the area of Malin, O regon, at the
California border.  Similarly, the Utility has firm transportation agreements with Transwestern Pipeline Co mpany, LLC and El Paso Natural Ga s Company to
transport natural gas from supply points in the Southwestern United States to interconnection points with the Utility's natural gas transportation system in the area of
California near Topock, Arizona.  The Uti lity also has a transportation agreement with Kern River Gas Transmission Company to transport gas from the U.S. Rocky
Mountains to the interconnection point with the Utility’s natural gas system in the area of Daggett, California.  ( For more information r egarding the Utility’s natural
gas transportation agreements, see Note 1 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. )
 
The Utility owns and operates three underground natural gas storage fields and has a 25% interest in a fourth stora ge field, all of which are connected to the Utility’s
transmission system.   The Utility owns and operates compressors and other facilities at these storage fields that are used to inject gas into the fields for storage and
later withdrawal.   In addition, f our independent storage operators are interconnected to the Utility's northern California transmission system.
 
As of December 31, 2016 the Utility had installed 268 automatic and remote control shut-off valves on its gas transmission system, as specified in the eleventh of
twelve safety recommendations made by the NTSB following its investigation of the San Bruno accident.   The NTSB closed that recommendation in 2015.   The final
safety recommendation, considered open and acceptable by the NTSB, involves en suring that all high consequence pipeline mileage in the Utility’s gas transmission
system has been hydrostatically tested.   As of December 31, 2016, the Utility has hydrostatically tested about 840 miles and completed the majority of this safety
recommend ation.   The Utility currently plans to complete the NTSB recommendation by 2022 for the remaining approximately 28 aggregate pipeline miles
(involving hundreds of primarily short pipeline segments that include tie-in pieces, fittings or smaller diameter of f-takes from the larger transmission pipelines).
 
In addition, in 2016, the Utility inspected 260 miles of transmission pipeline using in-line inspection tools and upgraded an additional 107 miles of transmission
pipeline to allow for the use in-line inspe ction tools, replaced 127 miles of distribution main, and completed the installation of over 25,000 line makers to more easily
identify the locations of gas pipelines.
 
19
 

 
Natural Gas Operating Statistics
 
The following table shows the Utility's operating st atistics from 201 4 through 201 6 (excluding subsidiaries) for natural gas, including the classification of revenues
by type of service.   No single customer of the Utility accounted for 10% or more of consolidated revenues for bundled gas sales in 201 6 , 201 5 and 201 4 .
 
 
 
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
2014
Customers (average for the year)
 
 
4,442,379
 
 
4,415,332
 
 
4,394,283
Gas purchased (MMcf)
 
 
208,260
 
 
209,194
 
 
202,215
Average price of natural gas purchased
 
$
1.83
 
$
2.11
 
$
4.09
Bundled gas sales (MMcf):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Residential
 
 
149,483
 
 
144,885
 
 
143,514
  Commercial
 
 
46,507
 
 
43,888
 
 
42,080
Total Bundled Gas Sales
 
 
195,990
 
 
188,773
 
 
185,594
Revenues (in millions):
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bundled gas sales:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Residential
 
$
1,968
 
$
1,816
 
$
1,683
  Commercial
 
 
439
 
 
403
 
 
419
  Other
 
 
149
 
 
125
 
 
51
Bundled gas revenues
 
 
2,556
 
 
2,344
 
 
2,153
Transportation service only revenue
 
 
800
 
 
649
 
 
662
            Subtotal
 
 
3,356
 
 
2,993
 
 
2,815
  Regulatory balancing accounts
 
 
446
 
 
183
 
 
617
Total operating revenues
 
$
3,802
 
$
3,176
 
$
3,432
Selected Statistics:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Average annual residential usage (Mcf)
 
 
36
 
 
35
 
 
34
Average billed bundled gas sales revenues per Mcf:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Residential
 
$
13.10
 
$
12.53
 
$
11.72
  Commercial
 
 
9.45
 
 
9.18
 
 
9.96
Net plant investment per customer
 
$
2,808
 
$
2,573
 
$
2,468
 
Competition
 
Competition in the Electricity Industry
 
California law allows qualifying non-residential electric customers of investor-owned electric utilities to purchase electricity from energy service providers rather than
from the utilities up to certain annual and overall GWh limits that have been specified for each utility.   T his arrangement is known as “direct access.”     In addition,
California law permits cities, counties, and certain other public agencies th at have qualified to become a CCA to generate and/or purchase electricity for their local
residents and businesses.   By law, a CCA can procure electricity for all of its residents and businesses which do not affirmatively elect to continue to receive elect
ricity from a utility.
 
The Utility continues to provide transmission, distribution, metering, and billing services to direct access customers, although these customers can choose to obtain
metering and billing services from their energy service provider. The CCA customers continue to obtain transmission, distribution, metering, and billing services from
the Utility.  In addition to collecting charges for transmission, distribution, metering, and billing services that it provides, the Utility is able to co llect charges intended
to recover the generation-related costs that the Utility incurred on behalf of direct access and CCA customers while they were the Utility’s customers. The Utility
remains the electricity provider of last r esort for these customers.
 
In some circumstances, governmental entities such as cities and irrigation districts, which have authority under the state constitution or state statute to provide retail
electric service, may seek to acquire the Ut ility’s distribution facilities, general ly through eminent domain.   These same entities may, and sometimes do, construct
duplicate distribution facilities to serve existing or new Utility customers.
 
20
 

 
The Utility is also impacted by the increasing viability of distributed generation and energy st orage.  The levels of self-generation of electricity by customers
(primarily solar installations) and the use of customer net energy metering, which allows self-generating customers to receive bill credits at the full retail rate, are
increasing.   These fa ctors result in a shift of cost responsibility for grid and related services to other customers of the Utility.  The Utility also competes for the
opportunity to develop and construct certain types of electric transmission facilities within, or interconnec ted to, its service territory through a competitive bidding
process managed by the CAISO.
 
Competition in the Natural Gas Industry
 
The Utility competes with other natural gas pipeline companies for customers transporting natural gas into the southern Cali fornia market on the basis of
transportation rates, access to competitively priced supplies of natural gas, and the quality and reliability of transportation services.  The Utility also competes for
storage services with other third-party storage providers , primarily in northern California.
 
Environmental Regulation
 
The Utility’s operations are subject to extensive federal, state and local laws and requirements relating to the protection of the environment and the safety and health
of the Utility's personn el and the public.  These laws and requirements relate to a broad range of activities, including the remediation of hazardous and radioactive
substances; the discharge of pollutants into the air, water, and soil; the re porting and reduction of CO ­ 2 and other GHG emissions; the transportation, handling,
storage and disposal of spent nuclear fuel; and the environmental impacts of land use, including endangered species and habitat protection.   The penalties for violation
of these laws and requirements can be severe and may include significant fines, damages, and criminal or civil sanctions.  These laws and requirements also may
require the Utility, under certain circumstances, to interrupt or curtail operations.  (See Item 1A. Risk Factors.)  Generally, the U tility recovers most of the costs of
complying with environmental laws and regulations in the Utility's rates, subject to reasonableness review.  Environmental costs associated with the clean-up of most
sites that contain hazardous substances are subject t o a ratemaking mechanism described in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 .
 
Hazardous Waste Compliance and Remediation
 
The Utility's facilities are subject to various regulations adopted by the U.S.  Environmental Protection Agency, including the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 as amended.  The Utility is also subject to the regulations adopted by
other federal agenc ies respo nsible for implementing federal environmental laws.  The Utility also must comply with environmental laws and regulations adopted by
the State of California and various state and local agencies.  These federal and state laws impose strict liability for the release of a hazardous substance on the (1)
owner or operator of the site where the release occurred, (2) on companies that disposed of, or arranged for the disposal of, the hazardous substances, and (3) in some
cases, their corporate successors.  Under t he Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act , these persons (known as “potentially
responsible parties”) may be jointly and severally liable for the costs of cleaning up the hazardous substances, monitoring and paying for the har m caused to natural
resources, and paying for the costs of health studies.
 
The Utility has a comprehensive program in place to comply with these federal, state, and local laws and regulations.  Under federal and California laws, the Utility
may be respons ible for remediation of hazardous substances even if it did not deposit those substances on the site.  The Utility’s remediation activities are overseen
by the California Department of Toxic Substances Control, several California regional water quality con trol boards, and various other federal, state, and local
agencies.  The Utility has incurred significant environmental remediation liabilities associated with former manufactured gas plant sites, power plant sites, gas
gathering sites, sites where natural gas compressor stations are located, and sites used by the Utility for the storage, recycling, or disposal of potentially hazardous
substances.  Groundwater at the Utility’s Hinkley and Topock natural gas compressor stations contains hexavalent chromium as a result of the Utility’s past operating
practices.  The Utility is responsible for remediating this groundwater contamination and for abating the effects of the contamination on the environment.
 
For more information about environmental remediation liabi lities, see Note 1 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
 
21
 

 
Air Quality and Climate Change
 
The Utility's electricity generation plants, natural gas pipeline operations, fleet, and fuel storage tanks are subject to numerous air p ollution control laws, including the
federal Clean Air Act, as well as state and local statutes.  These laws and regulations cover, among other pollutants, those contributing to the formation of ground-
level ozone, CO 2 , sulfur dioxide (SO 2 ), mono-nitrogen oxide (NO x ), particulate matter, and other GHG emissions.
 
In December 2009, the EPA concluded that GHG emissions contribute to climate change and issued a finding that GHG emissions cause or contribute to air pollution
that endangers public health and wel fare.   In May 2014, the U.S. Global Change Research Program (a confederation of the research arms of thirteen federal
departments and agencies) released its third National Climate Assessment, which stated that the global climate is changing and that impact s related to climate change
are already evident in many sectors and are expected to become increasingly disruptive across the nation throughout this century and beyond.
 
Federal Regulation .  At the federal level, the EPA is charged with implementation and enforcement of the Clean Air Act.  Although there have been several
legislative attempts to address climate change through imposition of nationwide regulatory limits on GHG emissions, comprehensive federal legislation has not yet
been enacted.  In the abse nce of federal legislative action, the EPA has used its existing authority under the Clean Air Act to address GHG emissions.
 
In August 2015, the EPA published final regulations under section 111(b) of the Clean Air Act to control CO 2 emissions from new fo ssil fuel-fired power plants. 
While these regulations do not affect the Utility’s existing power plants, the regulations impose emission limitations on fossil fuel-fired power plants constructed after
January 8, 2014 and will affect the design, constructi on, operation and cost of such power plants. 
 
In August 2015 , the EPA also published final regulations under section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act to control CO 2 emissions from existing fossil fuel-fired power
plants .  These regulations are designed to red uce power plant CO 2 em issions on a national basis by as much as 32% by 2030, compared with 2005 levels.  States
were required to submit final plans to comply with the se regulations by September 2016, but were permitted to request an extension to file such plans until September
2018. It is uncertain whether and how these federal regulations will ultimately impact California, since existing state regulation currently requires, among other things,
the gradual reduction of state-wide GHG emissions to 40% below 1990 levels by 20 3 0.   Following publication of the EPA’s regulations , in October 2015 West
Virginia and several other states and parties challenged the EPA’s section 111(d) regulations in the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circ
uit and petitioned the Court to stay the regulations pending review of the appeal on the merits.  The D.C. Circuit denied the request for stay but in February 2016, the
United States Supreme Court granted a stay of the section 111(d) regulations pending re view of the appeal by the D.C. Circuit.  The Supreme Court’s decision may
affect the nature, extent and timing of implementat ion of these regulations.  As described below, the Utility expects all costs and revenues associated with the state-
wide, comprehen sive cap-and-trade program to be passed through to customers.
 
With the change in federal a dministration from President Barack Obama to President Donald Trump, there is significant uncertainty with regard to what further
actions may occur regarding climate change at the federal level.  The new a dministration has indicated that it intends to revoke the Clean Power Plan regulations and
possibly withdraw from international efforts to combat climate change.  Upon taking office, President Trump issued an executi ve order to freeze all regulations issued
in the 60 days preceding his inauguration and directed the EPA and the White House to remove climate change- related materials and web pages, pending further
review.  It is assumed that the new a dministration also w ill take action to suspend all climate related regulatory and funding activities.  In light of the potential policy
reversal at the federal level, the State of California has indicated that it intends to continue and enhance its leadership on climate chang e nationally and globally. 
 
22
 

 
State Regulation.  California ’s AB 32, the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, provides for the gradual reduction of state-wide GHG emissions to 1990 levels by
2020.  The CARB has approved various regulations to achieve the 2020 target , including GHG emissions reporting and a state-wide, comprehensive cap-and-trade
program that sets gradually declining limits (or “caps”) on the amount of GHGs that may be emitted by major GHG emission sources within different sectors of the ec
onomy.  The cap - and-trade program’s first compliance period, which began on January 1, 2013, applied to the electricity generation and large industrial sectors.  The
next compliance period, which began on January 1, 2015, expanded to include the natural ga s and transportation sectors, effectively covering all the economy’s major
sectors until 2020.  The Utility’s compliance obligation as a natural gas supplier applies to the GHG emissions attributable to the combustion of natural gas delivered
to the Utilit y’s customers other than natural gas delivery customers that are separately regulated as covered entities and have their own compliance obligation. 
During each year of the program, the CARB issues emission allowances (i.e., the rights to emit GHGs) equal to the amount of GHG emissions allowed for that year. 
Emitters can obtain allowances from the CARB at quarterly auctions or from third parties or exchanges.  Emitters may also satisfy a portion of their compliance
obligation through the purchase of offset credits; e.g., credits for GHG reductions achieved by third parties (such as landowners, livestock owners, and farmers) that
occur outside of the emitters’ facilities through CARB-qualified offset projects such as refo restation or biomass projects.  Addit ionally, Senate Bill 32 (2016)
requires that CARB ensure a 40% reduction in greenhouse gases b y 2030 compared to 1990 levels.  CARB is currently considering regulatory amendments to the
cap-and-trade program to extend the program’s authority to 2030.   The Utility expects all costs and revenues associated with the GHG cap-and-trade program to b e
passed through to customers.  The California RPS program that requires the utilities to gradually increase the amount of renewable energy delivered to their customer
s is also expected to help reduce GHG emissions in California.
 
Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies. During 201 6 , the Utility continued its programs to develop strategies to mitigate the impact of the Utility’s
operations (including custom er energy usage) on the environment and to plan for the actions that it will need to take to adapt to the likely impacts of climate change
on the Utility’s future operations , including forming an officer-level coordinating committee to govern and oversee t he Utility’s activities .  The Utility regularly
reviews the most relevant scientific literature on climate change such as sea level rise, temperature changes, rainfall and runoff patterns, and wildfire risk, to help the
Utility identify and evaluate climat e change-related risks and develop the necessary adaptation strategies.  The Utility maintains emergency response plans and
procedures to address a range of near-term risks, including extreme storms, heat waves and wildfires and uses its risk-assessment pr ocess to prioritize infrastructure
investments for longer-term risks associated with climate change. The Utility also engages with leaders from business, government, academia, and non-profit
organizations to share information and plan for the future.
 
Wit h respect to electric operations, climate scientists project that, sometime in the next several decades, climate change will lead to increased electricity demand due
to more extreme, persistent, and frequent hot weather.  The Utility believes its str ategie s to reduce GHG emissions through energy efficiency and demand response
programs, infrastructure improvements, and the use of rene wable energy and energy storage are effective strategies for a dapting to the expected changes in demand
for electricity.  The Utility is making substantial investments to build a more modern and resilient system that can better withstand extreme weather and related
emergencies.   The Utility’s vegetation management activities also reduce the risk of wildfire impacts on electric an d gas facilities.  Over the long-term, the Utility
also faces the risk of higher flooding and inundation potential at coastal and low elevation facilities due to sea level rise combined with high tides, storm runoff and
storm surges.
 
Notwithstanding the c urrent high snowpack, c limate scientists predict that climate change will result in varying temperatures and levels of precipitation in the
Utility’s service territory .  This could, in turn, affect the Utility’s hydroelectric generation.  To plan for this potential change, the Utility is engaging with state and
local stakeholders and is also adopting strategies such as maintaining higher winter carryover reservoir storage levels, reducing discretionary reservoir water releases,
and collaborating on research and new modeling tools.  
 
With respect to natural gas operations, both safety-related pipeline strength testing and normal pipeline maintenance and operations release the GHG methane into the
atmosphere.  The Utility has taken steps to reduce the release of methane by implementing techniques including drafting and cross-compression, which reduce the
pressure and volume of natural gas within pipelines prior to venting.   In addition, the Utility continues to achieve reductions in methane emissions by implem enting
improvements in leak detection and repair, upgrades at metering and regulating stations, and maintenance and replacement of other pipeline materials.
 
23
 

 
Emissions Data
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility track and report their annual environmental perf ormance results across a broad spectrum of areas.  The Utility reports its GHG
emissions to the CARB and the EPA on a mandatory basis. On a voluntary basis, the Utility reports a more comprehensive emissions inventory to The Climate
Registry, a non-pro fit organization.  The Utility’s third-party verified voluntary GHG inventory reported to The Climate Registry for 201 5 totaled more than 54 milli
on metric tonnes of CO ­ 2 equivalent , two-thirds of which came from customer natural gas use.  The following table shows the 201 5 GHG emissions data the Utility
reported to the CARB under AB 32 .   PG&E Corporation and the Utility also publish additional GHG emissions data in their annual Corporate Responsibility and
Sustainability Report.
 
Source
 
Amount (metric tonnes CO 2 equivalent)
Fossil Fuel-Fired Plants (1)
 
2,875,176
Natural Gas Compressor Stations and Storage Facilities (2)
 
362,472
Distribution Fugitive Natural Gas Emissions
 
676,458
Customer Natural Gas Use  (3)
 
43,022,557
 
 
 
(1) Includes nitrous oxide and methane emissions from the Utility’s generating stations.
(2) Includ ing, but not limited to, compressor stations and storage facilities emitting more than 25,000 metric tonnes of CO 2 equivalent annually.
( 3) Includes emissions from the combustion of natural gas delivered to all entities on the Utility’s distribution system, with the exception of gas delivered to other natural gas local distribution
companies. This figure does not represent the Utility’s compliance obligation under AB 32, which will be equivalent to the above reported value less the fuel that is delivered to covered entities ,
as calculated by the CARB .
 
The following table shows the Utility’s third-party-verified CO 2 emissions rate associated with the electricity delivered to customers in 201 5 as compared to the
national average for electric utilities:
 
 
 
Amount (pounds of CO 2 per MWh)
U.S. Average (1)
 
1,143
Pacific Gas and Electric Company (2)
 
405
 
 
 
(1) Source: EPA eGRID.
(2) Since the Utility purchases a portion of its electricity from the wholesale market, the Utility is not able to track some of its delivered electricity back to a specific generator.  Therefore, there is
some unavoidable uncertainty in the Utility’s emissions rate.
 
Air Emissions Data for Utility-Owned Generation
 
In addition to GHG emissions data provided above, the table below sets forth information about the air emissions from the Utility’s owned generation facilities.  The
Utility’s owned generation (primarily nuclear and hydroelectric facilities) c omprised approximately 40 % of the Utility’s delivered electricity in 201 5 .  PG&E
Corporation and the Utility also publish air emissions data in their annual Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Report.
 
 
 
2015
 
2014
Total NOx Emissions (tons)                                                                                                              
 
160  
141
NOx Emissions Rate (pounds/MWh)                                                                                             
 
0.01  
0.01
Total SO 2 Emissions (tons)
 
17  
14
SO 2 Emissions Rate (pounds/MWh)
 
0.0011  
0.0010
 
Water Quality
 
On May 19, 2014, the EPA issued final regulations to implement the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act that require cooling water intake structures at
electric power plants, such as the nuclear generation facilities at Diablo Canyon, to reflect the best technology available to minimize adverse environmental impacts. 
Various industry and environmental groups have challenged the federal regulations in proceedings pending in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. 
California’s once-through cooling policy d iscussed below is considered to be at least as stringent as the new federal regulations.  Therefore, California’s
implementation process for the state policy will likely continue without any significant change.
 
24
 

 
At the state level, in 2010 , the California Water Board adopted a policy on once-through cooling that generally requires the installation of cooling towers or other
significant measures to reduce the impact on marine life from existing power generation facilities in California by at least 85%.  The policy also provided for an
alternative compliance approach for nuclear plants if certain criteria were met.  As required by the policy , the California Water Board appointed a committee to
evaluate the feasibility and cost of using alternat ive technologies to achieve compliance at Diablo Canyon.  The committee’s consultant submitted its final report to
the California Water Board in September 2014 .  The report addressed feasibility, costs and timeframes to install alternative technologies at Diablo Canyon, such as
cooling towers.  The Utility’s Diablo Canyon operations must be in compliance with the California Water Board’s policy by December 31, 2024 .
 
On June 20, 2016, the Utility entered into a joint proposal with certain parties to retire Diablo Canyon at the expiration of its current operating licenses in 2024 and
2025 , and replace it with a GHG-free portfolio of energy efficiency, renewables and energy storage.  As a result of the planned retirement, the California Water Board
will no lon ger need to address alternative compliance measures for Diablo Canyon.  Beginning in 2017, as required under the p olicy, the Utility will pay an annual
interim mitigation fee until operations cease in 2024 and 2025 .  
 
Additionally, t he Utility expects tha t its decision to retire Diablo Canyon will affect the terms of a final settlement agreement between the Utility, the Central Coast
Water Board and the California Attorney General’s Office regarding the thermal component of the plant’s once-through cooling discharge.  (For more information,
see “Diablo Canyon Power Plant” in Item 3. Legal Proceedings below.)
 
Nuclear Fuel Disposal
 
Under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, the DOE and electric utilities with commercial nuclear power plants were authorized to enter into contracts under which
the DOE would be required to dispose of the utilities’ spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste by January 1998, in exchange for fees paid by the utilities’
customers.  The DOE has been unable to meet its con tractual obligation with the Utility to dispose of nuclear waste from the Utility’s two nuclear generating units at
Diablo Canyon and the retired nuclear facility at Humboldt Bay.  As a result, the Utility constructed interim dry cask storage facilities to store its spent fuel onsite at
Diablo Canyon and at Humboldt Bay until the DOE fulfills its contractual obligation to take possession of the spent fuel.  The Utility and other nuclear power plant
owners sued the DOE to recover the costs that they incurred to construct interim storage facilities for spent nuclear fuel.
 
In September 2012, the U.S. Department of Justice (“DOJ”) and the Utility executed a settlement agreement that awarded the Utility $266 million for spent fuel
storage costs incurred through December 31, 2010.  The settlement agreement also provided a claims process by which the Utility submits annual requests for
reimbursement of its ongoing spent fuel storage costs.   Through 2016, the Ut ility has been awarded an additional $99 million through these annual submissions ,
including $28 million for costs incurred between June 1, 2014 and May 31, 2015.   The claim for the period June 1, 2015 through May 31, 2016 is currently under
review by the DOE.   These proceeds are being refunded to customers through rates.   The settlement agreemen t, as amended, does not address costs incurred for
spent fuel storage beyond 2016; an extension of the agreement for costs through 2019 is pending DOJ approval. Costs beyond 2016 could be subject to future
litigation.   Considerable uncertainty continues to exist regarding when and whether the DOE will meet its contractual obligation to the Utility and other nuclear power
plant owners to dispose of spent fuel.
25
 

 
ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS
 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results can be affected by ma ny factors, including estimates and assumptions used in the critical accounting policies
described in MD&A, that can cause their actual financial results to differ materially from historical results or from anticipated future financial results.  The follow ing
discussion of key risk factors should be considered in evaluating an investment in PG&E Corporation and the Utility and should be read in conjunction with MD&A
and the consolidated financial statements and related notes in Part II, Item 8, “Financial S tatements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.  Any of these
factors, in whole or in part, could materially affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s business, results of operations, financial condition, and stock price.
 
Risks Related to the Outc ome of Enforcement Matters, Investigations, and Regulatory Proceedings
 
PG&E Corporation ’s and the Utility ’s financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows could be materially affected by the ultimate amount of third-
party liability that the Utility incurs in connection with the Butte fire.
 
In September 2015, a wildfire (known as the “Butte fire”) ignited and spread in Amador and Calaveras Counties in Northern California.   On April 28, 2016, Cal Fire
released its report of the investigation o f the origin and cause of the wildfire.   According to Cal Fire’s report, the fire burned 70,868 acres, resulted in two fatalities,
destroyed 549 homes, 368 outbuildings and four commercial properties, and damaged 44 structures.   Cal Fire’s report concluded that the wildfire was caused when a
Gray Pine tree contacted the Utility’s electric line which ignited portions of the tree, and determined that the failure by the Utility and/or its vegetation management
contractors, ACRT Inc. and Trees, Inc., to identif y certain potential hazards during its vegetation management program ultimately led to the failure of the tree.   In a
press release also issued on April 28, 2016, Cal Fire indicated that it will seek to recover firefighting costs in excess of $90 million f rom the Utility.
 
On May 23, 2016, individual plaintiffs filed a master complaint against the Utility and its two vegetation management contractors in the Superior Court of California
for Sacramento County.   Subrogation insurers also filed a separate maste r complaint on the same date.   The California Judicial Council had previously authorized
the coordination of all cases in Sacramento County.   As of December 31, 2016, complaints have been filed against the Utility and its two vegetation management
contract ors in the Superior Court of California in the Counties of Calaveras, San Francisco, Sacramento, and Amador involving approximately 1,950 individual
plaintiffs representing approximately 950 households and their insurance companies.   These complaints are p art of or are in the process of being added to the two
master complaints.   Plaintiffs seek to recover damages and other costs, principally based on inverse condemnation and negligence theories of liability.   The number
of individual complaints and plaintif fs may increase in the future.  
 
In connection with this matter, the Utility may be liable for property damages, interest, and attorneys’ fees without having been found negligent, through the theory of
inverse condemnation.  In addition, the Utility may b e liable for fire suppression costs, personal injury damages, and other damages if the Utility were found to have
been negligent.   The Utility believes that it is probable that it will incur a loss of at least $750 million for all pote ntial damages describ ed above. The Utility has
liability insurance from various insurers, which provides coverage for third-party liability attributable to the Butte fire in an aggregate amount of approximately $900
million.  Such insurance coverage is subject to the terms and limitations of the available policies and may not be sufficient to cover the Utility’s u ltimate liability.
 
The process for estimating costs associated with claims relating to the Butte fire requires management to exercise significant judgment based on a number of
assumptions and subjective factors.   As more information becomes known, includ ing additional discovery from the plaintiffs and results from the ongoing mediation
and settlement process, management estimates and assumptions regarding the financial impact of the Butte fire may change.   A change in management’s estimates or
assumptions could result in an adjustment that could have a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition and the results of operations
during the period such change occurred.  
 
If the Utility records losses in connection with claims re lating to the Butte fire that materially exceed the amount the Utility accrued for these liabilities, PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows could be materially affected in the reporting periods durin g which additional
charges are recorded, depending on whether the Utility is able to record or collect insurance recoveries in amounts sufficient to offset such additional accruals. (For
more information, see “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Item 7. MD&A and in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
26
 

 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s future financial results may be materially affected by the outcomes of the CPUC’s investigative enforcement proceedings
against the Utility, other known enforcement matters, and other ongoing state and federal investigation s and requests for information.  The Utility also could
incur material costs and fines in connection with future investigations, citations, audits, or enforcement a ctions.
 
The Utility could incur material charges, including fines and other penalties, in connection with a potential settlement or litigated  outcome of the CPUC’s
investigation of the Utility’s compliance with the CPUC’s rules re garding ex parte communications .  While on October 14, 2016, the Cities of San Bruno and San
Carlos, ORA, the SED, TURN, and the Utility submitted a status report to the CPUC which proposed an update to the framework for resolving the proceeding and
included a total of 164 com munications in the scope of the proceeding, the Utility expects that the other parties may argue that the number of violations exceeds the
164 communications referenced in the status report either because a single communication may have violated more than one rule or because they believe some of the
material provided during discovery constitutes impermissible ex parte communications.  The Utility expects to contest many of these assertions.  If the matter does not
settle, the CPUC will determine which commu nications included within the scope of the proceeding were in violation of its rules.  The CPUC will also determine
whether to impose penalties or other remedies, as a result of a potential settlement or otherwise.  The CPUC can impose fines up to $50,000 for each violation, and up
to $50,000 per day if the CPUC determines that the violation was continuing.  The CPUC has wide discretion to determine the amount of penalties based on the
totality of the circumstances, including such factors as how many days e ach violation continued; the gravity of the violations; the type of harm caused by the
violations and the number of persons affected; and the good faith of the entity charged in attempting to achieve compliance, after notification of a violation.  The
CPUC is also required to consider the appropriateness of the amount of the penalty to the size of the entity charged.  The CPUC has historically exercised broad
discretion in determining whether violations are continuing and the amount of penalties to be impos ed.  While it is uncertain how the CPUC will calculate the number
of violations or the penalty for any violations, such fines or penalties could be significant and materially affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s liquidity and
results of operations. (See the discussion under the heading “Regulatory Matters” in MD&A.)
 
The Utility also is a target of a number of investigations and government requests for information.  In 2014, both the U.S. Attorney's Office in San Francisco and the
California Attorne y General's office opened investigations into matters related to allegedly improper communication between the Utility and CPUC personnel.   In
addition, in October 2016, the Utility received a grand jury subpoena and letter from the U.S. Attorney for the No rthern District of California advising that the Utility
is a target of a federal investigation regarding possible criminal violations of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and conspiracy to violate the act.  The Utility was also
contacted by certain other federa l agencies with requests for information.  While the Utility believes that these requests for information are routine, their outcome is
uncertain.  The Utility also is unable to predict the outcome of pending investigations, including whether any charges wil l be brought against the Utility.
 
If these investigations or requests for information result in enforcement action against the Utility, the Utility could incur additional fines or penalties or suffer negative
consequences described above in the immediatel y preceding risk factor.  In addition, a negative outcome in any of these investigations or future enforcement actions
may negatively affect the outcome of future ratemaking and regulatory proceedings; for example, by enabling parties to challenge the Util ity’s request to recover
costs that the parties allege are somehow related to the Utility’s violations.  
 
The Utility may incur fines and penalties in connection with the Utility’s efforts to identify and remove encroachments from transmission pipeline r ights of way and
the Penalty Decision.  The Penalty Decision requires the SED to review the Utility’s gas transmission operations (including the Utility’s compliance with the remedies
ordered by the Penalty Decision) and to perform annual audits of the Uti lity’s record-keeping practices for a minimum of ten years.  The SED could impose fines on
the Utility or require the Utility to incur unrecoverable costs, or both, based on the outcome of these future audits.  In addition, although PG&E Corporation and th e
Utility do not currently face the possibility of fines or penalties in the first phase of the CPUC’s pending investigation into the Utility’s safety culture since it has been
categorized as rate setting, it is uncertain how a next phase , if any, would be categorized.  (See the discussion under the heading “Regulatory Matters” in MD&A.)
 
The Utility could be subject to additional regulatory or governmental enforcement action in the future with respect to compliance with federal, state or local laws,
regulations or orders that could result in additional fines, penalties or customer refunds, including those regarding renewable energy and resource adequacy
requirements; customer billing; customer service; affiliate transactions; vegetation management; de sign, construction, operating and maintenance practices; safety and
inspection practices; compliance with CPUC general orders or other applicable CPUC decisions or regulations; federal electric reliability standards; and
environmental compliance.  CPUC sta ff could impose penaltie s on the Utility in the future in accordance with its authority under the gas and electric safety citation
programs.  The amount of such fines, penalties, or customer refunds could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and th e Utility’s financial results.  
 
27
 

 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s future financial results could be materially affected by the conviction of the Utility in the federal criminal proceeding and
by the debarment proceeding .
 
On August 9, 2016, the jury in the federal criminal trial against the Utility in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, in San Francisco,
found the Utility guilty on one count of obstructing a federal agency proceeding and five counts of violations of pipeline integrity management regulations of the
Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act.  On January 26, 2017, the court issued a judgment of conviction against the Utility.  The court sentenced the Utility to a five- year
corporate probation period, oversight by a third-party monitor for a period of five years, with the ability to apply for early termination after three years , a fine of $3
million to be paid to the federal government, certain advertising requirements, and community service. The Utility has dec ided not to appeal the convictions.
 
The probation includes a requirement that the Utility not commit any local, state or federal crimes during the probation period.  As part of the probation, the Utility is
required to retain a third-party monitor.  The goal of the monitorship will be to prevent the criminal conduct with respect to gas pipeline transmission safety that gave
rise to the conviction.  To that end, the goal of the monitor will be to help ensure that the Utility takes reasonable and appropriat e steps to maintain the safety of the
gas transmission pipeline system, performs appropriate integrity management assessments on its gas transmission pipelines, and maintains an effective ethics and
compliance program and safety related incentive program.
 
After an initial assessment is conducted and an initial report is prepared by the monitor, the monitor will prepare reports on a semi -annual basis setting forth the
monitor’s continued assessment and making recommendations consistent with the goals and sc ope of the monitorship.  The Utility expects that the monitor will be
retained before the end of the second quarter of 2017.
 
At December 31, 2016, PG&E Corporation and the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets include d a $3 million accrual in connection wi th this matter.  The Utility
could incur material costs and additional penalties , not recoverable through rates, in the event of non-compliance with the terms of its probation and in connection
with the monitorship (including but not limited to the monitor’ s compensation or costs resulting from recommendations of the monitor).
 
Also, in September 2015, the Utility was notified that the DOI had initiated an inquiry into whether the Utility should be suspended or debarred from entering into
federal procurement and non-procurement contracts and programs citing the San Bruno explosion and indicating, as the basis for the inquiry, alleged poor record-
keeping, poor identification and evaluation of threats to gas lines and obstruction of the NTSB’s investigation.  On December 21, 2016, the Utility and the DOI
entered into an interim administrative agreement that reflects the DOI’s determination that the Utility remains eligible to contract with federal government agencies
while the DOI determines whether any further a ction is necessary to protect the federal government’s business interests.  The agreement will be effective until
superseded by an amended agreement or determination.  The agreement also provides that the DOI is still conducting a review to determine whether the Utility has an
effective compliance and ethics program and that the DOI is required to use its best efforts to complete its review before the end of 2017.  If the DOI determines that
the Utility’s program is not generally effective in preventing and de tecting criminal conduct, the Utility may be required to enter into an amended administrative
agreement and implement remedial and other measures, such as a requirement that the Utility’s natural gas operations and/or compliance and eth ics programs be supe
rvised by one or more independent third party monitor (s) .
 
The Utility’s conviction and the outcome of the debarment proceeding could harm the Utility’s relationships with regulators, legislators, communities, business
partners, or other constituencies and make it more difficult to recruit qualified personnel and senior management.   Further, they could negatively affect the outcome
of future ratemaking and regulatory proceedings, for example by, enabling parties to argue that the Utility should not be allow ed to recover costs that the parties
allege are somehow related to the criminal charges on which the Utility was found guilty.  They could also result in increased regulatory or legislative scrutiny with
respect to various aspects of how the Utility’s busi ness is conducted or organized.    As discussed under the heading “Regulatory Matters”   in Item 7. MD&A, the
SED continues evaluating PG&E Corporation’s and   the Utility’s   organizational culture and governance in the CPUC’s pending investigation to examine th e
Utility’s safety culture.
 
28
 

 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results primarily depend on the outcomes of  regulatory and ratemaking proceedings and the Utility’s ability to
manage its operating expenses and capital expenditures so that it i s able to earn its authorized rate of return in a timely manner.
 
As a regulated entity, the Utility’s rates are set by the CPUC or the FERC on a prospective basis and are generally designed to allow the Utility to collect sufficient
revenues to recover r easonable costs of providing service, including a return on its capital investments.  PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results could
be materially affected if the CPUC or the FERC does not authorize sufficient revenues for the Utility to safe ly and reliably serve its customers and earn its authorized
ROE.  The outcome of the Utility’s ratemaking proceedings can be affected by many factors, including the Utility’s reputation (especially as a result of the Utility’s
conviction in the federal cri minal trial ), the level of opposition by intervening parties; potential rate impacts; increasing levels of regulatory review; changes in the
political, regulatory, or legislative environments; and the opinions of the Utility’s regulators, consumer and othe r stakeholder organizations, and customers, about the
Utility’s ability to provide safe, reliable, and affordable electric and gas services.
 
The Utility also is required to incur costs to comply with legislative and regulatory requirements and initiatives , such as those relating to the development of a state-
wide electric vehicle charging infrastructure, the deployment of distributed energy resources, implementation of demand response and customer energy efficiency
programs, energy storage and renewable en ergy targets, underground gas storage, and the construction of the California high-speed rail project.  The Utility’s ability
to recover costs, including its investments, associated with these and other legislative and regulatory initiatives will, in large part, depend on the final form of
legislative or regulatory requirements, and whether the associated ratemaking mechanisms can be timely adjusted to reflect changes in customer demand for the
Utility’s electricity and natural gas services. 
 
In addition to the amount of authorized revenues, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results could be materially affected if the Utility’s actual costs to
safely and reliably serve its customers differ from authorized or forecast costs.  The Utility may in cur additional costs for many reasons including changing market
circumstances, unanticipated events (such as storms, fires, accidents, catastrophic or other events affecting the Utility’s operations), or compliance with new state laws
or policies.  Althoug h the Utility may be allowed to recover some or all of the additional costs, there may be a substantial time lag between when the Utility incurs the
costs and when the Utility is authorized to collect revenues to recover such costs.  Alternatively, the CPU C or the FERC may disallow costs that they determine were
not reasonably or prudently incurred by the Utility.
 
The Utility’s ability to recover its costs also may be affected by the economy and its impact on the Utility’s customers.  For example, a sust ained downturn or
sluggishness in the economy could reduce the Utility’s sales to industrial and commercial customers or the level of uncollectible bills could increase.  Although the
Utility generally recovers its costs through rates, regardless of sales volume, rate pressures increase when the costs are borne by a smaller sales base. 
 
Changes in commodity prices also may have an adverse effect on the Utility’s ability to timely recover its operating costs and earn its authorized ROE.   Although the
Utility generally recovers its electricity and natural gas procurement costs from customers as “pass-through” costs, a significant and sustained rise in commodity
prices could create overall rate pressures that make it more difficult for the Utility to rec over its costs that are not categorized as “pass-through” costs.   To relieve
some of this upward rate pressure, the CPUC could authorize lower revenues than the Utility requested or disallow full cost recovery. 
 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s finan cial results depend upon the Utility’s continuing ability to recover “pass-through” costs, including electricity and
natural gas procurement costs, from customers  in a timely manner.  The CPUC may disallow procurement costs for a variety of reasons.  In a ddition, the
Utility’s ability to recover these costs could be affected by the loss of Utility customers and decreased new customer growth , if the CPUC fails to adjust the
Utility’s rates to reflect such events.
 
The Utility meets customer demand for elect ricity from a variety of sources, including electricity generated from the Utility’s own generation facilities, electricity
provided by third parties under power purchase agreements, and purchases on the wholesale electricity market.   The Utility must mana ge these sources using the
commercial and CPUC regulatory principles of “least cost dispatch” and prudent administration of power purchase agreements in compliance with its CPUC-approved
long-term procurement plan.  The CPUC could disallow procurement cost s incurred by the Utility if the CPUC determines that the Utility did not comply with these
principles or if the Utility did not comply with its procurement plan. 
 
29
 

 
Further, the contractual prices for electricity under the Utility’s current or future powe r purchase agreements could become uneconomic in the future for a variety of
reasons, including developments in alternative energy technology, increased self-generation by customers, an increase in distributed generation, and lower customer
demand due to a dverse economic conditions or the loss of the Utility’s customers to other retail providers.   In particular, the Utility will incur additional costs to
procure renewable energy to meet the higher targets established by California SB 350 that became effecti ve on January 1, 2016.  Despite the CPUC’s current
approval of the contracts, the CPUC could disallow contract costs in the future if it determines that the costs are unreasonably above market. 
 
The Utility’s ability to recover the costs it incurs in the wholesale electricity market may be affected by whether the CAISO wholesale electricity market continues to
function effectively.  Although market mechanisms are designed to limit excessive prices, these market mechanisms could fail, or the related system s and software on
which the market mechanisms rely may not perform as intended which could result in excessive market prices.   The CPUC could prohibit the Utility from passing
through the higher costs of electricity to customers.  For example, during the 2 000 and 2001 energy crisis, the market mechanism flaws in California’s then-newly
established wholesale electricity market led to dramatically high market prices for electricity that the Utility was unable to recover through customer rates, ultimately
caus ing the Utility to file a petition for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.
 
Further, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results could be affected by the loss of Utility customers and decreasing bundled load that occurs through
municipalization of the Utility’s facilities, an increase in the number of CCAs who provide electricity to their residents, and an increase in the number of consumers
who become direct access customers of alternative generation providers.  (See “Co mpetition in the Electricity Industry” in Item 1.)  As the number of bundled
customers (i.e., those customers who receive electricity and distribution service from the Utility) declines, the rates for remaining customers could increase as the
Utility would have a smaller customer base from which to recover certain procurement costs.  Although the Utility is permitted to collect non-bypassable charges for
above market generation-related costs incurred on behalf of former customers, the charges may not be suf ficient for the Utility to fully recover these costs.  In
addition, the Utility’s ability to collect non-bypassable charges has been, and may continue to be, challenged by certain customer groups.  Furthermore, if the former
customers return to receiving e lectricity supply from the Utility, the Utility could incur costs to meet their electricity needs that it may not be able to timely recover
through rates or that it may not be able to recover at all.
 
In addition, increasing levels of self-generation of e lectricity by customers (primarily solar installations) and the use of customer net energy metering (“NEM”),
which allows self-generating customers to receive bill credits for surplus power at the full retail rate, puts upward rate pressure on remaining cu stomers.   In January
2016, the CPUC adopted new NEM rules and rates.   The new rules and rates became effective for new NEM customers of the Utility in December 2016.   New NEM
customers will be required to pay an interconnection fee, will go on time of use rates, and will be required to pay some non-bypassable charges to help fund some of
the costs of low income, energy efficiency, and other programs that other customers pay.   However, the resulting rules will still put upward rate pressure on remaining
cust omers, and remove the cap on the number of NEM customers.   Significantly higher bills for remaining customers may result in a decline of the number of such
customers as they may seek alternative energy providers.  The CPUC states that it intends to revisit these rules in 2019.
 
A confluence of technology-related cost declines and sustained federal or state subsidies could make a combination of distributed generation and energy storage a
viable, cost-effective alternative to the Utility’s bundled electric se rvice which could further threaten the Utility’s ability to recover its generation, transmission, and
distribution investments.  If the number of the Utility’s customers decreases or grows at a slower rate than anticipated, the Utility’s level of capital i nvestment would
likely decline as well, in turn leading to a slower growth in rate base and earnings.  Reduced energy demand or significantly slowed growth in demand due to
customer migration to other energy providers, adoption of energy efficient technolo gy, conservation, increasing levels of distributed generation and self-generation,
unless substantially offset through regulatory cost allocations, could adversely impact PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results.
 
The CPUC has begun to impl ement rate reform to allow residential electric rates to more closely reflect the utilities’ actual costs of providing service and decrease
cost-subsidization among customer classes.  Many aspects of rate reform are not yet finalized, including time-of-use rates and whether the utilities can impose a fixed
charge on certain customers.  If the Utility is unable to recover a material portion of its procurement costs and/or if the CPUC fails to adjust the Utility’s rates to
reflect the impact of changing loads , the wide deployment of distributed generation, and the development of new electricity generation and energy storage
technologies, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results could be materially affected.   
 
30
 

 
Risks Related to Liquidity and Cap ital Requirements
 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results will be affected by their ability to continue accessing the capital markets and by the terms of debt and
equity financings.
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility will continue to seek funds in the capital and credit markets to enable the Utility to make capital investments, pay fines that may be
imposed in the future, as well as costs related to rights-of-way and legal and regulatory costs.  PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s ability to access the capital and
credit markets and the costs and terms of available financing depend primarily on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s credit ratings and outlook.  Their credit
ratings and outlook can be affected by many factors, including the pe nding CPUC investigations and ratemaking proceedings.  If PG&E Corporation’s or the Utility’s
credit ratings were downgraded to below investment grade, their ability to access the capital and credit markets would be negatively affected and could result in higher
borrowing costs, fewer financing options, including reduced, or lack of, access to the commercial paper market, additional collateral posting requirements, which in
turn could affect liquidity and lead to an increased financing need.  Other factors can affect the availability and terms of debt and equity financing, including changes
in the federal or state regulatory environment affecting energy companies generally or PG&E Corporation and the Utility in particular, the overall health of the energy
in dustry, volatility in electricity or natural gas prices, an increase in interest rates by the Federal Reserve Bank, and general economic and financial market conditions.
 
The reputations of PG&E Corporation and the Utility continue to suffer from the negat ive publicity about matters discussed under “Enforcement and Litigation
Matters” in Item 7. MD&A.  The negative publicity and the uncertainty about the outcomes of these matters may undermine confidence in management’s ability to
execute its business strat egy and restore a constructive regulatory environment, which could adversely impact PG&E Corporation’s stock price.  Further, the market
price of PG&E Corporation common stock could decline materially depending on the outcome of these matters.   The amount and timing of future share issuances also
could affect the stock price. 
 
If the Utility were unable to access the capital markets, it could be required to decrease or suspend dividends to PG&E Corporation and PG&E Corporation could be
required to contrib ute capital to the Utility to enable the Utility to fulfill its obligation to serve.  To maintain PG&E Corporation’s dividend level in these
circumstances, PG&E Corporation would be further required to access the capital or credit markets.  PG&E Corporatio n may need to decrease or discontinue its
common stock dividend if it is unable to access the capital or credit markets on reasonable terms.  
 
PG&E Corporation’s ability to meet its debt service and other financial obligations and to pay dividends on its common stock depends on the Utility’s earnings
and cash flows.
 
PG& E Corporation is a holding company with no revenue generating operations of its own.  The Utility must use its resources to satisfy its own obligations, including
its obligation to serve customers, to pay principal and interest on outstanding debt, to pay preferred stock dividends, and meet its obligations to employees and
creditors, before it can distribute cash to PG&E Corporation.  Under the CPUC’s rules applicable to utility holding companies, the Utility’s dividend policy must be
established by the Uti lity's Board of Directors as though the Utility were a stand-alone utility company and PG&E Corporation’s Board of Directors give “first
priority” to the Utility’s capital requirements, as determined to be necessary and prudent to meet the Utility’s obliga tion to serve or to operate the Utility in a prudent
and efficient manner.  The CPUC has interpreted this “first priority” obligation to include the requirement that PG&E Corporation “infuse the Utility with all types of
capital necessary for the Utility t o fulfill its obligation to serve.”  In addition, before the Utility can pay common stock dividends to PG&E Corporation, the Utility
must maintain its authorized capital structure with an average 52% equity component. 
 
If the Utility were required to pay a material amount of fines or incur material unrecoverable costs in connection with the terms of the probation or monitorship , the
pending CPUC investigations, or other enforcement matters, it would require incremental equity contributions from PG&E Corpo ration to restore its capital
structure.  PG&E Corporation common stock issuances used to fund such equity contributions could materially dilute EPS.   (See “Liquidity and Financial Resources”
in Item 7. MD&A.)  Further, if PG&E Corporation were required t o infuse the Utility with significant capital or if the Utility was unable to distribute cash to PG&E
Corporation, or both, PG&E Corporation may be unable to pay principal and interest on its outstanding debt, pay its common stock dividend, or meet other o
bligations.
 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s ability to pay dividends also could be affected by financial covenants contained in their respective credit agreements that require
each company to maintain a ratio of consolidated total debt to consolidate d capitalization of at most 65%.
 
31
 

 
Risks Related to Operations and Information Technology
 
The Utility’s electricity and natural gas operations are inherently hazardous and involve significant risks which, if they materialize, can adversely affect PG&E
Corp oration’s and the Utility’s financial results.  The Utility’s insurance may not be sufficient to cover losses caused by an operatin g failure or catastrophic
event, or may not become available at a reasonable cost, or available at all.
 
The Utility owns and operates extensive electricity and natural gas facilities, including two nuclear generation units and an extensive hydroelectric generating system
.  (See “Electric Utility Operations” and “Natural Gas Utility Operations” in Item 1. Business.)  The Util ity’s ability to earn its authorized ROE depends on its ability
to efficiently maintain, operate, and protect its facilities, and provide electricity and natural gas services safely and reliably.  The Utility undertakes substantial capital
investment proje cts to construct, replace, and improve its electricity and natural gas facilities.  In addition, the Utility is obligated to decommission its electricity
generation facilities at the end of their useful operating lives.  The Utility’s ability to safely and reliably operate, maintain, construct and decommission its facilities is
subject to numerous risks, many of which are beyond the Utility’s control, including those that arise from: 
 
●the breakdown or failure of equipment, electric transmission or di stribution lines, or natural gas transmission and distribution pipelines, that can cause
explosions, fires, or other catastrophic events;
 
●
an overpressure event occurring on natural gas facilities due to equipment failure, incorrect operating procedures or failure to follow correct operating
procedures, or welding or fabrication-related defects, that results in the failure of downstream transmission pipelines or distribution assets and
uncontained natural gas flow;
 
●
failure to maintain adequate capaci ty to meet customer demand on the gas system that results in customer curtailments, controlled/uncontrolled gas
outages, gas surges back into homes, serious personal injury or loss of life;
 
●
a prolonged statewide electrical black-out that results  in damage to the Utility’s equipment or damage to property owned by customers or other third
parties;
 
●
the failure to fully identify, evaluate, and control workplace hazards that result in serious injury or loss of life for employees or the public, environm ental
damage, or reputational damage;
 
●
the release of radioactive materials caused by a nuclear accident, seismic activity, natural disaster, or terrorist act;
 
●
the failure of a large dam or other major hydroelectric facility, or the failure of one or more levees that protect land on which the Utility’s assets are built;
 
●
the failure to take expeditious or sufficient action to mitigate operating conditions, facilities, or equipment, that the Utility has identified, or
reasonably should have identified, as unsafe, which failure then leads to a catastrophic event (such as a wild land fire or natural gas explosion), and
the failure to respond effectively to a catastrophic event;
 
●
inadequate emergency preparedness plans and the failure to respo nd effectively to a catastrophic event that can lead to public or employee harm or
extended outages;
 
●
severe weather events such as storms, tornadoes, floods, drought, earthquakes, tsunamis, wild land and other fires, pandemics, solar events,
electromagnetic events, or other natural disasters;
 
●
operator or other human error;
 
●
an ineffective records management program that results in the failure to construct, operate and maintain a utility system safely and prudently;
 
●
construction performed by third parties that damage the Utility’s underground or overhead facilities, including, for example, ground excavations or “dig-
ins” that damage the Utility’s underground pipelines;
 
●
 
 
the release of hazardous or toxic substances into the air, water, or soil, including, for example, gas leaks from natural gas storage facilities; flaking lead-
based paint from the Utility’s facilities, and leaking or spilled insulating fluid from electrical equipment; and
 
32
 

 
●attacks by third parties, including cy ber-attacks, acts of terrorism, vandalism, or war.
 
The occurrence of any of these events could interrupt fuel supplies; affect demand for electricity or natural gas; cause unplanned outages or reduce generating output;
damage the Utility’s assets or ope rations; damage the assets or operations of third parties on which the Utility relies; damage property owned by customers or others;
and cause personal injury or death.  As a result, the Utility could incur costs to purchase replacement power, to repair as sets and restore service, and to compensate
third parties. 
 
In particular, the Utility may incur material liability in connection with the Butte fire.  ( See “PG&E Corporation and the Utility may incur material liability in
connection with Butte Fire” above. )   Additionally, on January 12, 2017, a residential structure fire occurred in Yuba City, California resulting in the collapse of the
house and injuries to two persons inside the house.  The CPUC, a third-party engineering firm, and local fire and police officials are investigating the origin and cause
of the incident.  The Utility may incur material costs, including as a result of these investigations or any proceedings that could be commenced in connection with this
incident. 
 
Further, although the Utility often enters into agreements for third-party contractors to perform work, such as patrolling and inspection of facilities or the construction
or demolition or facilities, the Utility may retain liability for the quali ty and completion of the contractor’s work and can be subject to penalties or other enforcement
action if the contractor violates applicable laws, rules, regulations, or orders.  The Utility may also be subject to liability, penalties or other enforcement action as a
result of personal injury or death caused by third-party contractor actions. 
 
Insurance, equipment warranties, or other contractual indemnification requirements may not be sufficient or effective to provide full or even partial recovery under all
circumstances or against all hazards or liabilities to which the Utility may become subject.  An uninsured loss could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s
and the Utility’s financial results.  Future insurance coverage may not be available at rates and on terms as favorable as the Utility’s current insurance coverage or may
not be available at all.
 
Further, California law includes a doctrine of inverse condemnation that is routinely invoked in California for wildfire damages. Inverse condemna tion imposes strict
liability (including liability for attorneys’ fees) for damages and takings as a result of the design, construction and maintenance of utility facilities, including its
electric transmission lines.  As a result of the strict liability s tandard applied to wildfires, recent losses recorded by insurance companies, the risk of increase of
wildfires including as a result of the ongoing drought, and the Butte fire, the Utility may not be able to obtain sufficient insurance coverage in the futu re at
comparable cost and terms as the Utility’s current insurance coverage, or at all.  In addition, the Utility is unable to predict whether it would be allowed to recover in
rates the increased costs of insurance or the costs of any uninsured losses.
 
I f the amount of insurance is insufficient or otherwise unavailable, or if the Utility is unable to recover in rates the costs of any uninsured losses, PG&E Corporation’s
and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows could be m aterially affected.
 
The Utility’s operational and information technology systems could fail to function properly or be improperly accessed or damaged by third parties (including
cyber-attacks and physical acts ) or damaged by severe weather, natural disast ers, or other events. Any of these events could disrupt the Utility’s operations and
cause the Utility to incur unanticipated losses and expense or liability to third parties .
 
The operation of the Utility’s extensive electricity and natural gas systems re lies on evolving and increasingly complex operational and information technology
systems and network infrastructures that are interconnected with the systems and network infrastructure owned by third parties.   All of the Utility’s operational and
technolog y systems and network infrastructure are vulnerable to disability or failures in the event of cyber-attacks and physical acts.  Cyber- attacks are increasingly
sophisticated and may include computer hacking, viruses, malware, social engineering, denial of s ervice attacks, ransomware, destructive malware, or other means of
disruption, destruction, or unauthorized access, acquisition or control.  In addition, hardware, software, or applications the Utility develops or procures from third
parties may contain de fects in design or manufacture or other problems that could unexpectedly compromise information security.  Physical attacks may include acts
of sabotage, acts of war, acts of terrorism, or other physical acts.  The Utility’s operational and information tec hnology systems and networks are deemed critical
infrastructure, and any failure or decrease in their functionality could, among other things, cause harm to the public or employees, significantly disrupt operations,
negatively impact the Utility’s ability to generate, transport, deliver and store energy and gas, or otherwise operate in the most efficient manner or at all, undermine
the Utility’s performance of critical business functions, damage the Utility’s assets or operations or those of third parties, and lead to reputational harm.  As a result,
such events could subject the Utility to significant expenses, claims by customers or third parties, government inquiries, investigations, and regulatory actions that
could result in fines and penalties, and los s of customers, any of which could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition and
results of operations.
 
33
 

 
The Utility’s systems, including its financial information, operational systems, advanced metering, and billin g systems, require ongoing maintenance, modification,
and updating, which can be costly and increase the risk of errors and malfunction.   The Utility often relies on third-party vendors to host, maintain, modify, and
update its systems and these third-part y vendors could cease to exist , fail to establish adequate processes to protect the Utility’s systems and information, or
experience internal or external security incidents.   Any incidents, disruptions or deficiencies in existing systems, or disruptions, d elays or deficiencies in the
modification of existing systems or implementation of new systems could result in increased costs, the inability to track or collect revenues, or diversion of
management’s and employees’ attention and resources, or negatively a ffect the Utility’s ability to maintain effective financial controls or timely file required
regulatory reports.   The Utility also could be subject to patent infringement claims arising from the use of third-party technology by the Utility or by a third-pa rty
vendor. 
 
In addition, the Utility’s information systems contain confidential information, including information about customers and employees.   A data breach involving theft,
improper disclosure, or other unauthorized access to or acquisition of conf idential information could subject the Utility to penalties for violation of applicable privacy
laws, claims by third parties, and enforcement actions by government agencies.  It could also reduce the value of proprietary information, and harm the Utility’ s
reputation.
 
The Utility and its third party vendors have been subject, and will likely continue to be subject, to attempts to gain unauthorized access to the Utility’s information
technology systems, or confidential data, or to disrupt the Utility’s op erations.  None of these attempts or breaches has individually or in the aggregate resulted in a
security incident with a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition and results of operations.  Despite implementation of secu rity
and control measures, there can be no assurance that the Utility will be able to prevent the unauthorized access to its systems, infrastructure, or data, or the disruption
of its operations, either of which could materially affect PG&E Corporation’s a nd the Utility’s financial condition and results of operations. 
 
While the Utility maintains cyber liability insurance that covers certain damages caused by cyber incidents, there is no guarantee that adequate insurance will continue
to be available at r ates the Utility believes are reasonable or that the costs of responding to and recovering from a cyber incident will be covered by insurance or
recoverable in rates.
 
The operation and decommissioning of the Utility’s nuclear power plants expose it to pot entially significant liabilities and the Utility may not be able to fully
recover its costs if regulatory requirements change or the plant ceases operations before the licenses expire.
 
The operation of the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities exposes it to potentially significant liabilities from environmental, health and financial risks, such as risks
relating to the storage, handling and disposal of spent nuclear fuel, and the release of radioactive materials caused by a nuclear accident, seismic act ivity, natural
disaster, or terrorist act.  If the Utility incurs losses that are either not covered by insurance or exceed the amount of insurance available, such losses could have a
material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial result s.  In addition, the Utility may be required under federal law to pay up to $255 million of
liabilities arising out of each nuclear incident occurring not only at the Utility’s Diablo Canyon facility but at any other nuclear power plant in the United State s.  
(See Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)    
 
On August 11, 2016, the Utility submitted an application to the CPUC to retire Diablo Canyon at the expiration of its current operating licenses in 2024 and 2025 and
replace it with a portfolio of energy efficiency and GHG-free resources.  The application includes a joint proposal between the Utility and certain interested parties,
entered into on June 20, 2016.  However, the Utility continues to face public concern about the safety of nuclear generation and nuclear fuel.  Some of these nuclear
opposition g roups regularly file petitions at the NRC and in other forums challenging the actions of the NRC and urging governmental entities to adopt laws or
policies in opposition to nuclear power.  Although an action in opposition may ultimately fail, regulatory pr oceedings may take longer to conclude and be more costly
to complete.  It is also possible that public pressure could grow leading to adverse changes in legislation, regulations, orders, or their interpretation.  As a result,
operations at the Utility’s tw o nuclear generation units at Diablo Canyon could cease before the licenses expire in 2024 and 2025.  In such an instance, the Utility
could be required to record a charge for the remaining amount of its unrecovered investment and such charge could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation and
the Utility’s financial results.
 
34
 

 
In addition, in order to retain highly skilled personnel necessary to safely operate Diablo Canyon during the remaining years of operations, the Utility will incur costs
in connecti on with (i) an employee retention program to ensure adequate staffing levels at Diablo Canyon, and (ii) an employee retraining and development program,
  to facilitate redeployment of a portion of Diablo Canyon personnel to the decommissioning project and el sewhere in the company.   The Utility currently estimates
that the additional cost of the employee retention program and the employee retraining and development program will be approximately $350 million.   The Joint
Proposal seeks confirmation from the CPUC that these costs will be recovered through the Utility’s nuclear decommissioning electric rates.   The employee retention
and retraining and development programs are subject to bargaining with the Utility’s labor unions.   The Utility will also incur costs in connection with an employee
severance program.   The severance program was previously approved by the CPUC in prior nuclear decommissioning ratemaking proceedings.
 
The Utility has incurred, and may continue to incur, substantial costs to comply with NRC regulations and orders.   (See “Regulatory Environment” in Item 1.
Business.)   If the Utility were unable to recover these costs, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results could be materially affected.   The Utility may
determine that it cannot comply with the new regulations or orders in a feasible and economic manner and voluntarily cease operations; alternatively, the NRC may
order the Utility to cease operations until the Utility can comply with new regulations, orders, or decisions.   The Ut ility may incur a material charge if it ceases
operations at Diablo Canyon before the licenses expire in 2024 and 2025.  At December 31, 2016, the Utility’s unrecovered investment in Diablo Canyon was $1.7
billion.
 
At the state level, the California Wate r Board has adopted a policy on once-through cooling that generally requires the installation of cooling towers or other
significant measures to reduce the impact on marine life from existing power generation facilities in California by at least 85%.   If t he California Water Board
requires the installation of cooling towers that the Utility believes are not technically or economically feasible, the Utility may be forced to cease operations at Diablo
Canyon and may incur a material charge.   If the Utility obt ains contingent approvals referred to herein that will result in retiring Diablo Canyon at the end of the
current NRC operating licenses, the Utility will not be required to install cooling towers or implement alternative measures in order to comply with t he California
State Water Board Once-Through Cooling Wat er Policy, thus eliminating the regulatory uncertainty regarding the measures that could have been imposed on the
Utility or of incurring a material charge related thereto.  Even if the Utility is ult imately not required to install cooling towers, under the State Water Board’s interim
mitigation measures applicable to Diablo Canyon’s operations prior to 2025, starting in 2016, it will be required to make payments to the California Coastal
Conservancy t o fund various environmental mitigation projects, that the Utility does not expect to exceed $5 million per year. 
 
On June 28, 2016 the California State Lands Commission approved an extension of the Utility’s leases of coastal land occupied by the water intake and discharge
structures for the nuclear generation units at Diablo Canyon, to run concurrently with Diablo Canyon’s current operating licenses.  The Utility will be required to
obtain an additional lease extension from the State Lands Commission to cover the period of time necessary to decommission the facility.  The State Lands
Commission and California Coastal Commission will evaluate appropriate environmental mitigation and development conditions associated with the
decommissioning project, the c osts of which could be substantial.
 
The Utility also has an obligation to decommission its electricity generation facilities, including its nuclear facilities, as well as gas transmission system assets, at the
end of their useful lives.   (See Note 2: Sum mary of Significant Accounting Policies – Asset Retirement Obligations of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Statement in Item 8.)   The CPUC authorizes the Utility to recover its estimated costs to decommission its nuclear facilities through nuclear d ecommissioning charges
that are collected from customers and held in nuclear decommissioning trusts to be used for the eventual decommissioning of each nuclear unit.   If the Utility’s actual
decommissioning costs, including the amounts held in the nuclear decommissioning trusts, exceed estimated costs, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial
results could be materially affected.
 
Risks Related to Environmental Factors
 
The Utility’s operations are subject to extensive environmental laws and changes i n or liabilities under these laws could adversely affect PG&E Corporation’s
and the Utility’s financial results.
 
The Utility’s operations are subject to extensive federal, state, and local environmental laws, regulations, orders, relating to air quality, water quality and usage,
remediation of hazardous wastes, and the protection and conservation of natural resources and wildlife.  The Utility incurs significant capital, operating, and other
costs associated with compliance with these environmental statute s, rules, and regulations.  The Utility has been in the past, and may be in the future, required to pay
for environmental remediation costs at sites where it is identified as a potentially responsible party under federal and state environmental laws.  Alth ough the Utility
has recorded liabilities for known environmental obligations, these costs can be difficult to estimate due to uncertainties about the extent of contamination,
remediation alternatives, the applicable remediation levels, and the financial a bility of other pote ntially responsible parties.  (For more information, s ee Note 13 of
the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
Environmental remediation costs could increase in the future as a result of new legislation, the curren t trend toward more stringent standards, and stricter and more
expansive application of existing environmental regulations.  Failure to comply with these laws and regulations, or failure to comply with the terms of licenses or
permits issued by environment al or regulatory agencies, could expose the Utility to claims by third parties or the imposition of civil or criminal fines or other
sanctions. 
 
The CPUC has authorized the Utility to recover its environmental remediation costs for certain sites through various ratemaking mechanisms.  One of these
mechanisms allows the Utility rate recovery for 90% of its hazardous substance remediation costs for certain approved sites without a reasonableness review.  The
CPUC may discontinue or change these ratemaking m echanisms in the future or the Utility may incur environmental costs that exceed amounts the CPUC has
authorized the Utility to recover in rates.
 
Some of the Utility’s environmental costs, such as the remediation costs associated with the Hinkley natural gas compressor site, are not recoverable through rates or
insurance .  (See “Environmental Regulation” in Item 1.)  The Utility’s costs to remediate groundwater contamination near the Hinkley natural gas compressor site
and to abate the effects of the contamination have had, and may continue to have, a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results.  Their
financial results also can be materially affected by changes in estimated costs and by the extent to which actual remediation costs differ from recorded liabilities.
 
35
 


 
 
The Utility’s future operations may be affected by climate change that may have a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition,
results of operations, and cash flows. 
 
The Utility has been studying the potential effects of climate change (increased temperatures, changing precipitation patterns, rising sea levels) on the Utility ’s
operations and is developing contingency plans to adapt to those events and conditions that the Utility believes are most significant.  Scientists project that climate
change will increase electricity demand due to more extreme, persistent and hot weath er.  While snowpack in the Sierra Nevada Mountains has been at higher than
normal levels this winter, California has experienced ongoing drought in the past. If temperatures and the levels of precipitation in the Utility’s service territory
continue to ch ange, that could impact the levels of snowpack in the Sierra Nevada Mountains. As a result, the Utility’s hydroelectric generation could change and the
Utility would need to consider managing or acquiring additional generation.  
 
If the Utility increases i ts reliance on conventional generation resources to replace hydroelectric generation and to meet increased customer demand, it may become
more costly for the Utility to comply with GHG emissions limits.  In addition, increasing temperatures and lower level s of precipitation could increase the occurrence
of wildfires in the Utility’s service territory causing damage to the Utility’s facilities or the facilities of third parties on which the Utility relies to provide service,
damage to third parties for loss of property, personal injury, or loss of life.  In addition, flooding caused by rising sea levels could damage the Utility’s facilities,
including hydroelectric assets such as dams and canals, and the electric transmission and distribution assets.  The Uti lity could incur substantial costs to repair or
replace facilities, restore service, compensate customers and other third parties for damages or injuries.  The Utility anticipates that the increased costs would be
recovered through rates, but as rate press ures increase, the likelihood of disallowance or non-recovery may increase. 
 
Events or conditions caused by climate change could have a greater impact on the Utility’s operations than the Utility’s studies suggest and could result in lower
revenues or in creased expenses, or both.  If the CPUC fails to adjust the Utility’s rates to reflect the impact of events or conditions caused by climate change, PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows could be mat erially affected.
 
Other Risk Factors
 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results could be materially affected as a result of political and legislative developments.
 
The Utility’s financial results could be materially affected as a result of the recent change in federal a dministration from President Barack Obama to Preside nt
Donald Trump.  For example, the new administration has indicated tax reform as a priority.  Tax reform outli nes produced by both President Trum p and the Tax
Reform Task Force include proposals related to federal tax rate s , deductions for state income taxes (and potentially property tax), interest expense deduction, capital
expenditure deduction, and expensing plant.  It is unclear what tax reform may be ultimately adopted.  It is generally expected that a tax reform bill will be introduced
in early 2017.  
 
The Utility may be required to incur substantial costs in order to obtain or renew licenses and permits needed to operate the Utility’s business and the Utility may
be subject to fines and penalties for failure to comply or obtain license renewal.
 
The Utility must comply with the terms of various governmental permits, authorizations, and licenses, including those issued by the FERC for the continued operation
of the Utility’s hydroelectric generation facilities, and those issued by environmental and other federal, state and local governmental agencies.  Many of the Utility’s
capital investment proj ects, and some maintenance activities, often require the Utility to obtain land use, construction, environmental, or other governmental permits. 
These permits, authorizations, and licenses may be difficult to obtain on a timely basis, causing work delays.   Further, existing permits and licenses could be revoked
or modified by the agencies that granted them if facts develop that differ significantly from the facts assumed when they were issued.  In addition, the Utility often
seeks periodic renewal of a lic ense or permit, such as a waste discharge permit or a FERC operating license for a hydroelectric generation facility.  If a license or
permit is not renewed for a particular facility and the Utility is required to cease operations at that facility, the Uti lity could incur an impairment charge or other
costs.  Before renewing a permit or license, the issuing agency may impose additional requirements that may increase the Utility’s compliance costs.  In particular, in
connection with a license renewal for one or more of the Utility’s hydroelectric generation facilities or assets, the FERC may impose new license conditions that
could, among other things, require increased expenditures or result in reduced electricity output and/or capacity at the facility.  In addition, local governments may
attempt to assert jurisdiction over various utility operations by requiring permits or other approvals that the Utility has not been previously required to obtain.  
 
The Utility may incur penalties and sanctions for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of licenses and permits which could have a material effect on PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.  If the Utility cannot obtain, renew, or comply with nec essary governmental
permits, authorizations, licenses, ordinances, or other requirements, or if the Utility cannot recover the increase in associated compliance and other costs in a timely
manner, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results coul d be materially affected. 
 
Poor investment performance or other factors could require PG&E Corporation and the Utility to make significant unplanned contributions to its pension plan,
other postretirement benefits plans, and nuclear decommissioning trust s.
 
PG& E Corporation and the Utility provide defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefits for eligible employees and retirees.  The Utility also
maintains three trusts for the purposes of providing funds to decommission its nuclear facilities.  The performance of the debt and equity markets affects the value of
plan assets and trust assets.  A decline in the market value may increase the funding requirements for these plans and trusts.  The cost of providing pension and other
postretirement bene fits is also affected by other factors, including interest rates used to measure the required minimum funding levels, the rate of return on plan
assets, employee demographics, discount rates used in determining future benefit obligations, rates of increase in health care costs, future government regulation, and
prior contributions to the plans.  Similarly, funding requirements for the nuclear decommissioning trusts are affected by the rates of return on trust assets, changes in
the laws or regulations regar ding nuclear decommissioning or decommissioning funding requirements as well as changes in assumptions or forecasts related to
decommissioning dates, technology and the cost of labor, materials and equipment.  (See Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.) If the Utility is required to make significant unplanned contributions to fund the pension and postretirement plans or if
actual nuclear decommissioning costs exceed the amount of nuclear decommissioning trust funds and the Utility is unable to recover the contributions or additional
costs in rates, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results could be materially affected .
 
36

 

 
The Utility’s success depends on the availabili ty of the services of a qualified workforce and its ability to maintain satisfactory collective bargaining agreements
which cover a substantial number of employees.  PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s results may suffer if the Utility is unable to attrac t and retain qualified
personnel and senior management talent, or if prolonged labor disruptions occur.
 
The Utility’s workforce is aging and many employees are or will become eligible to retire within the next few years.  Although the Utility has underta ken efforts to
recruit and train new field service personnel, the Utility may be faced with a shortage of experienced and qualified personnel.  The majority of the Utility’s employees
are covered by collective bargaining agreements with three unions.  Labo r disruptions could occur depending on the outcome of negotiations to renew the terms of
these agreements with the unions or if tentative new agreements are not ratified by their members.  In addition, some of the remaining non-represented Utility
employee s could join one of these unions in the future. 
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility also may face challenges in attracting and retaining senior management talent especially if they are unable to restore the
reputational harm generated by the negative publi city stemming from the ongoing enforcement proceedings.  Any such occurrences could negatively impact PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition and results of operations.
 
37
 

 
ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
 
None.
 
ITEM 2.   P ROPERTIES
 
The Utility owns or has obtained the right to occupy and/or use real property comprising the Utility's electricity and natural gas distribution facilities, natural gas
gathering facilities and generation facilities, and natural gas and electricity transmission facilities, which are described in Item 1. Business, under “Electric Utility
Operations” and “Natural Gas Utility Operations.”  The Utility occupies or uses real property that it does not own primarily through various leases, easements, rights-
of-way, permits, or licenses from private landowners or governmental authorities.  In total, the Utility occupies 11 million square fe et of real property, including 9
million square feet owned by the Utility.  The Utility's corporate headqu arters comprises approximately 1.7 million square feet located in several Utility-owned
buildings in San Francisco, California.
 
PG&E Corporation also leases approximately 42,000 square feet of office space from a th ird party in San Francisco, California.  This lease will expire in 2022.
 
The Utility currently owns approximately 167,000 acres of land, including approximately 140,000 acres of watershed lands.  In 2002 the Utility agreed to implement
its “Land Conserva tion Commitment” (“LCC”) to permanently preserve the six “beneficial public values” on all the watershed lands through conservation easements
or equivalent protections, as well as to make approximately 70,000 acres of the watershed lands available for dona tion to qualified organizations.  The six “beneficial
public values” being preserved by the LCC include: natural habitat of fish, wildlife, and plants; open space; outdoor recreation by the general public; sustainable
forestry; agricultural uses; and histo ric values.  The Utility’s goal is to implement all the transactions needed to implement the LCC by the end of 2018, subject to
securing all required regulatory approvals.
 
ITEM 3. L EGAL PROCEEDINGS
 
In addition to the following proceedings, PG&E Corporati on and the Utility are parties to various lawsuits and regulatory proceedings in the ordinary course of their
business.     For more information regarding material lawsuits and proceedings, see “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note   13 of the Notes to t he
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 and in Item 7. MD&A.
 
Penalty Decision Related to the CPUC’s Investigative Enforcement Proceedings Related to Natural Gas Transmission
 
On April 9, 2015, the CPUC issued a decision in its investigative enforc ement proceedings against the Utility to impose total penalties of $1.6 billion on the Utility
after determining that the Utility had committed numerous violations of laws and regulations related to its natural gas tra nsmission operations that could have l ed to
or contributed to the natural gas explosion that occurred in the City of San Bruno, California on September 9, 2010.  In January 2016, the CPUC closed the
investigative proceedings.  The total penalty include d (1) a $300 million fine, (2) a one-time $400 million bill credit to the Utility’s natural gas customers, (3) $850
million to fund pipeline safety projects and programs, and (4) remedial measures that the CPUC estimates will cost the Utility at least $50 million.
 
The Utility refunded the $400 m illion to its customers in the second quarter of 2016 and paid the $300 million fine in the third quarter of 2015.  On December 1,
2016, the CPUC approved a final phase two decision in the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case, which applies $689 million of the $8 50 million pe nalty to capital
expenditures.  The Utility is precluded from including these capital costs in rate base.  The final phase two decision also approves the Utility’s list of programs and
projects that meet the CPUC’s definition of “safety related ,” the costs of which are to be funded through the $850 million penalty.   For more information, see
“Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
 
Federal Criminal Trial
 
On June 14, 2016, a federal criminal trial against the Utility began in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, in San Francisco, on 12
felony counts alleging that the Utility knowingly and willfully violated minimum safety standards under the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act relating to record-
keeping, pipeline integrity management, and identification of pipeline threats, and one felony count cha rging that the Utility obstructed the NTSB investigation into
the cause of the San Bruno ac cident.  On July 26, 2016, the court granted the government’s motion to dismiss one count alleging that the Utility knowingly and
willfully failed to retain a strength test pressure record with respect to a distribution feeder main, thereby reducing the to tal number of counts from 13 to 12.
 
38
 

 
On August 9, 2016, the jury returned its verdict.  The jury acquitted the Utility on all six of the record-keeping allegations but found the Utility guilty on six felony
counts that include one count of obstructing a federal agency proceeding and five counts of violations of pipeline integrity management regulations of the Natural Gas
Pipeline Safety Act. 
 
On January 26, 2017, the court issued a judgment of conviction sentencing the Utility to a five-ye ar corporate probation period, oversight by a third-party monitor for
a period of five years, with the ability to apply for early termination after three years , a fine of $3 million to be paid to the federal government, certain advertising
requirements, an d community service.  The Utility has decided not to appeal the convictions.  The probation includes a requirement that the Utility not commit any
local, state, or federal crimes during the probation period.  As part of the probation, the Utility is requir ed to retain a third-party monitor.  The goal of the monitorship
will be to prevent the criminal conduct with respect to gas pipeline transmission safety that gave rise to the conviction.  To that end, the goal of the monitor will be to
help ensure that th e Utility takes reasonable and appropriate steps to maintain the safety of the gas transmission pipeline system, performs appropriate integrity
management assessments on its gas transmission pipelines, and maintains an effective ethics an d compliance progr am and safety related incentive program.
 
After an initial assessment is conducted and an initial report is prepared by the monitor, the monitor will prepare reports on a semi -annual basis setting forth the
monitor’s continued assessment and making recomme ndations consistent with the goals and scope of the monitorship.  The Utility expects that the monitor will be
retained before the end of the second quarter of 2017.  For more information, see “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8 and Item 1A. Risk Factors.
 
Litigation Related to the San Bruno Accident and Natural Gas Spending
 
As of December 31, 2016, there were seven purported derivative lawsuits seeking recovery on behalf of PG&E Corporation and the Utility for alleged breaches of
fiduciary duty by officers and directors, among other claims.
 
Four of the complaints were consolidated as the   San Bruno Fire Derivative Cases   and are pending in the Superior Court of California, County of San Mateo.   The
remaining three cases are Tellardin v. Anthony F. Earley, Jr.,. et al., Iron Workers Mid-South Pension Fund v. Johns, et al., and Bushkin v. Rambo et al .
 
On December 8, 2015, the California Court of Appeal issued a writ of mandate to t he Superior Court of California, San Mateo County, ordering the court to stay all
proceedings in the four consolidated San Bruno Fire Derivative Cases pending conclusion of the federal criminal proce edings against the Utility.   On November 16,
2016, counse l in the four consolidated San Bruno Fire Derivative cases, as well as counsel in the Tellardin action, appeared for a status conference in the San Mateo
Superior Court.   The court reaffirmed that all proceedings in these actions were stayed until the conclusion of the Utility’s federal criminal proceeding, at which point
they were directed to meet and confe r and report back to the court.  T he parties completed a mediation session on December 8-9, 2016 and continue discussions
about the poten tial resolu tion of the matter.  These actions remain stayed.
 
Bushkin v. Rambo et al ., pending in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, has been designated by the plaintiff as related to the
pending shareholder derivative suit Ir on Workers Mid-South Pension Fund v. Johns, et al. , discussed below.   The plaintiff in the Bushkin lawsuit has agreed that this
case should be stayed pending conclusion of the federal criminal trial against the Utility and, on May 3, 2016, the judge entere d a stipulated order staying the case.  
The order also provides that the parties should meet and confer within 30 days after the criminal trial concludes and provide the court a status update.   Despite the
stay of his complaint, on June 20, 2016 the Bushki n plaintiff filed a petition in the Superior Court of California, San Francisco County, seeking to enforce the
plaintiff’s claimed right as a shareholder to inspect certain PG&E Corporation accounting books and records pursuant to section 1601 of the Calif ornia Corporations
Code.   On July 25, 2016, PG&E Corporation filed a motion to stay plaintiff’s petition until the appellate stay of the San Bruno Fire Derivative Cases has been lifted,
or, in the alternative, a demurrer asking the court to dismiss plainti ff’s petition.   On August 29, 2016, the San Francisco Superior Court granted PG&E Corporation’s
motion, and indicated that plaintiff’s petition was stayed pending resolution of the criminal matter against the Utility.   On January 13, 2017, the parties subm itted a
joint case management statement advising the court that, because the Utility ha d not yet been sentenced, the case should remain stayed until at least March 10, 2017,
when the parties will advise the court of further developments.   While the Utility was sentenced in the federal criminal proceeding on January 26, 2017, this matter
remains stayed until at least March 10, 2017.
 
39
 

 
The Iron Workers action pending in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California has been stayed p ending the resolution of the San Bruno
Fire Derivative Cases .   On May 5, 2016, the court ordered the parties to meet and confer within 30 days after the criminal trial concludes and provide the court a
status update.   At the court’s request, on August 22, 2016, the parties filed a statement requesting that the case continue to be stayed until resolution of the San Bruno
Fire Derivative Cases .   On August 31, 2016, the court set a case management conference for September 30, 2016, and requested the parties to file a joint case
management conference statement by September 23, 2016.   On September 30, 2016, the court decided to continue the stay pending the resolution of the federal
criminal proceeding against the Utility and ordered the parties to submit a joint status report on or before March 15, 2017.   This matter remains stayed until at least
March 15, 2017.
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are uncertain when and how the above lawsuits will be resolved.
 
Butte Fire Litigation
 
In September 2015, a wildfire (known as the “Butte fire”) ignited and spread in Amador and Calaveras Counties in Northern California.  On April 28, 2016, Cal Fire
released its report of the investigation of the origin and cause of the wildfire.  According to Cal Fire’s report, the fire burned 70,868 acres, resulted in two fatalities,
destroyed 549 homes, 368 outbuildings and four commercial properties, and damaged 44 structures.  Cal Fire’s report concluded that the wildfire was caused when a
Gray Pine tree contacted the Utility’s electric line which ignited portions of the tree, and determined that the failure by the Utility and/or its vegetation management
contractors, ACRT Inc. and Trees, Inc., to identify certain potential hazards during its vegetation m anagement program ultimately led to the failure of the tree.  In a
press release also issued on April 28, 2016, Cal Fire indicated that it will seek to recover firefighting costs in excess of $90 million from the Utility.
 
On May 23, 2016, individual plaintiffs filed a master complaint against the Utility and its two vegetation management contractors in the Superior Court of California
for Sacramento County.  Subrogation insurers also filed a separate master complaint on the same date.  The California Judicial Council had previously authorized the
coordination of all cases in Sacramento County.  As of December 31, 2016, complaints have been filed against the Utility and its two vegetation management
contractors in the Superior Court of California in the Counties of Calaveras, San Francisco, Sacramento, and Amador involving approximately 1,950 individual
plaintiffs representing approximately 950 households and their insurance companies.  These complaints are part of or are in the process of being added to the two
master complaints.  Plaintiffs seek to recover damages and other costs, principally based on inverse condemnation and negligence theories of liability.  The number of
individual complaints and plaintiffs may increase in the future. 
 
The Utility continues mediating and settli ng cases.  The next case management conference is scheduled for March 2, 2017.
 
In connection with this matter, the Utility may be liable for property damages, interest, and attorneys’ fees without having been found negligent, through the theory of
inverse condemnation.  In addition, the Utility may be liable for fire suppression costs, personal injury damages, and other damages if the Utility were found to have
been negligent.  The Utility believes it was not negligent; howeve r, there can be no assurance that a court or jury would agree with the Utility.  The Utility believes
that it is probable that it will incur a loss of at least $750 million for all potential damages described above.  This amount is based on assumptions abo ut the number,
size, and type of structures damaged or destroyed, the contents of such structures, the number and types of trees damaged or destroyed, as well as assumptions about
personal injury damages, attorneys’ fees, fire suppression costs, and other damages that the Utility could be liable for under the theories of inverse condemnation
and/or negligence . 
 
For additional information, see “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
 
Other Enforcement Matters
 
Fines may be imposed, or other regulatory or governmental enforcement action could be taken, with respect to the Utility’s self-reports of noncompliance with electric
and natural gas safety regulations, prohibited ex parte commun ications between the Utility and CPUC personnel, and other enforcement matters.   See “Enforcement
and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
 
40
 

 
Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant
 
The Utility's Diablo Canyon power plant employs a “once-through” cooling water system that is regulated under a Clean Water Act permit issued by the Central Coast
Board.  Thi s permit allows the Diablo Canyon power plant to discharge the cooling water at a temperature no more than 22 degrees above the temperature of the
ambient receiving water, and requires that the beneficial uses of the water be protected.     The beneficial use s of water in this region include industrial water supply,
marine and wildlife habitat, shellfish harvesting, and preservation of rare and endangered species.     In January   2000, the Central Coast Board issued a proposed
draft cease and desist order alleging that, although the temperature limit has never been exceeded, the Utility's Diablo Canyon power plant's discharge was not
protective of beneficial uses.
 
In October   2000, the Utility and the Central Coast Board reached a tentative settlement under which the Central Coast Board agreed to find that the Utility's
discharge of cooling water from the Diablo Canyon power plant protects beneficial uses and that the intake technology reflects the best technology available, as
defined in the federal Clean Water Ac t.     As part of the tentative settlement, the Utility agreed to take measures to preserve certain acreage north of the plant and to
fund approximately $6   million in environmental projects and future environmental monitoring related to coastal resources.     On March   21, 2003, the Central Coast
Board voted to accept the settlement agreement.     On June   17, 2003, the settlement agreement was executed by the Utility, the Central Coast Board and the
California Attorney General's Office.     A condition to the effectiven ess of the settlement agreement was that the Central Coast Board renew Diablo Canyon's permit.
 
However, a t its July   10, 2003 meeting, the Central Coast Board did not renew the permit and continued the permit renewal hearing indefinitely.     Several Central
Coast Board members indicated that they no longer supported the settlement agreement, and the Central Coast Board requested a team of independent scientists to
develop additional information on possible mitigation measures for Central Coast Board staff.     I n   2005, the Central Coast Board reviewed the scientists' draft
report recommending several such mitigation measures, but no action was taken .  
 
Subsequently, the California State Water Resources Control Board adopted a Once-Through Cooling Water Policy in May 2010 which requires Diablo Canyon to be
in compliance with the policy by December 2024 and allows for alternative compliance measures at nuc lear power plants.  
 
On June 20, 2016, the Utility entered into a joint proposal with certain parties to retire Diablo Canyon at the expiration of its current operating licenses in 2024 and
2025 and replace it with a GHG-free portfolio of energy efficienc y, renewables and energy storage.   The Utility expects that the State Board’s OTC Policy and its
decision to retire Diablo Canyon will a ffect the te rms of a final settlement agreement between the Utility, the Central Coast Water Board and the California At torney
General’s Office .   Also, as required under the State Board’s OTC Policy, beginning in 2017 , the Utility will pay an annual interim mitigation fee until operations
cease at the end of the current licenses.  
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe that the ultimate outcome of this matter will not have a material impact on the Utility’s financial condition or results of
operations.    
 
Venting Incidents in San Benito County
 
As part of its regular maintenance and inspection practices for its natural gas transmission system, the Utility performs in-line inspections of pipelines using devices
called “pigs” that travel through the pipeline to inspect and clean the walls of the pipe.   When in-line inspections are performed, natural gas in the pipeline mu st be
released or vented at the pipeline station where the device is removed.   In February 2014, the Utility conducted an in-line inspection of a natural gas transmission
pipeline that traverses San Benito County and vented the natural gas at the Utility’s transmission station located in Hollister, which is next to an elementary school.  
The Utility vented the natural gas during school hours on three occasions that month.   After being informed of the venting by the local air district, the San Benito
County district attorney notified the Utility in December 2014 that it was contemplating bringing a civil legal action against the Utility for violation of Health and
Safety Code section 41700, which prohibits discharges of air contaminants that cause a public nu isance.   In January 2017, the Utility and the district attorney reached
an agreement on a stipulated judgement that resolves the matter.   The stipulated judgment includes a fine of approximately $175,000.   In addition, a $75,000 fine will
be held in abeyan ce for 5 years, and would be payable to the San Benito County district attorney in case of non-compliance with certain remedial requirements of the
stipulated judgment.   The stipulated judgment was executed by the court on January 27, 2017.
 
41
 

 
Transformer Oi l Release in Sonoma County
 
During a rain storm in February 2015, transformer oil was released into an underground vault in the City of Santa Rosa, in Sonoma County, while a Utility crew was
replacing a broken transformer.  Following further rains, the oil released from the vault and reached a nearby creek.  The event was investigated by Santa Rosa Fire
Department, the local environmental enforcement authority, and later referred to the Sonoma County District Attorney’s Office.  In May 2016, the District At torney
informed the Utility that it would seek penalties and costs in excess of $100,000 for alleged violations of several sections of the California Health and Safety and
California Government codes which prohibit unauthorized spills or releases of oil in to waters of the state and require that releases be reported to the Office of
Emergency Services.  In November 2016, the Utility and the Sonoma County district attorney reached an agreement on a stipulated judgment that resolves the matter. 
The stipulated judgment includes a fine of $80,000, reimbursement of enforcement costs of $40,000, and injunctive provisions requiring improvements to the Utility’s
vault dewatering procedure and training.  In November 2016, the court approved the stipulated judgment. 
 
ITEM 4.   MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
 
Not applicable.  
 
EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANTS
 
The following individuals serve as executive officers (1) of PG&E Corporation and/or the Utility, as of February 16, 2017.  Except as otherwise noted, all positions
have been held at Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
Name
 Age  Positions Held Over Last Five Years
 Time in Position
 
 
   
  
Anthony F. Earley, Jr.
(2)
 
67  Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer, and President, PG&E Corporation
 September   13, 2011 to present
 
 
  Executive Chairman of the Board, DTE Energy Company
 October 1, 2010 to September 12,
2011
 
 
   
  
Nickolas Stavropoulos
  (2)
 
58  President, Gas
 September 15, 2015 to present
 
 
  President, Gas Operations
 August 17, 2015 to September 15,
2015
 
 
  Executive Vice President, Gas Operations
 June 13, 2011 to August 16, 2015
 
 
   
  
Geisha J. Williams (2)
 
55  President, Electric
 September 15, 2015 to present
 
 
  President, Electric Operations
 August 17, 2015 to September 15,
2015
 
 
  Executive Vice President, Electric Operations
 June 1, 2011 to August 16, 2015
 
  
  
  
Jason P. Wells
 
39  Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, PG&E Corporation
 January 1, 2016 to present
 
 
  Vice President, Business Finance
 August 1, 2013 to  December 31,
2015
 
 
  Vice President, Finance
 October 1, 2011 to July 31, 2013
 
  
  
  
John R. Simon
 
52  Executive Vice President, Corporate Services and Human Resources, PG&E Corporation
 August 17, 2015 to present
 
 
  Senior Vice President, Human Resources, PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company 
 April 16, 2007 to August 16, 2015
 
  
  
  
Karen A. Austin
 
55  Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer
 June 1, 2011 to present
 
 
  President, Consumer Electronics, Sears Holdings
 February 2009 to May 2011
 
 
   
  
42
 

 
Desmond A. Bell
(3)
 54  Senior Vice President, Safety and Shared Services
 January 1, 2012 to present
 
 
   
  
Helen A. Burt (3)
 60  Senior Vice President, External Affairs and Public Policy, PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company
 September 30, 2015 to present
 
 
  Senior Vice President, Corporate Affairs, PG&E Corporation
 September 18, 2014 to
September 30, 2015
 
 
  Senior Vice President and Chief Customer Officer
 February 27, 2006 to September
17, 2014
 
 
   
  
Loraine M.
Giammona
 49  Senior Vice President and Chief Customer Officer
 September 18, 2014 to present
 
 
  Vice President, Customer Service
 January 23, 2012 to September
17, 2014
 
 
  Regional Vice President, Customer Care, Comcast Cable
 November 2002 to January 2012
 
  
  
  
Edward D.
Halpin
 55  Senior Vice President, Generation and Chief Nuclear Officer
 March 28, 2016 to present
 
 
  Senior Vice President, Power Generation and Chief Nuclear Officer
 September 8, 2015 to March 27,
2016
 
 
  Senior Vice President and Chief Nuclear Officer
 April 2, 2012 to September 8,
2015
 
 
  President, Chief Executive Officer and Chief Nuclear Officer, South Texas Project Nuclear
Operating Company
 December 2009 to March 2012
 
  
  
  
Patrick M. Hogan  53  Senior Vice President, Electric Operations
 February 1, 2017 to present
 
  
 Senior Vice President, Electric Transmission and Distribution
 March 1, 2016 to January 31,
2017
 
  
 Vice President, Electric Strategy and Asset Management
 September 8, 2015 to February
29, 2016
 
  
 Vice President, Electric Operations, Asset Management
 November 18, 2013 to
September 7, 2015
 
  
 Senior Vice President, Transmission and Distribution Engineering and Design, BC Hydro
 October 2011 to November 2013
 
  
  
  
Julie M. Kane
 58  Senior Vice President and Chief Ethics and Compliance Officer, PG&E Corporation and Pacific
Gas and Electric Company
 May 18, 2015 to present
 
 
  Vice President, General Counsel and Compliance Officer, North America, Avon Products, Inc.
 September 30, 2013 to March 
31, 2015
 
 
  Vice President, Ethics and Compliance, Novartis Corporation
 January 1, 2010 to August 31,
2015
 
  
  
  
Steven E.
Malnight
 44  Senior Vice President, Regulatory Affairs
 September 18, 2014 to present
 
 
  Vice President, Customer Energy Solutions
 May 15, 2011 to September 17,
2014
 
 
  Vice President, Integrated Demand Side Management
 July 1, 2010 to May 14, 2011
 
  
  
  
Dinyar B. Mistry
 55  Senior Vice President, Human Resources and Chief Diversity Officer, PG&E Corporation and
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
 February 1, 2017 to present
43
 

 
 
  
 Senior Vice President, Human Resources, PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company
 June 1, 2016 to January 31, 2017
 
  
 Senior Vice President, Human Resources, Chief Financial Officer, and Controller
 March 1, 2016 to May 31, 2016
 
  
 Senior Vice President, Human Resources and Controller, PG&E Corporation
 March 1, 2016 to May 31, 2016
 
  
 Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and Controller
 October 1, 2011 to February 28, 2016
 
  
 Vice President and Controller, PG&E Corporation
 March 8, 2010 to February 28, 2016
 
  
  
  
Hyun Park (4)
 55  Senior Vice President and General Counsel, PG&E Corporation
 November   13, 2006 to present
 
  
  
  
Jesus Soto, Jr.
 49  Senior Vice President, Gas Operations
 September 8, 2015 to present
 
 
  Senior Vice President, Engineering, Construction and Operations
 September 16, 2013 to September 8,
2015
 
 
  Senior Vice President, Gas Transmission Operations
 May 29, 2012 to September 15, 2013
 
 
  Vice President, Operations Services, El Paso Pipeline Group
 May 2007 to May 2012
 
  
  
  
Fong Wan
 55  Senior Vice President, Energy Policy and Procurement
 September 8, 2015 to present
 
 
  Senior Vice President, Energy Procurement
 October 1, 2008 to September 8, 2015
 
  
  
  
David S.
Thomason
 41  Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and Controller
 June 1, 2016 to present
 
 
  Vice President and Controller, PG&E Corporation
 June 1, 2016 to present
 
 
  Senior Director, Financial Forecasting and Analysis
 March 2, 2015 to May 31, 2016
 
  
 Senior Director, Corporate Accounting
 March 2, 2014 to March 1, 2015
 
 
  Senior Director, Financial Forecasting and Analysis
 September 1, 2012 to March 1, 2014
 
 
  Director, Planning, Forecasting and Reporting
 October 3, 2011 to August 31, 2012
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
   
  
 
(1) Mr. Earley, Mr. Stavropoulos, Ms. Williams, Mr. Simon, Ms. Burt, Ms. Kane, Mr. Mistry, Mr. Park, and Mr. Wells are executive officers of both PG&E Corporation and the Utility.  All other
listed officers are executive officers of the Utility only.
(2) On No vember 14, 2016, the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation elected Mr. Earley to the role of Executive Chair of the Board of PG&E Corporation and Ms. Williams to the role of Chief
Executive Officer and President of PG&E Corporation, both effective March 1 , 2017.  Also on November 14, 2016, the Board of Directors of the Utility elected Mr. Stavropoulos as President and
Chief Operating Officer of the Utility effective March 1, 2017.
(3) Mr. Bell and Ms. Burt will step down from their positions effective Mar ch 1, 2017.
(4) Mr. Park will step down from his position effective March 1, 2017 but is expected to remain with PG&E Corporation until September 1, 2017 .
44
 

 
PART II
 
ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRAN T’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED SHARE HOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES
 
As of February 7 , 201 7 , there were 56,835 holders of record of PG&E Corporation common stock.  PG&E Corporation common stock is listed on the New York
Stock Exchange and is traded under the symbol “PCG” .  The high and low closing prices of PG&E Corporation common stock for each quarter of the two most
recent fiscal y ears are set forth in the table entitled “Quarterly Consolidated Financial Data (Unaudited)” which appears after the Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8. Shares of common stock of the Utility are wholly owned by PG&E Corporation.  Information about the frequency and amount of dividends on
common stock declared by PG&E Corporation and the U tility for the two most recent fiscal years and information about the restrictions upon the payment of
dividends on their common stock appears in PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Statements of Equity, the Utility’s Consolidated Statements of S hareholders’ E quity,
and Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 and in “Li quidity and Financial Resources – Dividends” in Item 7 below.
 
Sales of Unregistered Equity Securities
 
PG&E Corporation made equity contributions to the Utility to taling $95 million d uring the quarter ended December 31, 2016 .  PG&E Corporation did not make any
sales of unregistered equity securities during 2016 in reliance on an exemption from registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. 
 
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
 
During the quarter ended December 31, 2016 , PG&E Corporation did not redeem or repurchase any shares of common stock outstanding.  PG&E Corporation does
not have any preferred stock outstanding.  Also, during the quarter ended December 31, 2016, the Utility did not redeem or repurchase any shares of its various series
of preferred stock outstanding.
45
 

 
ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
(in millions, except per share amounts)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
 
2013
 
2012
PG&E Corporation
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
For the Year  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Operating revenues
$
17,666    
$
16,833    
$
17,090    $
15,598    
$
15,040  
Operating income
 
2,177    
 
1,508    
 
2,450     
1,762    
 
1,693  
Net income
 
1,407    
 
888    
 
1,450     
828    
 
830  
Net earnings per common share, basic (1)
 
2.79   
 
1.81    
 
3.07     
1.83    
 
1.92  
Net earnings per common share, diluted
 
2.78   
 
1.79    
 
3.06     
1.83    
 
1.92  
Dividends declared per common share (2)
 
1.93   
 
1.82    
 
1.82     
1.82    
 
1.82  
At Year-End  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Common stock price per share
$
60.77   
$
53.19    
$
53.24    $
40.28    
$
40.18  
Total assets (3)
 
68,598    
 
63,234    
 
60,228     
55,693    
 
52,530  
Long-term debt (excluding current portion) (3)
 
16,220    
 
15,925    
 
15,151     
12,805    
 
12,598  
Capital lease obligations (excluding current
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
  portion)   (4)
 
31    
 
49    
 
69     
90    
 
113  
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
  
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
For the Year  
  
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
Operating revenues
$
17,667    
$
16,833    
$
17,088    $
15,593    
$
15,035  
Operating income
 
2,181    
 
1,511    
 
2,452     
1,790    
 
1,695  
Income available for common stock
 
1,388    
 
848    
 
1,419     
852    
 
797  
At Year-End  
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
Total assets (5)
 
68,374    
 
63,037    
 
59,964     
55,137    
 
52,003  
Long-term debt (excluding current portion) (5)
 
15,872    
 
15,577    
 
14,799     
12,805    
 
12,247  
Capital lease obligations (excluding current
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
  portion)   (4)
 
31    
 
49    
 
69     
90    
 
113  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(1 ) See “Overview – Summary of Changes in Net Income and Earnings per Share ” in Item 7. MD&A.
(2) Information about the frequency and amount of dividends and restrictions on the payment of dividends is set forth in “Liquidity and Financial Resources – Dividends” in MD&A in Item 7 and in
PG&E Corporati on’s Consolidated Statements of Equity, the Utility’s Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity, and Note 5 in Item 8.
( 3 ) In accordance with ASU No. 2015-03 , PG&E Corporation restated $105 million in 2015, $101 million in 2014 , $88 million in 2013, and $81 million in 2012 , of debt issuance costs .  Total
assets and total liabilities were each reduced by the amounts above with no impact to net income or total shareholders’ equity previously reported.
(4) The capital lease obligati ons amounts are included in noncurrent liabilities – other in PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(5 ) In accordance with ASU No. 2015-03 , the Utility restated $10 3 million in 2015, $99 million in 2014 , $88 million in 2013, and $80 million in 2012 , of debt issuance costs .  Total assets and
total liabilities were each reduced by the amounts above with no impact to net income or total shareholders’ equity previously reported.
46
 

 
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND   RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
 
OVERVIEW
 
PG&E Corporation is a holding company whose primary operating subsidiary is Pacific Gas and Electric Company, a public utility serving northern and central
California.  The Utility generates revenues mainly through the sale and delivery of electricity and natural gas to customers.
 
The Utility’s base revenue requirements are set by the CPUC in its GRC and GT&S rate case a nd by the FERC in its TO rate cases based on forecast costs.    
Differences between forecast costs and actual costs can occur for numerous reasons, including the volume of work required and the impact of market forces on the
cost of labor and materials.     Dif ferences in costs can also arise from changes in laws and regulations at both the state and federal level.     Generally, differences
between actual costs and forecast costs affect the Utility’s ability to earn its authorized return (referred to as “Utility R evenues and Costs that Impacted Earnings” in
Results of Operations below).     However, for certain operating costs, such as costs associated with pension and other employee benefits, the Utility is authorized to
track the difference between actual amounts an d forecast amounts and recover or refund the difference through rates (referred to as “Utility Revenues and Costs that
did not Impact Earnings” in Results of Operations below).     The Utility also collects revenue requirements to recover certain costs that t he CPUC has authorized the
Utility to pass on to customers , such as the costs to procure electricity or natural gas for its customers .     Therefore, although these costs can fluctuate, they generally
do not impact net income (referred to as “Utility Revenues and Costs that did not Impact Earnings” in Results of Operations below).       See “Ratemaking
Mechanisms” in Item 1 for further discussion.
 
This is a combined report of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, and includes separate Consolidated Financial Statement s for each of these two entities.  This
combined MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item
8. 
47
 

 
Summary of Chang e s in Net Income and Earnings per Share
 
T he following table is a summary reconciliation of the key changes, after-tax, in PG&E Corporation’s income available for common shareholders and EPS (as well as
earnings from o perations and EPS based on earnings from operations) for the year ended December 31, 2016 compared to the year ended December 31, 2015 (see
“Results of Operations” below).   “ Earnings from operations ” is a non-GAAP financial measure and is calculated as inc ome available for common shareholders less
items impacting comparability.   “ Items impacting comparability ” represent items that management does not consider part of the normal course of operations and
affect comparability of financial results between perio ds.   PG&E Corporation uses earnings from operations to understand and compare operating results across
reporting periods for various purposes including internal b udgeting and forecasting, short and long-term operating plans, and employee incentive compensa tion .  
PG&E Corporation believes that earnings from operations provide additional insight into the underlying trends of the business allowing for a better comparison
against historical results and expectations for future performance .  E arnings from operations are not a substitute or alternative for GAAP measures such as income av
ailable for common shareholders and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
 
 
 
EPS
(in millions, except per share amounts)
Earnings (1)
 
(diluted)
Income Available for Common Shareholders - 2015
$
874    
$
1.79  
Add items impacting comparability:
 
  
 
 
Fines and penalties
 
578    
 
1.19  
Pipeline-related expenses
 
61    
 
0.13  
Legal and regulatory related expenses
 
35    
 
0.07  
Natural gas matters insurance recoveries
 
(29)  
 
(0.06)
Earnings from Operations - 2015 (2)
$
1,519    
$
3.12  
2015 GT&S revenue (3)
 
300    
 
0.60  
Growth in rate base earnings
 
102    
 
0.20  
Regulatory and legal matters
 
1    
 
-  
Gain on disposition of SolarCity stock (4)
 
(14)  
 
(0.03)
Increase in shares outstanding
 
-    
 
(0.09)
Miscellaneous
 
(24)  
 
(0.04)
Earnings from Operations - 2016 (2)
$
1,884    
$
3.76  
Less items impacting comparability:
 
  
 
 
Butte fire related costs (net of insurance) (5)
 
(137)   
(0.27)
Fines and penalties (6)
 
(307)  
 
(0.61)
Pipeline-related expenses (7)
 
(67)  
 
(0.13)
Legal and regulatory related expenses (8)
 
(43)  
 
(0.09)
GT&S capital disallowance   (9)
 
(130)  
 
(0.26)
GT&S revenue   (10)
 
193    
 
0.38  
Income Available for Common Shareholders - 2016
$
1,393    
$
2.78  
 
 
 
  
 
(1)  All amounts presented in the table above are tax-adjusted at PG&E Corporation’s tax rate of 40.75% except for fines, which are not tax deductible. See footnote (6) below.
 
( 2 )  “Earnings from operations” is not calculated in accordance with GAAP and excludes the items impacting comparability shown in footn otes ( 5 ) through (10).
 
( 3 )   Represents the increase in 2016 revenues authorized December 1, 2016 in the final phase two decision of the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case.
 
( 4 )   Represents the gain recognized during the year ended December 31, 2015 . No comparable gain was recognized in 2016.
 
( 5 )   T he Utility recorded costs of $232 m illion (before the tax impact of $95 million) during the year ended December 31, 2016 associated with the Butte fire, net of insurance.  This includes
accrued charge s of $750 million ( before the tax impact of $ 306 million ) related to estimated third-party claims in conne ction with the Butte fire, partially offset by $625 million ( before the
tax impact of $255 million ) as probable of insurance recovery.  The Utility also incurred charges of $ 107 million ( before the tax impact of $44 million ) for Utility clean-up, repair, a nd
legal costs associated with the Butte fire . 
 
48
 

 
( 6 ) T he Utility incurred cost s of $498 million (before the tax impact of $191 million) , during the year ended December 31, 2016 associated with fines and penalties. This includes costs of $ 412
million (before the tax impact of $168 million) associated with safety-related cost disallowances imposed by the CPUC in its April 9, 2015 decision in the gas transmission pipeline
investigations.   The Utility also recorded $57 million (before the tax impact of $23 million) for disallowances imposed by the CPUC in its final phase two decision of the 2015 GT&S rate
case for prohibited ex parte communications.  In addition, the Utility accrued fines of $26 million in connection with the final decision app roved by the CPUC on August 18, 2016 in its
investigation regarding natural gas distribution record-keeping practices and $3 million in connection with the maximum statutory fine imposed on January 26, 2017 in the federal criminal
trial against the Utility .   These fines are not tax deductible .   Future fines or penalties may be imposed in connection with other enforcement, regulatory , and litigation activities regarding
natural gas matters and regulatory communications . 
 
( 7 ) T he Utility incurred costs of $ 113 million (before the tax impact of $ 46 million) , during the year ended December 31, 2016 for pipeline related expenses incurred in connection with the
multi-year effort to identify and remove encroachments from transmission pipeline rights of way .
 
(8 ) T he Utility incurred costs of $72 million (before the tax impact of $ 29 million), during t he year ended December 31, 2016 for legal and regulatory related expenses incurred in connection
with various enforcement, regulatory, and litigation activities regar ding natural gas matters and regulatory communications.  
 
(9 ) T he Utility incurred charges of $ 219 million ( before the tax impact of $89 million ), during the year ended December 31, 2016, for disallowed capital expenditures based on the CPUC
final phase o ne decision dated June 23, 2016 in the 2015 GT&S rate case, including $134 million ( before the tax impact of $54 million ) for the disallowed portion of the 2011 through
2014 capital expenditures in excess of adopted amounts and $85 million ( before the tax impact of $35 million) for t he Utility’s estimate of 2015 through 2018 capital expenditures that are
likely to exceed authorized amounts.   (S ee “Regulatory Matters ” below for more information.)
 
(10 ) As a result of the timing of the CPUC’s final phase two decision in the 2015 GT&S rate case, the Utility recorded $325 million (before the tax impact of $132 million) in excess of the
2016 authorized revenue requirement during the twelve months ended December 31, 2016 .
 
Key Factors Affecting Financial Results
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe that their future results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows will be materiall y affected by the following
factors: 
 
 
●
The Outcome of Enforcement, Litigation, and Regulatory Matters.  The Utility’s future financial results may continue to be impacted by the outcome of
current and future enforcement, litigation, and regulatory matters, including the Butte fire litigation, p otential costs associated with the alleged
violations of the CPUC’s ex parte communication rules, the cost of complying with the terms of probation and monitorship imposed in the sentencing
phase of the federal criminal trial and related remedial and other measures, and potential penalties in connection with the Utility’s self-report related to
its customer service representatives' drug and alcohol testing program.  (See “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
 
●
The Timing and Ou tcome of Ratemaking Proceedings.  The Utility’s results may be impacted by the timing and ou tcome of its 2017 GRC, FERC TO
rate case, and petition for modification related to its cost of capital .  Based on the current schedule, the Utility expects a fina l decision in its 2017
GRC in the first half of 2017. (See “Regulatory Matters − 2017 General Rate Case” below for more information.)   In addition, settlement negotiations
are ongoing related to the Utility’s FERC TO rat e case requesting a 2017 retail electric transmission revenue requirement.  (See “Regulatory Matters −
FERC Transmission Owner Rate Cases ” below for more information.)  Also, on February 7, 2017, the Utility filed with the CPUC a petition for
modification related to its cost of capital.  (See “Regulatory Matters – CPUC Cost of Capital ” below for more information.) The outcome of regulatory
proceedings can be affected by many factors, including arguments made by intervening parties, potential rate impacts, t he Utility’s reputation, the
regulatory and political environments, and other factors.
 
 
 
49
 

 
  ●
  The Ability of the Utility to Control and Recover Operating Costs and Capital Expenditures.  The Utility is committed to delivering safe, reliable,
sustainable , and affordable electric and gas services to its customers.  Increasing demands from state laws and policies relating to increased renewable
energy resources, the reduction of GHG emissions, the expansion of energy efficiency programs, the development and wides pread deployment of
distributed generation and self-generation resources, and the development of energy storage technologies have increased pressure on the Utility to
achieve efficiencies in its operations in order to maintain the affordability of its serv ice.  In any given year the Utility’s ability to earn its authorized
rate of return depends on its ability to manage costs within the amounts authorized in rate case decisions.   The Utility forecasts that in 201 7 it will
incur unrecovered pipeline-relat ed expenses ranging from $80 million to $125 million which primarily relate to costs to identify and remove
encroachments from transmission pipeline rights-of-way.  Also, the CPUC decision in the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case establishes various cost caps
tha t will increase the risk of overspend over the rate case cycle. (See Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidate d Financial Statements in Item 8 .)
 
 
●  
  The Amount and Timing of the Utility’s Financing Needs.  PG&E Corporation contributes equity to the Utility as needed to maintain the Utility’s
CPUC-au thorized capital structure.  In 201 6 , PG&E Corporation issued $842 mil lion of common stock and used $835 million of the cash proceeds
to make equity contributions to the Utility.  PG&E Corporation forecasts that i t will continue issuing a material amount of equity in future years,
including $400 million to $600 million in 2017, primarily to support the Utility’s capital expenditures.  PG&E Corporation may issue additional equity
to fund unrecoverable pipeline-relat ed expenses and to pay fines and penalties that may be required by the final outcomes of pending enforcement
matter s.  These additional issuances c ould have a material dilutive i mpact on PG&E Corporation’s EPS.  PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s
ability to access the capital markets and the terms and rates of future financings could be affected by the outcome of the matters discussed in
“Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13   of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 ,   change s in their respective credit
ratings, general economic and market conditions, and other factors.
 
 
For more information about the factors and risks that could affect PG& E Corporation’s and the Utility’s future results of operations, financial condition, and cash
flows, or that could cause future results to differ from historical results, see Item 1A. Risk Factors .  In addition, this 201 6 Form 10-K contains forward-looking
statements that are necessarily subject to various risks and uncertainties.  These statements reflect management’s judgment and opinions that are based on current
estimates, expectations, and projections about future events and assumptions regarding these events and management's knowledge of facts as of the date of this 2016
Form 10-K .  See the section entitled “Forward - Looking Statements” below for a list of some of the factors that may cause actual results to differ materially.  PG&E
Corporation and the Utility are not able to predict all the factors that may affect future results and do not undertake an obligation to update forward-looking
statements, whether in response to new information, future events, or otherwise.
50
 

 
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
 
The following discussion presents PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s operating results for 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 .  See “Key Factors Affecting Financial Results”
above for further discussion about factors that could affect future results of operations.
 
PG&E Corporation
 
The consolidated results of operations consist primarily of results relat ed to the Utility, which are discussed in the “Utility” section below.  The following table p
rovides a summary of net income available for common shareholders :
 
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Consolidated Total
$
1,393  
 $
874  
 $
1,436  
PG&E Corporation
 
5  
  
26  
  
17  
Utility
$
1,388  
 $
848  
 $
1,419  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P G&E Corporation’s net income consists primarily of income taxes , interest expense on long-term debt, and other income from investments.  Results include
approximately $30 million and $45 million of realized gains and associated tax benefits related to an investment in SolarCity Corporation recognized in 2015 and
2014, respectively , with no corresponding gains in 2016.
 
Utility
 
The table below shows certain items from the Utility’s Consolidated State ments of Income for 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 .  The table separately identifies the revenues a
nd costs that impacted earnings from those that did not impact earnings.  In general, expenses the Utility is authorized to pass through directly to customers (such as
costs to purchase electricity and natural gas, as well as costs to fund public purpose p rograms) and the corresponding amount of revenues collected to recover those
pass-through costs, do not impact earnings.  In addition, expenses that have been specifically authorized (such as the payment of pension costs) and the corresponding
revenues the Utility is authorized to collect to recover such costs, do not impact earnings.
 
Revenues that impact earnings are primarily those that have been authorized by the CPUC and the FERC to recover the Utility’s costs to own and operate its assets
and to prov ide the Utility an opportunity to earn its authorized rate of return on rate base.  Expenses that impact earnings are primarily those that the Utility incurs to
own and operate its assets.
 
51
 

 
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
 
Revenues and Costs:
 
 
 
Revenues and Costs:
 
 
 
Revenues and Costs:
 
 
(in millions)
That
Impacted
Earnings
That Did Not
Impact Earnings
Total
Utility
 
That
Impacted
Earnings
That Did Not
Impact Earnings
Total
Utility
 
That
Impacted
Earnings
That Did Not
Impact Earnings
Total
Utility
Electric operating revenues
$
7,955  
$
5,910   $
13,865    
$
7,442  
$
6,215   $
13,657    
$
7,059  
$
6,597   $
13,656  
Natural gas operating revenues
 
2,767    
1,035    
3,802    
 
2,082    
1,094    
3,176    
 
2,072    
1,360    
3,432  
Total operating revenues
 
10,722    
6,945    
17,667    
 
9,524    
7,309    
16,833    
 
9,131    
7,957    
17,088  
Cost of electricity
 
-    
4,765    
4,765    
 
-    
5,099    
5,099    
 
-    
5,615    
5,615  
Cost of natural gas
 
-    
615    
615    
 
-    
663    
663    
 
-    
954    
954  
Operating and maintenance
 
5,787    
1,565    
7,352    
 
5,402    
1,547    
6,949    
 
4,247    
1,388    
5,635  
Depreciation, amortization, and
decommissioning
 
2,754    
-    
2,754    
 
2,611    
-    
2,611    
 
2,432    
-    
2,432  
Total operating expenses
 
8,541    
6,945    
15,486    
 
8 ,013    
7,309    
15,322    
 
6,679    
7,957    
14,636  
Operating income
 
2,181    
-    
2,181    
 
1,511    
-    
1,511    
 
2,452    
-    
2,452  
Interest income 
(1)
 
  
  
22    
 
  
  
8    
 
  
  
8  
Interest expense 
  (1)
 
  
  
(819)  
 
  
  
(763)  
 
  
  
(720)
Other income, net 
(1)
 
  
  
88    
 
  
  
87    
 
  
  
77  
Income before income taxes
 
  
  
1,472    
 
  
  
843    
 
  
  
1,817  
Income tax provision (benefit) 
  (1)
 
  
  
70    
 
  
  
(19)  
 
  
  
384  
Net income
 
  
  
1,402    
 
  
  
862    
 
  
  
1,433  
Preferred stock dividend requirement 
(1)
 
  
  
14    
 
  
  
14    
 
  
  
14  
Income Available for Common Stock
 
 
 
 $
1,388    
 
 
 
 $
848    
 
 
 
 $
1,419  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(1) These items impacted earnings.
 
Utility Revenues and Costs that Impacted Earnings
 
The following discussion presents the Utility’s operating results for 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 , focusing on revenues and expenses that impacted earnings for these
periods.
 
Operating Revenues
 
The Utility’s electric and natural gas operating revenues that impacted earnings increased $ 1.2 b illion or 13% in 2016 compared to 2015 , primarily as a result of
approximately $ 700 million of incr emental revenues authorized in the 2015 GT&S rate case and approximately $ 425 million of additional base revenues as
authorized by the CPUC in the 2014 GRC deci sion and by the FERC in the TO rate case.  
 
The Utility included the authorized increase for the 2015 GT&S rate case period in rates starting August 1, 2016.   The Utility will collect, over a 36-month period, the
difference between adopted revenue requirements and amounts previously collected in rat es, retroactive to January 1, 2015.  Accounting rules allow the Utility to
recognize revenues in a given year only if they will be collected from customers within 24 months of the end of that year.  As a result, the Utility will recognize the
remaining $ 102 million in the first quarter of 2017.   (See “Regulatory Matters” below.)  
 
T he Utility’s electric and natural gas operating revenues that impacted earnings increased $393 million or 4% in 2015 compared to 2014, primarily as a result of
approximately $490 million of additional base revenues as authorized by the CPUC in the 2014 GRC decision and by the FERC in the TO rate case.  This increase
was partially offset by the absence of approximately $110 million of revenues the CPUC authorized the Utility to collect for recovery of certain PSEP-related costs
during the same period in 2014.
 
52
 

 
Operating and Maintenance
 
The Utility’s operating and maintenance expenses that impacted earnings in creased $ 385 m illi on or 7% in 2016 compared to 2015 , primarily due to $ 85 7 million
in charges for third-party claims, Utility clean-up, repair, and legal costs r elated to the Butte fire , $ 219 million in permanently disallowed capital spending (see
“Regulatory Matters” below), $34 million in charges recorded in connection with the final CPUC decision related to the natural gas distribution faciliti es record-
keeping investigation, the federal criminal trial , and the atmospheric corrosion inspection self-report, $24 million in higher pipeline-related expenses and legal and
regulatory related expenses during the year ended December 31, 2016 , an escalation related to la bor, benefits, and service contracts, and accelerat ed transm ission
and distribution project work .  These increases were partially offset by $ 500 million in charges associated with the Penalty Decision for customer refunds and fines
incurred in 2015 with no corresponding charges in 2016 and approximately $125 million in lower disallowed capital charges associated with the Penalty Decision in
2016 .  Additionally, the Utility recorded approximately $ 6 25 million in probable insurance re coveries related to the Butte fire in the year ended December 31, 2016
as compared to $49 million of insurance recoveries for third-party claims related to the San Bruno accident for the same period in 2015.  (S ee Note 13 of the Notes to
the Consolidated F inancial Statements in Item 8.) 
 
The Utility’s operating and maintenance expenses that impacted earnings increased $1.2 billion or 27% in 2015 compared to 2014, primarily due to $907 million in
charges associated with the Penalty Decision, consisting of $400 million for the customer bill credit, an additional $100 million charge for the fine payable to the state,
and $407 million of disallowed capital charges.  (See “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item
8.)  The increase is also due to higher labor and benefit-related expenses of approximately $100 million and fewer insurance recoveries for third-party claims and
associated legal costs of $63 million related to the San Bruno accident.  No further insurance recoveries related to these claims are expected.  These increases were
offset by $116 million in disallowed capital recorded in 2014 related to the PSEP.  
 
Depreciation, Amortization, and Decommissioning
 
The Utility’s depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning expenses increased $ 143 million or 5% in 2016 compared to 2015 and $ 179 million or 7% in 201 5
compared to 2014 .  In 201 6 , the increase was primarily due to the impact of capital additions.  In 2015, the increase was primarily due to the impact of capital
additions and higher depreciation rates as authorized by the FERC in the TO rate case .
 
Interest Expense
 
The Utility’s interest expenses increased by $ 56 million or 7% in the year ended December 31, 2016 compared to the same period in 2015, primarily due to the
issuance of additional long-term debt.  The Utility’s interest expenses increased by $ 43 million or 6% in the year ended December 31, 2015 compared to the same
period in 2014, primarily due to the issuance of long-term debt.
 
Interes t Income and Other Income, Net
 
There were no material changes to interest income and other income, net for the periods presented.
 
Income Tax Provision
 
The Utility’s income tax provision increased $ 89 million , or 468% , in 2016 as compared to 2015 .  The increase in the tax provision was primarily the result of the
statutory tax effect of higher pre-tax income in 2016 compared to 2015 , partially offset by higher tax benefits from property-related timing differences in 2016
compared to 2015 .  The higher effective tax rate is driven by higher pre-tax earnings in 2016, partially offset by rate impact from p roperty-related timing differences.
 
The Utility’s income tax provision   decreased $403   million, or   105%,   in   2015   as compared to   2014.   This is primarily the result of the statutory tax effect of  
lower pre-tax income and hi gher tax benefits from property- re lated timing differences in 2015 as compared to 2014.   The lower effective tax rate in 2015 is the
result of lower pre-tax earnings in 2015 and rate impact from property-related timing differences.
 
53
 

 
The following table reconciles the income tax expense at the federal statutory rate to the income tax provision:
 
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Federal statutory income tax rate
35.0   %
 
35.0   %
 
35.0   %
Increase (decrease) in income tax rate resulting from:
  
 
  
 
  
State income tax (net of federal benefit) (1)
(2.2) 
 
(4.8)  
 
1.6    
Effect of regulatory treatment of fixed asset differences (2)
(23.4) 
 
(33.7)  
 
(14.7)  
Tax credits
(0.8) 
 
(1.3)  
 
(0.7)  
Benefit of loss carryback
(1.1) 
 
(1.5)  
 
(0.8)  
Non-deductible penalties (3)
0.8   
 
4.3    
 
0.3    
Other, net   (4)
(3.5) 
 
(0.2)  
 
0.4    
Effective tax rate
4.8   %
 
(2.2) %
 
21.1   %
 
  
 
  
 
  
(1) Includes the effect of state flow -through ratemaking treatment.  In 2016 and 2015, amounts reflect an agreement with the IRS on a 2011 audit related to electric transmission and distribution
repairs deductions.   
(2) I nclude s the effect of federal flow-through ratemaking treatment for c ertain property-related costs as authorized by the 2014 GRC decision in all periods presented and by the 2015 GT&S
decision which impacted only 2016.  All amounts are impacted by the level of income before income taxes.  The 2014 GRC and 2015 GT&S rate cas e decisions authorized revenue requirements
that reflect flow-through ratemaking for temporary income tax differences attributable to repair costs and certain other property-related costs for federal tax purposes.  For these temporary tax
differences, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize the deferred tax impact in the current period and record offsetting regulatory assets and liabilities.  Therefore, PG&E Corporation’s and
the Utility’s effective tax rates are impacted as these differences arise and r everse.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize such differences as regulatory assets or liabilities as it is probable
that these amounts will be recovered from or returned to customers in future rates.  
( 3 ) Primarily represen ts the effect s of non-ta x deductible fines and penalties associated with the natural gas distribution facilities record-keeping decision for the year ended December 31, 2016
and the effects of the Penalty Decision for the year ended December 31, 2015 .   For more information about the Penalty Decision see “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 .  
( 4 ) In 2016, the amount primarily represents the impact of tax audit settlements.
 
Utility Revenues and Costs that did not Impact Earnings
 
Fluctuations in revenues that did not impact earnings are primarily driven by procurement costs, see below for more detail.
 
Cost of Electricity
 
The Utility’s cost of electricity includes the cost of power purchased from third parties (including renewable energy resources), transmission, fuel used in its own
generation facilities, fuel supplied to other facilities under power purchase agreements, costs to comply with California’s cap-and-trade progr am, and realized gains
and losses on price risk management activities.   (See Note 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.) 
 
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Cost of purchased power
$
4,510    $
4,805    $
5,266  
Fuel used in own generation facilities
 
255     
294     
349  
Total cost of electricity
$
4,765    $
5,099    $
5,615  
Average cost of purchased power per kWh   (1)
$
0.109    $
0.100    $
0.101  
Total purchased power (in millions of kWh) (2)
 
41,324     
48,175     
52,008  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
(1 ) C ost of purchased power was impacted primarily by a higher percentage of renewable energy resources .
( 2) T he decrease in purchased power primarily resulted from an increase in generation from the Utility’s Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant and its hydroelectric facilities as well as lower electric
customer demand . 
 
The Utility’s total purchased power is driv en by customer demand, the availability of the Utility’s own generation facilities (including Diablo Canyon and its
hydroelectric plants), and the cost-effectiveness of each source of electricity .
 
54
 

 
Cost of Natural Gas
 
The Utility’s cost of natural gas includes the costs of procurement, storage and transportation of natural gas, costs to comply with California’s cap-and-trade program,
and realized gains and losses on price risk management activities.   (See Note 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financia l Statements in Item 8.)  The Utility’s cost of
natural gas is impacted by the market price of natural gas, changes in the cost of storage and transportation, and changes in customer demand.  
 
(in millions)
2016
 2015
 2014
Cost of natural gas sold
$
481    $
518    $
813  
Transportation cost of natural gas sold
 
134     
145     
141  
Total cost of natural gas
$
615    $
663    $
954  
Ave rage cost per Mcf of natural gas sold
$
2.45    $
2.74    $
4.37  
Total natural gas sold (in millions of Mcf)
 
196     
189     
186  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Operating and Maintenance Expenses
 
The Utility’s operating expenses that did not impact earnings include certain costs that the Utility is authorized to recover as incurred such as pension contributions
and public purpose programs costs.  If the Utility were to spend more than authorized amounts, these expenses could have an impact to earnings.  For 201 6 , 201 5,
and 201 4 , no material amounts were incurred above author ized amounts.
 
LIQUIDITY AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES
 
Overview
 
The Utility’s ability to fund operations , finance capital expenditures, and make distributions to PG&E Corporation depends on the levels of its operating cash flows
and access to the capital and credit markets.  The CPUC authorizes the Utility’s capital structure, the aggregate amount of long-term and short-term debt that the
Utility may issue , and the revenue requirements the Utility is able to collect to recover its cost of capital.  The Utility generally utilizes equity contributions from
PG&E Corporation and long-term senior unsecured debt issuances to maintain its CPUC-authorized long-term capital structure consisting of 52% equity and 48% debt
and preferred sto ck.  (See “Ratemaking Mechanisms” in Item 1 . )   The Utility relies on short-term debt, including commercial paper, to fund temporary financing
needs.  
 
PG&E Corporation’s ability to fund operations, make scheduled principal and interest payments, fund equity contributions to the Utility , and pay dividends primarily
depends on the level of cash distributions received from the Utility and PG&E Corporation’s access to the capital and credit markets.  PG&E Corporation has material
stand-alone cash flows related to the issuance of equity and lo ng-term debt, dividend payments, and issuances and repayments under its revolving credit facility and
commercial paper program.  PG&E Corporation relies on short-term debt, including commercial paper, to fund temporary financing needs.
 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s credit ratings may be affected by the ultimate outcome of pending enforcement and litigation matters.  Credit rating downgrades
may increase the cost and availability of short-term borrowing, including commercial paper, the costs associat ed with credit facilities, and long-term debt costs.  In
addition, some of the Utility’s commodity contracts contain collateral posting provisions tied to the Utility’s credit rating from each of the major credit rating
agencies.  If the Utility’s credit ra ting were to fall below investment grade, the Utility would be required to post additional cash immediately to fully collateralize
some of its net liability positions .  (See Note s 9 and 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)  
 
PG&E Corporation’s equity contributions to the Utility are funded primarily through common stock issuances.  PG&E Corporatio n forecasts that it will issue between
$400 million and $ 6 00 million in common stock during 2017, primarily to fun d equity contributions to the Utility.  T he Utility’s equity needs will continue to be
affected by the timing and outcome of unrecoverable pipeline-related expenses and by fines , penalties and claims that may be imposed in connection with the matters
descr ibe d in “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 below.  Com mon stock issuances by
PG&E Corporation to fund these needs could have a material dilutive impact on PG&E Corporation’s EPS .  
 
55
 

 
Cash and Cash Equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.  PG&E Corporation and the
Utility maintain separate bank accounts and primarily invest their cash in money market funds.  In addition to cash and cash equivalents, the Utility holds restricted
cash that, prior to October 2016, primarily consisted of cash held in escrow pending the resolution of the remaining disputed claims that were filed in the Utility’s
reorganization proceeding under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.  In October 2016, the Utility received approval from the bankruptcy court to release the
remaining $161 million of cash held in escrow to unrestricted cash for use by the Ut ility.  (See “Resolution of Remaining Chapter 11 Disputed Claims” in Note 13 of
the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)  
 
Financial Resources
 
Debt and Equity Financings
 
The Utility issued $ 1.0 billion in long-term debt and $ 500 million in short-term debt during the year ended December 31, 2016.  (See Note 4 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)    
 
During 2016, PG&E Corporation sold 2.6 million shares of its common stock under the February 2015 equity distribution agreement for cash proceeds of $ 149
million, net of commissions paid of $ 1.3 million.  As of December 31, 2016, the remaining gross sales available under this agreement were $ 275 million.
 
In August 2016, PG&E Corporation sold 4.9 million shares of its common stock in an underw ritten public offering for net cash proceeds of $ 309 million.
 
In addition, d uring 2016, PG&E Corporation sold 7.4 million shares of common stock under its 401(k) plan, the Dividend Reinvestment and S tock Purchase Plan,
and share-based compensation plans for total cash proceeds of $ 364 million .
 
The proceeds from equity issuances were used for general corporate purposes, including the contribution of equity to the Utility .  For the year ended December 31,
2016 , PG&E Corporation made equity contributions to the Utility of $ 835 million.  Additionally, PG&E Corporation and the Utility expect to continue to issue long-
term and short-term debt for genera l corporate purposes and to maintain the CPUC-authorized capital structure during 2017.
 
Revolving Credit Facilities and Commercial Paper Programs
 
In June 2016, PG&E Corporation and the Utility each extended the termination dates of their existing revolvi ng credit facilities by one year from April 27, 2020 to
April 27, 2021. At December 31, 2016, PG&E Corporation and the Utility had $ 300 million and $ 1.9 billion available under their respective $ 300 million and $3. 0
billion revolving credit facilities.  (See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility can issue commercial paper up to the maximum amounts of $300 million and $ 2.5 billion, respectively.  For the year ended
December 31, 2016, PG&E Corporation and the Utility had an average outstanding commercial paper balance of $ 84 million and $ 837 million, and a maximum
outstanding balance of $ 176 million and $ 1.4 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2016, t he Utility had an outstanding co mmercial paper balance of $ 1.0 b illion
and PG&E Corporation did not have any commercial paper outstanding .  (See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)  
 
T he revolving credit facilities require that PG&E Corporation and the Utility maintain a ratio of total consolidated debt to total consolidated capitalization of at most
65% as of the end of each fiscal quarter.  At December 31, 2016, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s total consolidated debt to total consolidated capitalization was
51% and 50% , respectively.  PG&E Corporation’s revolving credit facility agreement also requires that PG&E Corporation own, directly or indirectly, at least 80% of
the common s tock and at least 70% of the voting capital stock of the Utility.   In addition, the revolving credit facilities include usual and customary provisions
regarding events of default and covenants including covenants limiting liens to those permitted under PG& E Corporation’s and the Utility’s senior note indentures,
mergers, and imposing conditions on the sale of all or substantially all of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s assets and other fundamental changes.   A t December
31, 2016 , PG&E Corporation and the Utility were in compl iance with all covenants under their respective revolving credit facilities.
 
56
 

 
Dividends
 
In May 2016, the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation and the Utility each adopted a new target dividend payout ratio range of 55% to 65% of earnings, with a
target to reach a payout ratio of approximately 60% by 2019.   Each Board of Directors retains authority to change the respective common stock dividend policy and
dividend payout ratio at any time, especially if unexpected events occur that would change its view as to the prudent level of cash conservation.   No dividend is
payable unless and until declared by the applicable Board of Directors. 
 
PG&E Corporation
 
For the first quarter of 2016, the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation declared a common stock dividend of $ 0.455 per share.  In May 2016, the Board of
Directors of PG&E Corporation declared a new quarterly common stock dividen d of $ 0.49 per share.  As a result, for e ach of the second, third and fourth quarter s
of 2016, the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation declared a common stock dividend of $0.49 per share .  In 2016, total dividends were $ 1.925 per share.  For
each of the quarters in 2015 and 2014 , t he Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation declared common stock dividends of $ 0.455 per share, for annual dividends of $
1.82 per share.   Dividends paid to common share holders by PG&E Corporation were $ 921 million in 2016, $ 856 million in 2015 , and $ 828 million in 2014 .  In
December 201 6 , the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation declared quarterly dividends of $ 0.49 per share, totali ng $ 248 milli on, of which approximately $
243 mil lion was paid on January 15, 201 7 to shareholders of record on December 30, 2016.
 
Utility
 
For the first quarter of 2016, the Board of Directors of the Utility declared a common stock dividend of $ 179 million to PG&E Corporation.  For each of the second,
third and fourth quarters of 2016, the Board of Directors of the Utility declar ed common stock dividends of $ 24 4 million to PG&E Corporation .  In 2016, total
dividends paid by the Utility to PG&E Corporation were $ 911 million.  For each of the quarters in 2015 and 2014 , the Board of Directors of the Utility declared
common stock dividends of $ 179 million to PG&E Corporation for annual dividends paid of $ 716 million in 2015 and 2014 .   In addition, the Utility paid $ 14
million of dividends on preferred stock in each of 201 6, 2015 , and 2014.   The Ut ility’s preferred stock is cumulativ e and any dividends in arrears must be paid
before the Utility may pay any common stock dividends.  In December 201 6 , the Board of Directors of the Utility declared dividends on its outstanding series of
preferred stock, payable o n February 15, 201 7 , to sh ar eholders of record on January 31, 2017 .
 
Utility Cash Flows
 
The Utility’s cash flows were as follows:
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Net cash provided by operating activities
$
4,344    
$
3,747    
$
3,632  
Net cash used in investing activities
 
(5,526)  
 
(5,211)  
 
(4,799)
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
1,194    
 
1,468    
 
1,157  
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
$
12    
$
4    
$
(10)
 
Operating Activities
 
The Utility’s cash flows from operating activities primarily consist of receipts from customers less payments of operating expenses, other than expenses such as
depreciation that do not require the use of cash.  During 2016 , net cash provided by operating activities in creased by $ 597 million compared to 2015 .  This in crease
was partially due to the Utility receiving an additional $170 million in tax refunds in 2016 than in 2015.  The remaining increase was primarily due to fluctuations in
activities within the normal course of business such as timing and amount of customer billings and vendor billings and payments. During 2015, net cash provided by
operating activities increased by $1 15 million compared to 2014.  This increase was primarily due to higher bas e revenue collections authorized in the 2014 GRC
and lower purchase d power costs (see “Cost of Electricity” under “Results of Operations – Utility Revenues and Costs that did not Impact Earnings” above), offset by
the payment of a $300 million fine to the State General Fund as required by the Penalty Decision.
 
57
 

 
Future cash flow from operating activities will be affected by various factors, including:
 
 
•
the timing and outcome of ratemaking proceedings, including the 2017 GRC and the TO rate case, and cost of capital proceeding ;
 
 
•
the timing and amounts of costs that may be incurred in connection with claims associated with Butte fire and the timing and amount of related insurance
recoveries, fines or penaltie s that may be imposed in connection with the ex parte OII or costs in connection with a potential settlement, fines or penalties that
may be imposed in connection with other enforcement and litigation matters, costs associated with the terms of probation a nd monitorship imposed in the
sentencing phase of the federal criminal trial, and potential remedial and other measures that could be imposed on the Utility in connection with the DOI
debarment pr oceeding (see “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 1 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 below);
 
 
•
the timing and amount of costs the Utility incurs, but does not recover, associated with its natural gas system;
 
 
•
the timing and amount of tax payments (including the bonus depreciation) , tax refunds, net collateral paym ents, and interest payments, as well as changes in
tax regulations that could be adopted by Congress as a result of the new federal administration and other proposals; and
 
 
•
the timing of the resolution of the Chapter 11 disputed claims and the amount of principal and interest on these claims that the Utility will be required to pay.
 
 
Investing Activities
 
Net cash used in investing activities in creased by $ 315 million during 20 16 as compared to 2015 primarily due to an increase of approximately $440 million in
capital expenditures, partially offset by an increase in restricted cash released from escrow by approximately $160 million.  (See “Resolution of Remaining Chapter 11
Disp uted Claims” in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)  Net cash used in investing activities increased by $412 million during
2015 as compared to 2014 primarily due to an increase of $340 million in capital expenditures and an increase in net purchases of nuclear decommissioning trust
investments in 2015 as compared to net proceeds associated with sales of nuclear decommissioning trust investments in 2014.
 
Future cash flows used in investing activities are largely depen dent on the timing and amount of capital expenditures.  The Utility estimates that it will incur
approximately $6.0 billion in capital expenditures in each of the years 2017, 2018, and 2019.
 
Financing Activities
 
During 2016 , net cash pro vided by financing activities de creased by $ 274 million as compared to 2015 .  During 2015 , net cash provided by financing act ivities
increased by $3 11 million as compare d to 2014.  Cas h provided by or used in financing activities is driven by the Utility’s financing needs, which depend on the
level of cash provided by or used in operating activities, the level of cash provided by or used in investing activities, the condi tions in the capital markets, and the
maturity date of existing debt instruments.  The Utility generally utilizes long-term debt issuances and equity contributions from PG&E Corporation to maintain its
CPUC-authorized capital structure, and relies on short -term debt to fund temporary financing needs.
58
 

 
CONTRACTUAL COMMITMENTS
 
The following table provides information about PG&E Corporation ’s and the Utility’s contractual commitments at December 31, 2016 :
 
 
Payment due by period
 
Less Than
 
1-3
 
3-5
 
More Than
 
 
(in millions)
1 Year
 
Years
 
Years
 
5 Years
 
Total
Ut ility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Long-term debt (1) :
$
1,495  
 $  
2,408  
 $  
3,328  
 $  
22,452  
 $  
29,683  
Purchase obligations (2) :
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Power purchase agreements:
 
3,417  
 
 
6,175  
 
 
5,844  
 
 
29,506  
 
 
44,942  
Natural gas supply, transportation, and storage
 
536  
 
 
329  
 
 
241  
 
 
455  
 
 
1,561  
Nuclear fuel agreements
 
97  
 
 
188  
 
 
179  
 
 
136  
 
 
600  
Pension and other benefits (3)
 
388  
 
 
776  
 
 
776  
 
 
388  
 
 
2,328  
Operating leases (2)
 
44  
 
 
80  
 
 
75  
 
 
168  
 
 
367  
Preferred dividends (4)
 
14  
 
 
28  
 
 
28  
 
 
-  
 
 
70  
PG&E Corporation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Long-term debt (1) :
 
8  
 
 
362  
 
 
-  
 
 
-  
 
 
370  
Total Contractual Commitments
$
5,999  
 $
10,346  
 $
10,471  
 $
53,105  
 $
79,921  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Includes interest payments over the terms of the debt.  Interest is calculated using the applicable interest rate at December 31, 2016 and outstanding principal for each instrument with the terms
ending at each instrument’s maturity.   (See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.) 
( 2) See “Purchase Commitments” and “Other Commitments” in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
(3) See Note 11 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Payments into the pension and other benefits plans are based on annual contribution requirements.  As these annual
requirements continue indefinitely into the futu re, the amount shown in the column entitled “more than 5 years” represents only 1 year of contributions for the Utility’s pension and other benefit
plans.
( 4) Based on historical performance, it is assumed for purposes of the table above that dividends are payable within a fixed period of five years.
 
The contractual commitments table above excludes potential payments associated with unrecognized tax positions .  Due to the uncertainty surrounding tax audits,
PG&E Corporation and the Utility cannot make reli able estimates of the amount s and period s of future payments to major tax jurisdictions related to unrecognized
tax benefits.  Matters relating to tax years that remain subject to examination are discussed in Note 8 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 .
 
O ff-Balance Sheet Arrangements
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on
their financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources , other than
those discussed in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements (the Utility’s commodity purchase agreements) in Item 8 .
 
ENFORCEMENT AND LITIGATION MATTERS  
 
PG& E Corporation and the Utility have significant contingencies arising from their operations, including contingencies related to the enforcement and litigation
matters described in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 . The outcome of these matters, individually or in the aggregate, could
have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s future financial results. 
 
 
Butte Fire Litigation
 
In September 2015, a wildfire (known as the “Butte fire”) ignited and spread in Amador and Calaveras Counties in Northern California.  On April 28, 2016, Cal Fire  
released its report of the investigation of the origin and cause of the wildfire.   According to Cal Fire’s report, the fire burned 70,868 acres, resulted in two fa talities,
destroyed 549 homes, 368 outbuildings and four commercial properties, and damaged 44 structures.  Cal Fire’s   report concluded that the wildfire was caused when a
Gray Pine tree contacted   the Utility’s   electric line which ignited portions of the t ree, and determined that the failure by the Utility   and/or its vegetation
management contractors, ACRT Inc. and Trees, Inc.,   to identify certain potential hazards during its vegetation management program ultimately led to the failure of
the tree.   In a pre ss release also issued on April 28, 2016, Cal Fire indicated that it will seek to recover firefighting costs in excess of $90 million from the Utility.
59
 

 
 
 
On May 23, 2016, individual plaintiffs filed a master complaint against the Utility and its two vegetat ion management contractors in the Superior Court of California
for Sacramento County.   Subrogation insurers also filed a separate master complaint on the same date.   The California Judicial Council had previously authorized the
coordination of all cases in Sacramento County.   As of December 31, 2016, complaints have been filed against the Utility and its two vegetation management
contractors in the Superior Court of California in the Counties of Calaveras, San Francisco, Sacramento, and Amador involving app roximately 1,950 individual
plaintiffs representing approximately 950 households and their insurance companies.   These complaints are part of or are in the process of being added to the two
master complaints.   Plaintiffs seek to recover damages and other c osts, principally based on inverse condemnation and negligence theories of liability.  The number
of individual complaints and plaintiffs may increase in the future. 
 
The Utility continues mediating and settling cases.  The next case management conferenc e is scheduled for March 2, 2017.
 
In connection with this matter, the Utility may be liable for property damages, interest, and attorneys’ fees without having been found negligent, through the theory of
inverse condemnation.  In addition, the Utility may be liable for fire suppression costs, personal injury damages, and other damages if the Utility were found to have
been negligent.  The Utility believes it was not negligent; however, there can be no assurance that a court or jury would agree with the Util ity.  The Utility believes
that it is probable that it will incur a loss of at least $750 million for all potential damages described above.  This amount is based on assumptions about the number,
size, and type of structures damaged or destroyed, the conte nts of such structures, the number and types of trees damaged or destroyed, as well as assumptions about
personal injury damages, attorneys’ fees, fire suppression costs, and other damages that the Utility could be liable for under the theories of inverse condemnation
and/or negligence.
 
The Utility believes that it is reasonably possible that it will incur losses related to Butte fire claims in excess of $750 million accrued through December 31, 2016 but
is currently unable to reasonably estimate the upper end of the range of losses because it is still in an early stage of the evaluation of claims, the mediation and
settlement process, and discovery.  The process for estimating costs associated with claims relating to the Butte fire requires management to e xercise significant
judgment based on a number of assumptions and subjective factors.  As more information becomes known, including additional discovery from the plaintiffs and
results from the ongoing mediation and settlement process, management estimates and assumptions regarding the financial impact of the Butte fire may result in
material increases to the loss accrued. 
 
The Utility has liability insurance from various insurers, which provides coverage for third-party liability attributable to the Butt e fire in an aggregate amount of
approximately $900 million.  Such insurance coverage is subject to the terms and limitations of the applicable policies and may not be sufficient to cover the Utility’s
ultimate liability.
 
The Utility records insurance recoveries when it is deemed probable that a recovery will occur and the Utility can reasonab ly estimate the amount or its range.  The
Utility has recorded $625 million for probable insurance recoveries in connection with losses related to the Butte fire.  While the Utility plans to seek recovery of all
insured losses, it is unable to predict the ultimate amount and timing of such insurance recoveries.  In addition, the Utility is pursuing coverage under the insurance
policies of its two vegetation management contractors, including under policies where the Utility is listed as an additional insured .  Recoveries of any amounts under
these policies are uncertain.  If the ultimate liability exceeds the amounts recovered through insurance, the Utility would expect to seek authorization from the CPUC
and the FERC to recover any exce ss amounts from custom ers.   The Utility is unable to predict the timing or outcome of any such proceeding, or the timing of
recovery from customers, if any.  The resolution of claims, any future regulatory proceeding, and the recoveries from other potentially responsible partie s and
customers could extend over a number of years. (For more information, see “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
Department of Interior Inquiry
 
In September 2015, the Utility was notified that the DOI had initiated an inquiry into whether the Utility should be suspended or debarred from entering into federal
procurement and non-procurement contracts and programs citing the San Bruno explosion and indicating, as the basis for the inquiry, alleged poor record-keeping,
poor identification and evaluation of threats to gas lines and obstruction of the NTSB’s investigation.  The Utility filed its initial response on November 2, 2015 to
demonstrate that i t is a “presently responsible” contractor under federal procurement regulations and that it believes suspension or debarment is not appropriate.  On
April 8, 2016, the Utility received a series of follow-up questions from the DOI regarding its November 201 5 submission.   On November 21, 2016, the Utility
provided the DOI with a supplemental submission in which it addressed the DOI’s April 8, 2016 questions.   The Utility continues to fully cooperate with the DOI.
 
60
 

 
As a result of the August 9, 2016 jury’s verdict in the federal criminal trial, the Utility updated its registration on the federal government’s System for Award
Management (SAM), a federal procurement database, to reflect the verdict.  Under federal law, the government may not enter into a contr act with any corporation
that was convicted of a felony criminal violation under any federal law within the preceding 24 months, where the awarding agency is aware of the conviction, unless
an agency has considered suspension or debarment of the corporatio n and made a determination that this action is not necessary to protect the interests of the
government. 
 
On December 21, 2016, the Utility and the DOI entered into an interim administrative agreement that reflects the DOI’s determination that the Utili ty remains eligible
to contract with federal government agencies while the DOI determines whether any further action is necessary to protect federal government’s business interests. 
The agreement will be effective until superseded by an amended agreement or determination.  The agreement also provides that the DOI is still conducting a review to
determine whether the Utility has an effective compliance and ethics program and that the DOI is required to use its best efforts to complete its review before the end
of 2017.  If the DOI determines that the Utility’s program is not generally effective in preventing and detecting criminal conduct, the Utility may be required to enter
into an amended administrative agreement and implement remedial and other measures, such as a requirement that the Utility’s natural gas operations and/or
compliance and ethics programs be supervised by one or more in dependent third party monitor(s) .
 
The Utility could incur material costs, not recoverable through rates, to implement r emedial and other measures that could be imposed, the amount of which the
Utility is currently unable to estimate. 
 
Litigation Related to the San Bruno Accident and Natural Gas Spending
 
As of December 31, 2016, there were seven purported derivative lawsui ts seeking recovery on behalf of PG&E Corporation and the Utility for alleged breaches of
fiduciary duty by officers and directors, among other claims.
 
Four of the complaints were consolidated as the   San Bruno Fire Derivative Cases   and are pending in th e Superior Court of California, County of San Mateo.   The
remaining three cases are Tellardin v. Anthony F. Earley, Jr.,. et al., Iron Workers Mid-South Pension Fund v. Johns, et al., and Bushkin v. Rambo et al .
 
On December 8, 2015, the California Court o f Appeal issued a writ of mandate to the Superior Court of California, San Mateo County, ordering the court to stay all
proceedings in the four consolidated San Bruno Fire Derivative Cases pending conclusion of the federal criminal proceedings against the Utility.   On November 16,
2016, counsel in the four consolidated San Bruno Fire Derivative cases, as well as counsel in the Tellardin action, appeared for a status conference in the San Mateo
Superior Court.   The court reaffirmed that all proceedings in th ese actions were stayed until the conclusion of the Utility’s federal criminal proceeding, at which point
they were directed to meet and confer and report back to the court.  The parties completed a mediation session on December 8-9, 2016 and continue disc ussions about
the potential resolution of the matter.  These actions remain stayed.
 
 
61
 

 
Bushkin v. Rambo et al ., pending in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, has been designated by the plaintiff as related to the pend
ing shareholder derivative suit Iron Workers Mid-South Pension Fund v. Johns, et al. , discussed below.   The plaintiff in the Bushkin lawsuit has agreed that this case
should be stayed pending conclusion of the federal criminal trial against the Utility and , on May 3, 2016, the judge entered a stipulated order staying the case.   The
order also provides that the parties should meet and confer within 30 days after the criminal trial concludes and provide the court a status update.   Despite the stay of
his comp laint, on June 20, 2016 the Bushkin plaintiff filed a petition in the Superior Court of California, San Francisco County, seeking to enforce the plaintiff’s
claimed right as a shareholder to inspect certain PG&E Corporation accounting books and records pur suant to section 1601 of the California Corporations Code.   On
July 25, 2016, PG&E Corporation filed a motion to stay plaintiff’s petition until the appellate stay of the San Bruno Fire Derivative Cases has been lifted, or, in the
alternative, a demurrer a sking the court to dismiss plaintiff’s petition.   On August 29, 2016, the San Francisco Superior Court granted PG&E Corporation’s motion,
and indicated that plaintiff’s petition was stayed pending resolution of the criminal matter against the Utility.   On January 13, 2017, the parties submitted a joint case
management statement advising the court that, because the Utility had not yet been sentenced, the case should remain stayed until at least March 10, 2017, when the
parties will advise the court of furthe r developments.  While the Utility was sentenced in the federal criminal proceeding on January 26, 2017, this matter remains
stayed until at least March 10, 2017.
 
The Iron Workers action pending in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California has been stayed pending the resolution of the San Bruno
Fire Derivative Cases .   On May 5, 2016, the court ordered the parties to meet and confer within 30 days after the criminal trial concludes and provide the court a
status update.   At the court’s request, on August 22, 2016, the parties filed a statement requesting that the case continue to be stayed until resolution of the San Bruno
Fire Derivative Cases .   On Augu st 31, 2016, the court set a case management conference for September 30, 2016, and requested the parties to file a joint case
management conference statement by September 23, 2016.   On September 30, 2016, the court decided to continue the stay pending the resolution of the federal
criminal proceeding against the Utility and ordered the parties to submit a joint status report on or before March 15, 2017.  This matter remains stayed until at least
March 15, 2017.
 
For more information about the federal crimi nal proceeding, see Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and Item 3 Legal Proceedings.
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are uncertain when and how the above lawsuits will be resolved.
62
 

 
R EGULATORY MATTERS
 
The Utility is subject to substantial regulation by the CPUC, the FERC, the NRC , and other federal and state regulatory agencies.  The resolutions of these and other
proceedings may affect PG&E Corporation’s and th e Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
 
2017 General Rate Case
 
On September 1, 2015, the Utility filed its 2017 GRC application with the CPUC.  On August 3, 2016, the Utility, together with ORA, TURN, and 12 other
intervening parties filed a motion with the CPUC seeking approval of a settlement agreement that resolves nearly all of the issues raised by the parties in the Utility’s
2017 GRC.  All parties who filed testimony in the case joined the settlement agreement , which was the subject of a one-day workshop overseen by the assigned
commissioner and ALJ.  The settlement agreement will ultimately be considered by the full commission.  In the GRC proceeding, the CPUC will determine the annual
amount of base revenues (or “revenue requirements”) that the Utility will be authorized to collect from customers from 2017 through 2019 or 2020 to recover its
anticipated costs for electric distribution, natural gas distribution, and electric generation operations and to provide the Utility an opportunity to earn its authorized rate
of return.  (The Utility’s revenue requirements for other portions of its operations, such as electric transmission, natural gas transmission and storage services, and
electricity and natural gas purc hases, are authorized in other regulatory proceedings overseen by the CPUC or the FERC.)
 
Revenue Requirements and Attrition Year Revenues
 
The settlement agreement proposed that the Utility’s 2016 authorized revenue requirement of $7.9 billion be increas ed by $88 million, effective January 1, 2017.  The
settlement agreement further proposed an increase to the authorized 2017 revenues of $444 million in 2018 and an additional increase of $361 million in 2019, as
shown in the table below.
 
The settlement ag reement identified two contested issues.  First, the parties were unable to agree on whether there should be a third post-test year or “attrition” year
for this GRC cycle.  ORA and the Utility recommend a third post-test year for this cycle that would prov ide for an additional increase of $361 million in 2020. 
TURN and certain other settling parties oppose the third post-test year.  The other contested issue concerns whether the Utility should be authorized to establish a new
balancing account for costs ar ising from the CPUC’s rulemaking on natural gas leak abatement.  The Utility and certain settling parties support the balancing
account.  TURN and certain other settling parties do not.  ORA does not oppose it.  Interested parties filed comments and reply comments on the contested issues and
these issues were also discussed at a one-day workshop on August 30, 2016. 
 
The table below summarizes the differences between the amount of revenue requirement increases included in the Utility’s request, as updated in the Utility’s
supplemental testimony filed on February 22, 2016 and its May 27, 2016 rebuttal testimony, and the amount proposed in the settlement agreement:
 
Year
 
Increase Requested in GRC Application
(in millions)
 
 
Increase Proposed in Settlement Agreement
(in millions)
 
 
Difference (1)
(Decrease from GRC Application)
(in millions)
2017
$
319   $
88   
$
(231)
2018
 
467   
 
444    
(23)
2019
 
368     
361     
(7)
2020 (2)
 
N/A     
361    
N/A  
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
(1)  Rounded for presentation purposes.
(2) Whether or not revenues should be authorized for 2020 is a contested issue.
 
 
 
63
 

 
The following table shows the difference between the Utility’s requested increases in 2017 revenue requirements by line of business and the amounts proposed in the
settlement agreement:
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Increase/(Decrease) Proposed in
Settlement Agreement
   
Difference (1) (Decrease from GRC
Application)
(in millions)
 
Increase Requested in GRC
Application  
 
  
  
Line of Business:
 
 
  
  
Electric distribution
$
67  
 
1.6  %  
$
(62)
 
(1.5)
%   
$
(128)
Gas distribution
 
59  
 
3.4   
 
 
(3)
 
(0.2)
  
 
(62)
Electric generation
 
193  
 
9.9   
 
 
153  
 
7.8  
  
 
(40)
2017 revenue requirement
increases
$
319  
 
4.0  %  
$
88  
 
1.1  %
 
$
(231)
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
(1) Rounded for presentation purposes.
 
The following table shows the differences, by line of business and cost category, between the amount of revenue requirements included in the GRC application and
the amount proposed in the settlement agreement, as well as the differences between the 2016 authorized revenue requirements and (i) the GRC application and (ii)
the amounts proposed in the settlement agreement:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Increase/
 
Increase/
 
Amounts
 
Amounts
 
 
 
 
(Decrease)
 
(Decrease)
 
Requested in
 
Proposed in
 
 
 
2016 Amounts
 
2016 Amounts
(in millions) (1)
2017 GRC
 
Settlement
 
Difference
 
vs. 2017 GRC
 
vs. Settlement
Line of Business:
Application
 
Agreement
 
(Decrease)
 
Application
 
Agreement
Electric distribution
$
4,279   
$
4,151   
$
(128)  
$  
67   
$  
(62)
Gas distribution
 
1,801   
 
1,738   
 
(62)  
 
59   
 
(3)
Electric generation
 
2,155   
 
2,115   
 
(40)  
 
193   
 
153  
Total revenue requirements
$
8,235   
$
8,004   
$
(231)  
$
319   
$
88  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Cost Category:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(in millions) (1)
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Operations and maintenance
$
1,825   
$
1,794   
$
(31)  
 
161   
 
131  
Customer services
 
361    
334    
(27)  
 
42   
 
15  
Administrative and general
 
975    
912    
(62)  
 
(36)  
 
(99)
Less: Revenue credits
 
(140)   
(152)   
(12)  
 
(9)  
 
(21)
Franchise fees, taxes other than
 
   
   
  
 
  
 
 
   income, and other adjustments
 
184    
170    
(14)  
 
146   
 
132  
Depreciation (including costs of asset
 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
   removal), return, and income taxes
 
5,030    
4,946    
(84)  
 
15   
 
(70)
Total revenue requirements
$
8,235   
$
8,004   
$
(231)  
$  
319   
$  
88  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Rounded for presentation purposes.
 
The settlement agreement propose d reductions in the following areas forecast in the GRC application.  For gas distribution, reductions are proposed for corrosion
control, leak management, gas operations technology, and new business.  For electric distribution, reductions are propo sed for overhead maintenance, capacity,
technology, mapping and records, reliability, substation management, new business, and undergrounding work.  For electric distribution, the capital-related reductions
are offset in part by increases in the replacemen t and installation of additional units in specific asset areas.  For electric generation, the settlement agreement propose
d to move costs related to Diablo Canyon seismic studies from the GRC to the Utility’s Energy Resource Recovery Account proceeding.  P roposed reductions in the
customer service area largely relate to the removal of certain costs from the forecast related to residential rate reform implementation.  Some of these costs would be
recoverable through the existing Residential Rates Reform Memo randum Account, and the Utility could seek recovery of the remaining costs in a future filing with
the CPUC.  Additionally, a number of company-wide reductions, including reductions to the Short-Term Incentive Plan and certain employee benefits, are propos ed
in the settlement agreement.
 
64
 

 
Balancing Accounts
 
The settlement agreement proposes to retain certain existing balancing accounts, including the Tax Act Memo Account that was first established following the Tax
Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010, and to eliminate certain memorandum and balancing accounts that are no longer
necessary.  In addition to the contested balancing account for natural gas leak abatement mitigation costs, the settlement agreemen t proposes one new tax-related
memorandum account to track the impact on the revenue requirement from certain types of changes in tax laws or regulations.
 
Capital Additions and Rate Base
 
The settlement agreement proposes capital expenditures of $3.9 bill ion for 2017 for the portions of the Utility’s business addressed in the GRC.  Proposed capital
expenditures are lower than the amount included in the GRC application of $4.0 billion for 2017, consistent with the provisions of the settlement agreement.  Wh ile
the settlement agreement proposes overall revenue requirement increases for 2018 and 2019, it does not specify capit al expenditures for those years.  At the August
30, 2016 workshop, t he Utility estimated authorized capital expenditures of $3.6 billion for 2018 and $3.5 billion for 2019, based on a calculation method that is
subject to CPUC approval, as compared to its request of approximately $4.0 billion each year. The Utility is unable to predict if the CPUC will approve its proposed
calculation meth od.
 
The settlement agreement proposes a 2017 weighted average rate base of $24.3 billion for the portions of the Utility’s business reviewed in the GRC, compared with
the Utility’s request of $24.5 billion.  The $200 million difference is primarily due to the lower level of capital expenditur es agreed to in the settlement.  At the
August 30, 2016 workshop, t he Utility also estimated a weighted average rate base of $25.4 billion for 2018 and $26.3 billion for 2019, compared with the Utility’s
request of $25 .7 billion and $26.9 billion, respectively.
 
Evidentiary hearings were held on September 1, 2016.  A workshop was held on January 11, 2017 to further explore the three-year versus four-year rate case cycle. 
Under the current schedule, a final CPUC decisio n is e xpected to be issued in the first half of 2017.  On March 17, 2016, the CPUC issued a decision to allow the
authorized revenue requirement changes to become effective on January 1, 2017, even if the final decision is issued after that date.
 
PG&E Co rporation and the Utility are unable to predict whether the CPUC will approve the settlement agreement.
 
2015 Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Case
 
On June 23, 2016, the CPUC approved a final decision in phase one of the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case.   T he decision adopts the revenue requirements that the
Utility is authorized to collect through rates beginning August 1, 2016, to recover its costs of gas transmission and storage services for the 2015 GT&S ra te case
period (see table below) .   The decision authorizes the Utility to collect, over a 36-month period, the difference between adopted revenue requirements and amounts
previously collected in rates, retroactive to January 1, 2015.  A ccounting rules allow the Utility to recognize revenues in a given y ear only if they will be collected
from customers within 24 m onths of the end of that year.  A s a result, the Utility will complete recording $102 million of the retroactive reve nue requirement
increase in the first quarter of 2017 .
 
The phase one decision excludes from rate base $696 million of capital spending in 2011 through 2014 in excess of the amount adopted.  The decision permanently
disallows $120 million of that amount and orders that the remaining $576 million be subject to a third party audit ove rseen by the CPUC staff, with the possibility
that the Utility may seek recovery in a future proceeding.  The decision also establishes various cost caps that will increase the risk of overspend over the current rate
case cycle including new one-way capita l bal ancing accounts.  I n the second quarter of 2016, the Utility incurred charges of $190 million for capital expenditures
that the Utility believes are probable of disallowance based on the decision. This includes $134 million to the net plant balance fo r 2011 through 2014 capital
expenditures in excess of adopted amounts and $56 million for the Utility’s estimate of 2015 through 2018 capital expenditures that are probable of exceeding
authorized amounts.  The Utility took an additional charge of $29 mill ion in the fourth quarter of 2016 related to 2015 through 2018 capital expenditures that are
forecasted to exceed authorized amounts.  Additional charges may be required in the future based on the Utility’s ability to manage its capital spending and o n the
outcome of the CPUC’s audit of 2011 through 2014 capital spending.
 
The phase one decision denies the Utility’s request for full balancing account treatment for recovery of authorized transportation and storage revenue requirements for
non-core customers , and instead continues the revenue sharing mechanism authorized in the 2011 GT&S rate case that subjects a portion of the Utility’s
transportation and storage revenue requirement to market risk.
 
The phase one decision also authorizes the Utility’s reque st for cost recovery of up to $157 million for the construction of Line 407, a 25.5 mile, 30-inch pipeline in
the Sacramento Valley expected to be built during this rate case period.  The authorized revenue requirements will begin when Line 407 becomes ope rational.  The
decision also authorizes the Utility to track costs exceeding $157 mi llion in a memorandum account.  A reasonableness review of all costs for Line 407 will take place
in t he next GT&S rate case.
65
 

 
           
 
On August 1, 2016, TURN , ORA, and Indicated Shippers filed an appl ication for rehearing of the phase one decision.  The applica tion indicates that the decision
contains language suggesting that the authorized revenue requirement is to comply with new federal and state safety mandates and should be removed from the final
decision, allows recovery of shareholder costs in rates , and improperly sequences the calculation of the San Bruno Penalty and the ex parte disallowance.   The Utility
filed a response on August 16, 2016.  The Utility ca nnot predict when or if the CPUC will grant the rehearing or if it will adop t the parties’ recommendations.
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                       
 
On December 1, 2016, the CPUC approved a final decision in phase two of the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case , regarding the $850 million penalty ass essed in the
Penalty Decision.  The final phase two decision applies $689 million of the $850 million penalty (81 percent) to capital expenditures and the remaining $161 million
(19 percent) to expenses, and then reduce s the 2015 revenue requirement by $72 million for the five - month delay caused by the Utility’s violation of the CPUC ex
parte communication rules in this proceeding ($57 million of the $72 million total ex parte disallowance was recognized in 2016 and the remaining $15 million will be
recognized in the first quart er of 2017) .  The final decision also approve s the Utility’s list of programs which meet the CPUC’s definition of “safety related,” the
costs of which are to be funded through the $850 million penalty.
 
The following table shows t he revenue requirement amo unts adopted in the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case including adjustments for the $850 million Penalty
Decision disallowance and the ex parte disallowance:
 
(in millions)
2015
 
2016
 
2017
 
2018
Revenue Re quirement Before Adjustments
$  
1,046  
 $  
1,110  
 $  
1,220  
 $  
1,324  
San Bruno Penalty Expense Allocation
 
(161)
  
 
  
 
  
 
San Bruno Penalty Capital Revenue Requirement Allocation
 
5  
  
(47)
  
(93)
  
(93)
Other Expense Adjustments
 
(3)
  
(2)
  
(2)
  
(1)
Adjusted Ex Parte Penalty
 
(72)
  
 
  
 
  
 
Final Phase Two Revenue Requirement
$  
815  
 $  
1,061  
 $  
1,125  
 $  
1,230  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The final phase two decision adopts total weighted average rate base of $2.8 billion in 2015, $2.8 billion in 2016, $3.0 billion in 2017, and $3.5 billion in 2018.  The
final phase two decision reduce s rate base by the full amount of the disallowed capital expenditures but does not remove the asso ciated deferred taxes, which the
Utility believes creates a normalization violation.  In the final decision, the CPUC authorizes the Utility to establish a Tax Normalization Memorandum A ccount to
track relevant costs and clarifies that it does not intend t he rate base offset or the penalty generally, to create tax timing differe nces.  The final decision also affirms
the CPUC’s intention to comply with normalization rules and to avoid the potential adverse consequences of a finding of a normalization vi olati on by the IRS. 
Pursuant to the final phase two decision, on February 6, 2017, the Utility submitted an advice l etter to the CPUC to provide 30 days advance notice of the Utility’s
request to the IRS for a private letter ruling to determine whether the ado pted rate base offset complies with IRS normalization rules.  The final decision authorizes
the Utility to subsequently seek an appropriate adjustment to its rev enue requirements and rate base if the IRS finds a normalization violation.
 
On January 4, 2017, TURN, ORA and Indicated Shi ppers filed an application for rehearing of the phase two decision.  Specifically, the applica tion argues that the
decision inappropriately sequenced the San Bruno Penalty and the ex parte ratemaking disallowance.   The Util ity filed a response on January 19, 2017.  The Utility
cannot predict when or if the CPUC will grant the rehearing.
 
With the addition of a third attrition year, the Utility’s next GT&S cycle will begin in 2019.  The decision requires the Utility to file i ts next GT&S application in
2017.
 
66
 

 
FERC Transmission Owner Rate Cases
 
On July 29, 2015, the Utility requested a 2016 retail electric transmission revenue requirement of $1.515 billion, a $314 mill ion increase over the previous year’s
authorized revenue requirement of $1.201 billion.  The Utility’s proposed rates went into effect on March 1, 2016, subject to refund, and pending a final decision by
the FERC.  On September 1, 2016, the Utility and other settling parties (including the CPUC) filed a motion a t the FERC for approval of a settlement proposing that
the Utility’s 2016 retail electric transmission revenue requirement be set at $1.331 billion, a $130 million increase over the previous year’s a uthorized revenue
requirement.  The Utility also filed a motion on September 1, 2016, requesting the implementation of interim rates , which was an agreed upon term of the set
tlement.  The motion was granted and, as a result, the interim rates became effective for wholesale customers on September 1, 2016 and for retail customers on
October 1, 2016.  The FERC approved the settlement on November 17, 2016.
 
On July 29, 2016, the Utility filed a rate case at the FERC requesting a 2017 retail electric transmission revenue r equirement of $1.718 billion, a $387 million in
crease over the 2016 revenu e requirement of $1.331 billion .  The forecasted network transmission rate base for 2017 is $6.7 billion.  The Utility is also seeking a
return on equity of 10.9% which includes an incentive component of 50 basis points for the U tility’s continuing participation in the CAISO.  In the filing, the Utility
forecasted that it will make investments of $1.296 billion in 2017 in various capital projects. 
 
On September 30, 2016, the FERC issued an order accepting the Utility’s July 201 6 filing and set it for settlement negotiations.  The order set an effective date for
rates of March 1, 2017, and made the rates subject to hearing and refund.  The next settlement conference is scheduled for March 16 and March 17, 2017.
 
CPUC Cost of Cap ital
 
O n February 6, 2017, the Utility and other California IOUs entered into a MOU with the CPUC, ORA, and TURN to extend the next cost of capital application filing
deadline two years to April 22, 2019 for the year 2020.  To implement the MO U, on Februar y 7, 2016, the IOUs , ORA, and TURN filed with the CPUC a petition
for modification of prior CPUC decisions addressing the cost of capital.  If the petition for modification is approved as submitted it would reduce the Utility’s ROE
from 10.40% to 10.25% and reset the Utility’s authorized cost of long-term debt and preferred stock beginning January 1, 2018.  The long-term debt cost reset will r
eflect actual embedded costs as of the end of August 2017 and forecasted interest rates for the new long-term debt scheduled to be issued for the remainder of 2017
and all of 2018.   The Utility’s current capital structure of 52% common equity, 47% long-ter m debt, and 1% preferred equity would remain unchanged. 
 
If and once the petition for modification is granted by the CPUC, each IOU will submit to the CPUC in September 2017 its respective updated cost of capital and
corresponding revenue requirement imp acts with an eff ective date of January 1, 2018.  While the actual changes to the Utility’s revenue requirement resulting from
the petition for modification will not be known until the Utility’s filing in September 2017, the Utility estimates that its annua l revenue requirement will be reduced
by approximately $100 million, beginning in 2018.  These estimates are based on current and forecasted market interest rates.  Changes in market interest rates can
have material effects on the cost of the Utility’s fut ure financings and consequently on the estimated change in annual revenue requirements.
 
The Utility’s cost of capital adjustment mechanism would not operate in 2017 but could operate in 2018 to change the cost of capital for 2019.  If the mechanism is act
ivated for 2019, the Utility’s cost of capital, including its new ROE of 10.25%, will be adjusted according to the ex isting terms of the mechanism.  Concurrently with
the petition for modification, the Utilit y and other California IOUs sent a letter to the executive director of the CPUC requesting that the existing April 2017 filing due
date for the 2018 cost of capital be deferred while the CPUC is considering the petition for modification.  On February 13, 2017, the executive director of the CPUC
granted the request. As extended, the Utility and the other California IOUs would file their next cost of capital applications 60 days after the effective date of the
CPUC decision on the petition for modification, or April 20, 2017, whichever is later, if the CPU C does not grant the petition for modification.   The Utility expects
that the CPUC may issue a deci sion in the first half of 2017.
 
67
 

 
Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant
 
Joint Proposal for Plant Retirement
 
On August 11, 2016, the Utility submitted an appli cation to the CPUC to retire Diablo Canyon at the expiration of its current operating licenses in 2024 and 2025 and
replace it with a portfolio of energy efficiency and GHG-free resources.  The application implements a joint proposal between the Utility an d the Friends of the Earth,
Natural Resources Defense Council, Environment California, International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 1245, Coalition of California Utility Employees,
and Alliance for Nuclear Responsibility.
 
The application and joint proposal include a voluntary increase in the Utility’s target for RPS-eligible resources to 55%, effective in 2031 through 2045, as compared
to the state’s goal of 50% renewables.   The parties to the joint proposal proposed that the Utility be authorized to procure GHG-free replacement resources in three
competitive procurement tranches: in Tranche 1, the Utility would be authorized to obtain 2,000 gross GWh of energy efficiency savings to be implemented over the
2018 to 2024 time period; in Tra nche 2, the Utility would be authorized to procure through a solicitation 2,000 GWh of GHG-free energy resources that will
commence energy deliveries or add energy efficiency projects to the system in the 2025 to 2030 time period; and in Tranche 3, the Uti lity would commit to a
voluntary 55% RPS beginning in 2031 , and would maintain this voluntary commitment through 2045 or until superseded by action of the state legislature or the
CPUC.   The three tranches of resource procurement in the application and joi nt proposal are not intended to specify all energy resources that will be needed to ensure
the orderly replacement of Diablo Canyon. Instead, the Utility expects that the full solution will be addressed in ongoing CPUC proceedings. 
 
Costs associated with energy efficiency projects or programs in Tranche 1 and Tranche 2 would be recovered through the Utility’s electric public purpose program
rates as non-bypassable charges, consistent with the existing recovery mechanisms for energy efficiency program cost s.  GHG-free energy resources costs from
Tranche 2 are proposed to be recovered through a non-bypassable cost allocation mechanism called the Clean California Charge that (1) equitably allocates costs and
benefits, such as RPS or Resource Adequacy credits, associated with the procurement among responsible load-serving entities, and (2) determines the net capacity
costs of such procurement consistent with the methodology for the allocation of net capacity costs laid out by the CPUC.  Costs associated with pr ocurement for
Tranche 3 would be recovered through a separate renewable non-bypassable charge.  
 
The application seeks confirmation from the CPUC that the Utility’s full investment in Diablo Canyon and authorized rate of return will be recovered in rates by the
time the facility ceases operations.  Additionally, the Utility requests that the CPUC pre-approve the recovery of certain costs related to the closure of the Diablo
Canyon.  These include the non-bypassable cost allocation mechanism for procurement of GHG-free energy and the recovery of $1.3 billion for administration and
acquisition of the new Tranche 1 energy efficiency procurement as authorized energy efficiency funding, subject to return of all unspent funds; the recovery of
employee retention an d retraining and development programs to continue safe and efficient operation of Diablo Canyon through the end of its license periods,
estimated at approximately $3 6 0 million; and a community mitigation program to compensate San Luis Obispo County for the decline in local economic stimulus
provided by Diablo Canyon through a transition period ending in 2025 , estimated at $85 million. The Utility also seeks cost recovery of approximately $50 million in
costs related to the federal and state Diablo Canyon li cense renewal process.
 
More than 40 parties have submitted responses and protests to the Utility’s application.  A prehearing conference on the applicati on was held on October 6, 2016 and
public participation hearings were held in San Luis Obispo on Octob er 20, 2016.  On November 18, 2016, a scoping memo was issued that set the schedule and
determined that land issues would be out of the scope of this proceeding.  In December 2016, the Utility filed with the CPUC the community impact mitigation
program set tlement agreement of $85 million, compared to $50 million included in the original joint proposal filed on August 11, 2016.  Intervenor testimonies were
submitte d to the CPUC in January 2017.  Several intervenors indicated their support to retire Diablo Ca nyon at the expiration of its current operating licen ses in
2024 and 2025.  Several p arties argued , however , that a component of the employee retention program and community impact mitigation prog ram be funded by
shareholders.  Several intervenors also sub mitted proposals for modifications to certain aspects of the three GHG-free replacement tranches. Several parties
recommended that the license renewal project cost r ecovery request be rejected and/ or be paid for by bo th customers and shareholders.  There were no direct
challenges to the Diablo Canyon remaining net book value cost recovery proposal.  Rebuttal testimony and comments on the community impact mitigation program
settlement agreement are scheduled to be submitted to the CPUC on March 17, 2017 and evidentiary hearings are scheduled to take place in April 2017.  Opening and
reply briefs are due on May 26, 2017 and June 9, 2017, respectively.  The Utility expects that a final decision will be issued by the end of 2017.   Upon CPUC
approval of the appl ication and such approval becoming final and non-appealable , the Utility will withdraw its license renewal application currently pending before
the NRC .  PG&E Corporation and the Utility are unable to predict whether the CPUC will approve the application.
 
68
 

 
California State Lands Commission Lands Lease
 
On June 28, 2016, California State Lands Commission approved a new lands lease for the intake and discharge structures at Diablo Canyon to run concurrently with
Diablo Canyon’s current operating licenses, until Diablo Canyon Unit 2 ceases operations in August 2025.  The Utility believes that the approval of the new lease will
ensure sufficient time for the Utility to identify and bring online a portfolio of GHG-free replacement resources.  The Utility will submit a future lease extension
request to address the period of time required for plant decommissioning, which under NRC regulations can take as long as 20 years.  On August 28, 2016, the World
Business Academy (WBA) filed a writ in the Los Angeles Superi or Court.  WBA asserts that the State Lands Commission committed legal error when it determined
that the short term lease extension for an existing facility was exempt from review under the California Environmental Quality Act.  If the petitioner prevails in its
challenge, the State Lands Commission could be required to perform an environmental review of the new lands lease.  The court has set a trial date of July 11, 2017,
with the petitioner’s opening brief due February 27 , 2017, opposition briefs due Ap ril 24, 2017, and reply briefs due May 22, 2017 . 
 
Asset Retirement Obligations
 
The Utility expects that the decommissioning of Diablo Canyon will take many years after the expiration of its current operating licenses.  Detailed studies of the cost
to de commission the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities are conducted every three years in conjunction with the NDCTP.  Actual decommissioning costs may vary
from these estimates as a result of changes in assumptions such as decommissioning dates; regulator y requirements; technology; and costs of labor, materials, and
equipment.  The Utility recovers its revenue requirements for decommissioning costs from customers through a non-bypassable charge that the Utility expects will
continue until those costs are f ully recovered.
 
On March 1, 2016, the Utility submitted its updated decommissioning cost estimate with the CPUC.  The estimated undiscounted cost to decommission the Utility’s
nuclear power plants increased by approximately $1.4 billion, for a total estim ated cost of $4.8 billion, due to increased estimated costs related to spent fuel storage,
staffing, and out-of-state waste disposal.  The Utility requested that the CPUC authorize the collection of increased annual revenue requirements beginning on Januar
y 1, 2017 based on   these updated cost estimates.
 
While the NDCTP forecast includes employee severance program estimates, it does not include estimated costs related to the joint proposal’s employee retention and
retraining and development programs, and t he San Luis Obispo County community mitigation program described above.  The Utility intends to conduct a site-specific
decommissioning study to update the 2015 NDCTP forecast and to submit the study to the CPUC by mid-2019. 
 
On July 15, 2016, the assign ed CPUC commissioner and ALJ issued a scoping memo for the Utility’s 2015 NDCTP and excluded from the scope of the proceeding
the issue on whether the Utility should be required to present additional analysis for a license extension scenario for Diablo Can yon, as a result of the Utility’s
announcement of its plan to not seek relicensing of Diablo Canyon beyond its current operating authority.  The scoping memo also adopts within the scope of the
proceeding a reasonableness review of the Utility’s estimated u pdated cost to decommission the Utility’s nuclear power plants and of the forecasts of certain expenses
and the decommissioning trust funds’ rates of return.  Evidentiary hearings took place in September 2016 and opening briefs were submitted on October 14 , 2016. 
Intervenor parties proposed several major recommendations including a reduction to the total spent nuclear fuel storage forecast, a reduction to the large component
(reactor vessels, steam generators, and other large plant components) removal cost estimate, and a reduction to the waste disposal estimate.  Additionally, intervenors
asserted that the CPUC should not permit the Utility to increase its Diablo Canyon-related revenue requirement at this time as it has not demonstrated its current
estimate is reasonable. Parties also claimed that the Utility has not justified its increase to security costs and decommissioning oversight contractor staff costs.  No
party challenged the Utility’s decommissioning trust funds rates of return or cost escalation as sumptions.  Reply briefs were submitted on October 31, 2016. 
Intervenor parties reiterated that the Utility has not justified increases in costs due to large component removal, site security, decommissioning contractor staff, spent
nuclear fuel storage, a nd waste disposal.  The Utility confirmed that the testimony and work papers support the cost increases as well as the total estimate to
decommission Diablo Canyon.
 
The estimated nuclear decommissioning cost is discounted for GAAP purposes and recognized as an ARO on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.  The total nuclear
decommissioning obligation accrued in accordance with GAAP was $ 3.5 billion at December 31, 2016, which includes an $818 million adjustment to reflect the
increased cost estimates and a $115 million increase resulting from the joint proposal described above, and $2.5 billion at December 31, 2015.  These estimates are
based on decommissioning cost studies, prepared in accordance with the CPUC requirements.  Changes in these estimates could mat erially affect the amount of the
recorded ARO for these assets.
 
69
 

 
As of December 31 , 2016, the nuclear decommissioning trust accounts’ total fair value was $2.9 billion.  Changes in the estimated costs, the timing of
decommissioning or the assumptions underlying these estimates could cause material revisions to the estimated total cost to decommission. 
 
CPUC Investigation of the Utility’s Safety Culture
 
On August 27, 2015, the CPUC began a formal investigation into whether the organizational cultur e and governance of PG&E Corporation and the Utility prioritize
safety and adequately direct resources to promote accountability and achieve safety goals and standards.  The CPUC directed the SED to evaluate the Utility’s and
PG&E Corporation’s organizatio nal culture, governance, policies, practices, and accountability metrics in relation to the Utility’s record of operations, including its
record of safety incidents.  The CPUC authorized the SED to engage a consultant to assist in the SED’s investigation a nd the preparation of a report containing the
SED’s assessment.  The consultant’s work bega n in the second quarter of 2016.
 
The CPUC stated that the initial phase of the proceeding was categorized as rate setting because it will consider issues both of fa ct and policy and because the Utility
and PG&E Corporation do not face the prospect of fines, penalties, or remedies in this phase.  Upon completion of the consultant’s report, the assigned commissioner
will determine the scope of any next actions in the pr oceeding.  The timing, scope and potential outcome of the investigation are uncertain.
 
2014 – 2015 Energy Efficiency Incentive Awards
 
On December 15, 2016, the CPUC approved a final 2014 - 2015 Energy Efficiency Incentive Award of $16.3 million, compared to the Utility’s request of $19.1
million.  The award includes a $5.8 million reduction reflecting the approved settlement agreement related to the rehearing of the 2006 - 2008 customer energy
efficiency shareholder incentives .  The settlement agreement re quires the Utility to reduce future energy efficiency shareholder incentives by $29.1 million , which
will be applied in installments of $5.8 million per year for five years, provided that the Utility has sufficient energy efficiency incentive awards to off set that amount. 
Due to the application of the first offset of $5.8 million, the required future energy efficiency reduction currently corresponds to $23.3 million.  If shareholder
incentives are insufficient to offset this amount, the offset in the follo wing year will be increased by the shortfall.  At its discretion, the Utility may increase the
amount of the offset to reduce the remaining offset obligation more quickly.  If the amount has not been fully offset at the end of five years, the balance will be
credited against future energy efficiency program spending.
 
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY INITIATIVES
 
The California Legislature and the CPUC have adopted requirements, policies , and decisions to improve and refine gas and electric safety citation programs,
implement new state law requirements applicable to natural gas storage facilities , accommodate the growth in distributed electric generation resources (including
solar installa tions), increase the amount of renewable energy delivered to customers, promote customer energy efficiency and dema nd response programs, and foster
the development of a state-wide electric vehicle charging infrastructure to encourage the use of electric ve hicles.   In addition, the CPUC continues to implement state
law requirements to reform electric rates to more closely reflect the utilities’ actual costs of service, reduce cross-subsidization among customer rate classes,
implement new rules for net energy metering (which currently allow certain self-generating customers to receive bill credits for surplus power at the full retail rate),
and allow customers to have greater control over their energy use.   CPUC proceedings related to some of these matters are discussed below.  
 
The Utility’s ability to recover its costs, including investments associated with legislative and regulatory initiatives, as well as its electricity procurement and other
operating costs, will, in large part, depend on the final form of legislative or regulatory requirements, and whether the associated ratemaking mechanisms can be
timely adjusted to reflect changes in customer demand for the Utility’s electricity and natural gas service.    
 
Gas and Electric Safety Citation Program
 
The SED periodically audits utility operating practices and conducts investigations of potential violations of laws and regulations applicable to the safety of the
California utilities’ electric and natural gas facilities and operations.  The CPUC has del egated authority to the SED to issue citations and impose penalties for
violations identified through audits, in vestigations, or self-reports.  Under both the gas and electric programs, the SED has discretion whether to issue a penalty for
each violation, but if it assesses a penalty for a violation, it is required to impose the maximu m statutory penalty of $50,000.  The SED may, at its discretion, impose
penalties on a daily basis, or on less than a daily basis, for violations that continued for more than one day.
 
On September 29, 2016, the CPUC issued a final decision adopting improvements and refinements to its gas and electric safety citation programs.  Specifically, the
final decision refines the criteria for the SED to use in determining whether to is sue a citation and the amount of penalty, sets an administrative limit of $8 million per
citation issued, makes self-reporting voluntary in both gas and electric programs, adopts detailed criteria for the utilities to use to voluntarily self-report a poten tial
violation, and refines other issues in the programs.  The decision also merges the rules applicable to its gas and electric safety citation programs into a single set of
rules that replace the previous safety citation programs and adopts non-substantiv e changes to these programs so that the programs can be similar in structure and
process where appropriate.
70
 

 
 
 
Natural Gas Storage Facilities
 
On January 6, 2016, the California Governor ordered the DOGGR to issue emergency regulations to require gas storage facility operators throughout California,
including the Utility, to comply with new safety and reliability measures, including minimum daily inspection of gas storage well heads (using gas leak detection
technology such as infrared imaging), ongoing verif ication of the mechanical integrity of all gas storage wells, ongoing measurement of annular gas pressure or
annular gas flow within wells, regular testing of all safety valves used in wells, establishing minimum and maximum pressure limits for each gas st orage facility in
the state, and establishing  a comprehensive risk management plan that evaluates and prepares for risks at each facility, including corrosion potential of pipes and
equipment.   On February 5, 2016, the DOGGR adopted the emergency regulati ons.  The Utility implemented the regulations and submitted an Underground Storage
Risk and Integrity Management Plan on August 5, 2016 that is pending DOGGR approval.
 
Additionally, in September 2016, the California Governor signed SB 887 directing DOGGR and CARB to develop permanent regulations for gas storage facility
operations in California, which are expected to be finalized in the second half of 2017.  The PHMSA has also issued interim final rules effective January 18, 2017
regulating gas storage fa cilities at the federal level.  The Utility may incur significant costs to comply with the new regulations related to (1) the development of a
natural gas leak prevention and response program, (2) the development of a plan for corrosion monitoring and eval uation, (3) proactive replacement of equipment at
risk of failure, and (4) a review of risk management plans to consider new risk factors.  The Utility plans to file an advice letter with the CPUC in the first quarter of
2017 to request a memorandum accoun t to track the future incremental costs associated with implementing the new regulations.  Upon approval, a subsequent
application would be submitted to the CPUC for recovery of the incremental costs being tracked.  The Utility is unable to estimate the ti ming and outcome of such
request.
 
New Renewable Energy Targets
 
In October 2015, the California Governor signed SB 350 into law, which became effective January 1, 2016 .  SB 350 increases the amount of renewable energy that
must be delivered by most load -serving entities, including the Utility, to their customers from 33% of their total annual retail sales by the end of the 2017-2020
compliance period to 50% of their total annual retail sales by the end of the 2028- 2030 compliance period and in each thre e year compliance period thereafter.  SB
350 includes increasing interim renewable energy targets for the periods between 2020 and 2030 and continues to include compliance flexibility and waiver
mechanisms, including increased flexibility to apply excess r enewable energy procurement in one compliance period to future compliance periods.  The Utility will
incur additional costs to procure renewable energy to meet the new renewable energy targets which the Utility expects will continue to be recoverable from customers
as “pass-through” costs.  The Utility also may be subject to penalties for failure to meet the higher targets.
 
In December 2016, the CPUC issued the first of a series of decisions to implement the RPS-r elated provisions of SB 350.  The decision addressed compliance periods
and proc urement quantity requirements.  Subsequent rulings and decisions are expected in 2017 to address scope and implementation details.
 
Additionally, as stated above, the Utility’s application and joint proposal to retire Diablo Canyon include a voluntary increase in the Utility’s target for RPS-eligible
resources to 55%, effective in 2031 through 2045, as compared to the state’s goal of 50% renewables.
 
Electric Distribution Resources Plan
 
As required by Californi a law, on July 1, 2015, the Utility filed its proposed electric distribution resources plan for approval by the CPUC.  The Utility’s plan
identifies optimal locations on its electric distribution system for deployment of DERs.  The Utility’s proposal is de signed to allow energy technologies to be
interconnected with each other and integrated into the larger grid while continuing to provide customers with safe, reliable and affordable electric service.  The Utility
envisions a future electric grid that would allow customers to choose new advanced energy supply technologies and services to meet their needs consistent with safe,
reliable and affordable electric service. 
 
71
 

 
On January 24, 2017, the CPUC convened a workshop aimed at inform ing the development of a CPUC framework to evaluate grid-modernization investments.  Th e
workshop was attended by the California IOUs , the DE R industry, consumer advocates, the DOE , and the CPUC’s Energy Division staff.  The Energy Division staff
is expected to develop a grid modernization investment framework in the first quarter of 2017.  Additionally, on February 9, 2017, the CPUC issued a decision
approving two out of three of the Utility’s proposed field demonstration projects to test various distribution -related services that DERs might provide to the Utility. 
The Utility in unable to predict when a final CPUC decision approving, disapproving , or modifying the Utility’s electric distribution resources plan will be issued.
 
Integrated Distributed Energy R esources  – Regulatory Incentives Pilot Program
 
On April 4, 2016, the assigned CPUC commissioner and ALJ issued a ruling proposing to establish, on a pilot basis, an interim program offering regulatory incentives
to the Utility and the other two large Ca lifornia IOUs for the deployment of cost-eff ective DERs.  The ruling assumed that the incentive would take the form of an
additional payment to the Utility of 3.5% (grossed up for taxes) of the payments made to the DER provid er(s).  The ruling also state d that it did not intend for this
phase to adopt a new regulatory framework or business model for the California electric utilities.
 
On September 1, 2016, the assigned CPUC commissioner and ALJ issued an amended scoping memo and ruling that re-categorized a ll activities in the proceeding as
rate-setting, consolidated remaining issues into one phase, and proposed a revised regulatory incentive pilot to test how an earnings opp ortunity affects DER
sourcing.  On December 22, 2016, the CPUC issued a final decisi on in the proceeding which authorizes a pilot to test a regulatory incentive m echanism through
which the Utility will earn a 4% pre-tax incentive on annual payment s for DERs, as well as test a regulatory process that will allow the Utility to competitively solicit
DER services to defer distribution infrastructure.  Each utility is required to conduct at least one pilot, but may conduct up to three additional pilots.                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                
Electric Rate Reform and Net Energy Metering (NEM)
 
On July 3, 2015, the CPUC approved a final decision to authorize the Cali fornia IOUs to gradually flatten their tiered residential electric rate structures to two tiers by
January 2019.   The decision approved higher minimum bill charges for residential customers and also allows the imposition of a surcharge on customers with ex
tremely high electricity use beginning in 2017.   The decision requires the Utility to file a proposal by January 1, 2018, to charge residential electric customers based
on time-of-use rates (known as “default time-of-use rates”) unless customers elect othe rwise.   The Utility also may propose to impose a fixed charge on residential
electric customers.   Under the CPUC’s decision, default time-of-use rates must be implemented before the CPUC will permit the imposition of a fixed charge in
electric rates.  
 
In January 2016, the CPUC adopted new NEM rules .  The new rules became effective for new NEM customers in December 2016, when the Utility reached its NEM
cap of 2,409 MW.  N ew NEM customers will be required to pay an interconnection fee, will be charged for energy use on time-of-use rates, and will be required to
pay non-bypassable charges to help fund some of the costs of low-income, energy efficiency, and other programs that other customers pay.  Unlike the initial NEM
tariff, there is no cap on the total c apacity of distributed generation that can be installed under the new rules , and there is no size limitation on the projects, so long as
projects over 1MW pay actual interconnection costs . On March 7, 2016, the Utility and certain other parties, including TURN and CUE, filed applications for
rehearing.  The Utility requested that the CPUC vacate its January 2016 decision that the Utility asserts contains legal and factual errors.  Many parties argued that the
CPUC failed to complete its duties under AB 327, which required the CPUC to evaluate the costs and benefits of NEM.  On September 15, 2016, the CPUC voted to
deny the applications for rehearing, concluding that good cause had not been established to grant a rehearing and that the NEM decision adopted a s uccessor tariff as
required.  The CPUC indicated that it may revisit the NEM successor tariff in 2019.
 
72
 

 
Electric Vehicle (EV) Infrastructure Development
 
In December 2014, the CPUC issued a decision adopting a policy to expand the California utilities’ ro le in developing EV charging infrastructure to support
California’s climate goals.  On February 9, 2015, the Utility filed an application requesting that the CPUC approve the Utility’s proposal to deploy, own, and maintain
EV charging stations and the asso ciated infrastructure.  On December 15, 2016, the CPUC issued a fina l decision establishing a three-year EV program of $130
million (approximately $109 million in capital expenditures) to deploy up to 7,500 charging stations.  Further deployment of light-duty EV infrastructure will be
considered in a second phase of the proceeding.
 
Transportation Electrification (TE) Application
 
SB 350 orders the CPUC, in consultation with the C ARB and the CEC , to direct electrical corporations to file applications for programs and investments to
accelerate widesprea d TE.  In September 2016, the CPUC directed the large IOUs to file projects to accelerate T E in the state, including both one-year projects (of up
to $20 million total) and two to five-year programs with a requested revenue require ment determined by the utility.  On Januar y 20, 2017, the Utility filed its TE
application with the CPUC requesting a total of up to $253 million (approximately $21 1 million in capital expenditures) in program funding over five years (2018 -
2022) primarily related to make-ready infrastructure for TE in medium to heavy-duty sectors.  Protests are due March 6, 2017 and a prehearing conference is
scheduled for March 16 , 2017.  The Utility expects a decision to be issued within 12 to 18 months.
 
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
 
The Utility’s operations are subject to extensive federal, state, and local laws and permits relating to the protection of the environment and the safety and health of the
Utility’s personnel and the public.  These laws and requirements relate to a broad range of the Utility’s activities, including the remediation of hazardous wastes; the
reporting and reduction of CO 2 and other GHG emissions; the discharge of pollutants into the air, water, and soil; the reporting of safety and reliability measures for
natural gas storage facilities; and the transportation, handling, storage, and disposal of spent nuclear fuel.  (See Item 1A. Risk Factors and “Environmental Regulation”
in Item 1 .)    
 
Natural Gas Compressor Station Sites
 
The Utility is legally responsible for remediating groundwater contamination caused by hexavalent chromium used in the past at the Utility’s natural gas compressor
stations.   The Utility is also required to take measures to abate the effects of the contamination on the environment.  At December 31, 2016 , $ 299 millio n and $ 135
million was accrued in the Consolidated Balances Sheets for estimated undiscounted remediation costs associated with the Topock site and the Hinkley site,
respectively.  Costs associated with the Hinkley site are not r ecovered through rates.  (See “Environmental Remediation Contingencies” in Note 13 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 .)
 
RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
 
PG&E Corporation, mainly through its ownership of the Utility, and the Utility are exposed to risks associated with adverse changes in commodity prices, interest
rates, and counterparty credit.
 
The Utility actively manages market risk through risk management programs designed to support business objectives, discourage unauthorized risk-taking, reduce
commodity cost volatility, and manage cash flows.  The Utility uses derivative instruments only for non- trading purposes ( i.e . risk mitigation) and not for
speculative purposes .  The Utility’s risk management activities include the use of physical and financial instruments such as forward contracts, futures, swaps,
options, and other instruments and agreements, most of which are accounted for as derivative instruments.  Some contracts are accounted for as leases.
 
73
 
 

Commodity Price Risk
 
The Utility is exposed to commodity price risk as a result of its electricity and natural gas procurement activities, including the procurement of natural gas and nuclear
fuel necessary for electricity generation and natural gas procurement for core custom ers.  As long as the Utility can conclude that it is probable that its reasonably
incurred wholesale electricity procurement costs and natural gas costs are recoverable, fluctuations in electricity and natural gas prices will not affect earnings . Such
flu ctuations, however, may impact cash flows.   The Utility’s natural gas transportation and storage costs for core customers are also fully recoverable through a
ratemaking mechanism. 
The Utility’s current authorized revenue requirement for natural gas tra nsportation and storage service to non-core customers is not balancing account protected.   The
Utility recovers these costs through fixed reservation charges and volumetric charges from long-term contracts , resulting in price and volumetric risk. (See “ 2015
Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Case” above . )
 
The Utility uses value-at-risk to measure its shareholders’ exposure to these risks.  The Utility’s value-at-risk was approximately $ 7 million and $2 million at
December 31 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively .  During 2016 , t he Utility’s approximate high, low, and average values-at-risk were $7 million, $1 million and $4
million, respectively. Dur ing 2015 , the value-at-risk amounts were $2 million, $1 million and $2 million, respectively .  ( See Note 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of price risk management activities.)
 
Interest Rate Risk
 
Interest rate risk sensitivity analysis is used to measure interest rate risk by computing estimated changes in cash flows as a result of assumed changes in market
interest rates.  A t December 31 , 2016 and 2015 , if interest rates changed by 1% for all PG&E Corporation and Utility variable rate long-term debt, short-term debt,
and cash investments , th e impact on net income over the next 12 months would be $ 13 million and $11 million, respectively, based on net variable rate debt and
other interest rate-sensitive instruments outstanding.   ( See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for further discussion of interest
rates .)
 
Energy Procurement Credit Risk
 
The Utility conducts business with counterparties mainly in the energy industry, including the CAISO market, other California investor-owned electric utilities,
municipal utilities, energy trading companies, financial institutions, electricity generation companies, and oil and natural gas production companies located in the
United States and Canada.  If a counterparty fails to perform on its contractual obligation to deliver electricity or gas, then the Utility may find it necessary to procure
electricity or gas at current market prices, which may be higher than the contract prices.
 
The Utility manages credit risk associated with its counterparties by assigning cr edit limits based on evaluations of their financial conditions, net worth, credit ratings,
and other credit criteria as deemed appropriate.  Credit limits and credit quality are monitored periodically.  The Utility executes many energy contracts under mast er
commodity enabling agreements that may require security (referred to as “Credit Collateral” in the table below).  Credit c ollateral may be in the form of cash or
letters of credit.  The Utility may accept other forms of performance assurance in the form of corporate guarantees of acceptable credit quality or other eligible
securities (as deemed appropriate by the Utility).  Credit c ollateral or performance assurance may be required from counterparties when current net receivables and
replacement cost exp osure exceed contractually specified limits.
 
The following table summarizes the Utility’s energy procurement credit risk exposure to its counterparties :
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net Credit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of
 
Exposure to
 
Gross Credit
 
 
 
 
 
Wholesale
 
Wholesale
 
Exposure
 
 
 
 
 
Customers or
 
Customers or
 
Before Credit
 
Credit
 
Net Credit
 
Counterparties
 
Counterparties
(in millions)
Collateral (1)
 
Collateral
 
Exposure   (2)
 
>10%
 
>10%
December 31, 2016
$
69    
$
(11)  
$
58    
 
3    
 
39  
December 31, 2015
 
64    
$
(11)  
$
53    
 
4    
 
39  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Gross credit exposure equals mark-to-market value on physically and financially settled contracts, and net receivables (payables) where netting is contractually allowed.  Gross and net credit
exposure amounts reported above do not include adjustments for time value or liquidity.
(2) Net credit exposure is the Gross Credit Exposure Bef ore Credit Collateral minus Credit Collateral (cash deposits and letters of credit posted by counterparties and held by the Utility).  For
purposes of this table, parental guarantees are not included as part of the calculation.
 
74
 

 
CRITIC AL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
 
The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP involves the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the recorded amounts of
assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.  The accounting policies
described below are considered to be critical accounting policies due, in part, to their complexity and because their application is relevant and material to the financial
position and results of operations of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, and because these policies require the use of material judgments and estimates.  Actual results
may differ materially from these estimates and assumptions .  These acco unting policies and their key characteristics are outlined below.
 
Regulatory Accounting
 
As a regulated entity, t he Utility records regulatory assets and liabilities for amounts that are deemed probable of recovery from, or refund to, customers.  These am
ounts would otherwise be recorded to expense or income under GAAP.  Refer to “Regulation and Regulated Operations” in Note 2 as well as Note 3 of the Notes to
the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.  At December 31, 2016 , PG &E Corporation and the Utility reported regulatory assets (including current regulatory
balancing accounts receivable) of $ 9.9 billion and regulatory liabilities (including current regulatory balancing accounts payable) of $ 7.7 billion .  
 
Determining probability requires significant judgment by management and includes, but is not limited to, consideration of testimony presented in regulatory hearings,
proposed regulatory decisions, final regulatory orders, and the strength or status of applications for rehearing or state court appeals.  For some of the Utility’s
regulatory assets, including utility retained generation , the Utility has determined that the costs are recoverable based on specific approval from the CPUC .  The
Utility also records a regulatory asset when a mechanism is in place to recover current expenditures and historical experience indicates that recovery of incurred costs
is probable, such as the r egulatory assets for pension benefits ; deferre d income tax; price risk management; and unamortized loss, net of gain, on reacquired debt. 
The CPUC has not denied the recovery of any material costs previously recognized by the Utility as regulatory assets for the periods presented.  If the Utility det
ermined that it is no longer probable th at regulatory assets would be recovered or reflected in future rates, or if the Utility ceased to be subject to rate regulation, the
regulatory assets would be charged against income in the period in which that deter mination was made.   I f regulatory accounting did not apply, the Utility’s future
financial results could become more volatile as compared to historical financial results due to the differences in the timing of expense or revenue recognition.
 
In addition , regulatory accounting standards require recognition of a   loss if it becomes probable that capital expenditures will be disallowed for ratemaking purposes
and if a reasonable estimate of the amount of the disallowance can be made. Such assessments require significant judgment by management regarding probability of
recovery, as described above, and the ultimate cost of construction of capital assets.  The Utility records a loss to the extent capital costs are expected to exceed the
amount to be recovered.   T he Utility records a provision based on its best estimate; to the extent there is a high degree of uncertainty in the Utility’s forecast, it will
record a provision based on the lower end of the range of possible losses.   The Utility’s capital forecasts in volve a series of complex judgments regarding detailed
project plans, estimates included in third-party contracts, historical cost experience for similar projects, permitting requirements, environmental compliance standards,
and a variety of other factors.  
 
The Utility recorded charges of $283 million in 2016 for capital spending that was disallowed related to the Penalty Decision.  The Utility incurred charges of $219
million in 2016 for capital expenditures that will be disallowed based on the final phase two decision in its 2015 GT&S rate case.  Additionally, the Utility would be
required to record charges in future periods to the extent PSEP-related capital costs are higher than currently expected.  ( See “ Enforcement and Litigation Matters ”
in Note 1 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated F inancial Statements in Item 8.)
 
Loss Contingencies
 
As discussed below, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recorded material accruals for environmental remediation liabilities and for various enforc ement and
legal matters, and have recorded insurance receivable s for third-party claims.
 
Environmental Remediation Liabilities
 
The Utility is subject to loss contingencies pursuant to federal and California environmental laws and regulations that in the future may requi re the Utility to pay for
environmental remediation at sites where it has been, or may be, a potentially responsible party.  Such contingencies may exist for the remediation of hazardous
substances at various potential sites, including former manufactured gas plant sites, power plant sites, gas compressor stations, and sites used by the Utility for the
storage, recycling, or disposal of potentially hazardous materials, even if the Utility did not deposit those substances on the site.
 
75
 

 
The Utility generally commences the environmental remediation assessment process upon notification from federal or state agencies, or other parties, of a potential
site requiring remedial action.  (In some instances, the Utility may initiate action to determine its remediation liability for sites that it no longer owns in cooperation
with regulatory agencies.  For example, the Utility has begun a program related to certain former manufactured gas plant sites.)  Based on such notification, the Utility
completes an assessment of t he potential site and evaluates whether it is probable that a remediation liability has been incurred.  The Utility records an environmental
remediation liability when site assessments indicate remediation is probable and it can reasonably estimate the los s or a range of possible losses .  Given the
complexities of the legal and regulatory environment and the inherent uncertainties involved in the early stages of a remediation project, the process for estimating
remediation liabilities is subjective and requ ires significant judgment.  Key factors evaluated in developing cost estimates include the extent and types of hazardous
substances at a potential site, the range of technologies that can be used for remediation, the determination of the Utility’s liabilit y in proportion to other responsible
parties, and the extent to which such costs are recoverable from third parties.
 
When possible, the Utility estimates costs using site-specific information, but also considers historical experience for costs incurred a t similar sites depending on the
level of information available.  Estimated costs are composed of the direct costs of the remediation effort and the costs of compensation for employees who are
expected to devote a significant amount of time directly to the remediation effort.  These estimated costs include remedial site investigations, remediation actions,
operations and maintenance activities, post remediation monitoring, and the costs of technologies that are expected to be approved to remediate the site.   Remediation
efforts for a particular site generally extend over a period of several years.  During this period, the laws governing the remediation process may change, as well as site
conditions, thereby possibly affecting the cost of the remediation effo rt.
 
At December 31, 2016 and 2015 , the Utility ’s accruals for undiscounted gross environmental liabilities were $ 958 million and $ 969 million , respectively.  The
Utility’s undiscounted future costs c ould increase to as much as $ 1.9 billion if the extent of contamination or necessary remediation is greater than anticipated or if
the other potentially responsibl e parties are not financially able to contribute to these costs, and could increase further if the Utility chooses to remediate beyond
regulatory requirements.  Although the Utility has provided for known environmental obligations that are probable and rea sonably estimable, estimated costs may
vary significantly from actual costs, and the amount of additional future costs may be material to results of operations in the period in which they are recognized. 
 
Enforcement and Litigation Matters
 
PG&E Corporat ion and the Utility are subject to various laws and regulations and, in the normal course of business, are named as parties in a number of claims and
lawsuits.  In addition, penalties may be incur red for failure to comply with federal, state, or local laws and regulations.   PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a
provision for a loss contingency when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated.  PG& E Corporation
and the Utility evaluate the range of reasonably estimated losses and record a provision based on the lower end of the range , unless an amount within the range is a
better estimate than any other amount.  T he assessment of whether a loss is p robable or reasonably possible, and whether the loss or a range of loss is estimable,
often involves a series of complex judgments about future events.  Loss contingencies are reviewed quarterly and estimates are adjusted to reflect the impact of all
known information, such as negotiations, discovery, settlements and payments, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and other information and events pertaining to a
particular matter.  PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s policy is to exclude anticipated legal cost s from the provision for loss and expense these costs as incurred .  
Management has made significant estimates and assumptions about accruals related to the Butte fire.  At December 31, 2016, the Utility’s accrual for the Butte fire
was $690 million.  Actua l results may differ materially from these estimates and assumptions.  (See “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the Notes to
the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
Insurance Receivable
 
The Utility has liability   insurance from various insurers, which provides coverage for third party claims.  The Utility records insurance recoveries only when a third
party claim is recorded and it is deemed probable that a recovery of that claim will occur and the Utilit y can reasonably estimate the amount or its range.   The
assessment of whether recovery is probable or reasonably possible, and whether the recovery or a range of recoveries is estimable, often involves a series of complex
judgments about future events.     I nsurance recoveries are reviewed quarterly   and estimates are adjusted to reflect the impact   of all known information, including
contractual liability insurance policy coverage, advice of legal counsel, past experience with similar events, discussions with insurers and other information and events
pertaining to a particular matter.   Management has made significant estimates and assumptions about insurance recoveries related to the Butte fire.   (See
“Enforcement and Litigation Matters” and “Legal and Regulato ry Contingencies” in Note 13   of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
76
 

 
Asset Retirement Obligations
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility account for an ARO at fair value in the period during which the legal obligation is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value
and its settlement date can be made.  At the time of recording an ARO, the associated asset retirement costs are capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the
related long-lived asset.  The Utility recognize s a regula tory asset or liabilit y for the timing differences between the recognition of expenses and costs recovered
through the ratemaking process.   (See Notes 2 and 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
To estimate its liability, the Utility uses a discounted cash flow model based upon significant est imates and assumptions about future decommissioning costs,
inflation rates, and the estimated date of decommissioning.  The estimated future cash flows are disc ounted using a credit-adjusted risk-free rate that reflects the risk
associated with the decommissioning obligation. 
 
At December 31, 2016 , the Utility’s recorded ARO for the estimated cost of retiring these long-lived assets was $ 4.7 billion .   Changes in these estimates and
assumptions could materially affect the amount of the recorded ARO for these assets.  For exa mple, a premature shutdown of the nuclear facilities at Diablo Canyon
would increase the like lihood of an earlier start to decommissioning and cause an increase in the ARO.  I f the inflation adjustment or discount rate increased 25 basis
points, the result would be an immaterial impact to ARO. 
 
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility sponsor a non-contributory defined benefit pension plan for eligible employees a s well as contributory postretirement health care
and medical plans for eligible r etirees and their eligible dependents, and non-contributory postretirement life insurance plans for eligible employees and retirees .  
Adjustments to the pension and other benefit obligation are based on the d ifferences between actuarial assumptions and actual plan results .  These amounts are
deferred in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and amortized into income on a gradual basis.   The differences between pension benefit expense
recognized in accordance with GAAP an d amounts recognized for ratem aking purposes are recorded as regulatory asset s or liabilit ies as amounts are probable of
recovery from customers.   To the extent the other benefits are in an overfunded position, the Utility records a regulatory liability.   (See Note 3 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
The pension and other postretirement benefit obligations are calculated using actuarial models as of the December 31 measurement date.  The signi ficant a ctuarial
assumptions used in determining pension and other benefit obligations include the discount rate, the average rate of future compensation increases, the health care cost
trend rate and the expected return on plan assets.  PG&E Corporation a nd the Utility review these assumptions on an annual basis and adjust them as necessary . 
While PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe that the assumptions used are appropriate, significant differences in actual experience, plan changes or amendments,
or significant changes in assumptions may materially affect the recorded pension and other postretirement benefit oblig ations and future plan expenses. 
 
I n establishing health care cost assumptions, PG&E Corporation and the Utility consider rec ent cost tre nds and projections from industry experts .  This evaluation
suggests that current rates of inflation are expected to continue in the near term.  In recognition of continued high inflation in health care costs and given the design of
PG&E Corporation’s plan s, the assumed health care cost trend rate for 2017 is 7.2 % , gradually decreasing to the u ltimate trend rate of 4.5 % in 2 025 and beyond .
 
Expected rates of return on plan assets were developed by estimating future stock and bond returns and then applying these returns to the target asset allocations of the
employee benefit trusts, resulting in a weighted average rate of return on plan assets.  Fixed - income returns were projected based on real maturity and credit spreads
added to a long-term inflat ion rate.  Equity returns were projected based on estimates of dividend yield and real earnings growth added to a long-term rate of
inflation.  For the Utility’s defined benefit pension plan, the assumed return of 5.3 % compares to a ten-year actual return of 7.3 % .
 
The rate used to discount pension benefits and other benefits was based on a yield curve developed from market data of approximately 696 Aa-grade non-callable
bonds at December 31, 2016 .  This yield curve has discount rates that vary based on the duration of the obligations.  The estimated future cash flows for the pension
and other postretirement benefit obligations were matched to the corresponding rates on the yield curve to derive a weighted average discount rate.
 
77
 

 
The following reflects the sensitivity of pension costs and projected benefit obligation to changes in certain actuarial assumptions:
 
 
Increase
 
 
 
 
Increase in Projected
 
(Decrease) in
 
 
Increase in 2016 Pension
 
Benefit Obligation at
(in millions)
Assumption
 
 
Costs
 
December 31, 2016
Discount rate
(0.50) %
 
$
109    
$
1,319  
Rate of return on plan assets
(0.50) %
 
 
68    
 
-  
Rate of increase in compensation
0.50   %
 
 
59    
 
306  
 
The following reflects the sensitivity of other postretirement benefit costs and accumulated benefit obligation to changes in certain actuarial assumptions:
 
 
Increase
 
 
Increase in 2016
 
Increase in Accumulated
 
(Decrease) in
 
 
Other Postretirement
 
Benefit Obligation at
(in millions)
Assumption
 
 
Benefit Costs
 
December 31, 2016
Health care cost trend rate
0.50   %
 
$
4    
$
58  
Discount rate
(0.50) %
 
 
4    
 
134  
Rate of return on plan assets
(0.50) %
 
 
10    
 
-  
 
 
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
 
See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
 
This report contains forward-looking statements that are necessarily subject to various risks and unce rtainties.  These statements reflect management’s judgment and
opinions which are based on current estimates, expectations, and projections about future events and assumptions regarding these events and management's knowledge
of facts as of the date of thi s 2016 Form 10-K .  These forward-looking statements relate to, among other matters, estimated losses, including penalties and fines,
associated with various investigations and proceedings; forecasts of pipeline-related expenses that the Utility will not re cover through rates; forecasts of capital
expenditures; estimates and assumptions used in critical accounting policies, including those relating to regulatory assets and liabilities, environmental remediation,
litigation, third-party claims, and other liab ilities; and the level of future equity or debt issuances.  These statements are also identified by words such as “assume,”
“expect,” “intend,” “forecast,” “plan,” “project,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “anticipate,” “may,” “should,” “would,” “could, ” “potential” and similar
expressions.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility are not able to predict all the factors that may affect future results.  Some of the factors that could cause future results
to differ materially from those expressed or implied by th e forward-looking statements, or from historical results, include, but are not limited to:
 
●
the timing and outcomes of the Butte fire litigation , and whether the Utility’s insurance is sufficient to cover the Utility’s liability resulting therefrom or wh
ether insurance is otherwise available; and whether additional investigations and proceedings in connection with the Butte fire will be opened;
 
●
the timing and outcomes of the 2017 GRC , TO rate case , cost of capital proceeding, and other ratemaking and regulatory proceedings;
 
 
●
the terms of probation and the monitorship imposed in the sentencing phase of the Utility’s federal criminal trial on January 26, 2017, the timing and outcomes
of the debarment proceeding and potential remedial and other measur es that could be imposed on the Utility as a result of that proceeding, the SED’s
unresolved enforcement matters relating to the Utility’s compliance with natural gas-related laws and regulations, and other investigations that have been or
may be commenced relating to the Utility’s compliance with natural gas-related laws and regulations, and the ultimate amount of fines, penalties, and remedial
costs that the Utility may incur in connection with the outcomes;
 
 
●
the timing and outcomes of the CPUC’s inve stigation of communications between the Utility and the CPUC that may have violated the CPUC’s rules
regarding ex parte communications or are otherwise alleged to be improper, or of a potential settlement, and of the U.S. Attorney’s Office in San Francisco and
the California Attorney G eneral’s office investigations in connection with communications between the Utility’s personnel and CPUC officials, whether
additional criminal or regulatory investigations or enforcement actions are commenced with respect to allegedly improper communicat ions, and the extent to
which such matters negatively affect the final decisions to be issued in the Utility’s ratemaking proceedings;
78
 

 
 
 
 
●
whether PG&E Corporation and the Utility are able to repair the harm to their reputations caused by the Utility’s conviction in the federal criminal trial, the
state and federal investigations of natural gas incidents, matters relating to the criminal federal trial, improper communications between the CPUC and the
Utility, and the Utility’s ongoing work to remove encr oachments from transmission pipeline rights-of-way;
 
 
●
whether the Utility can control its costs within the authorized levels of spending, and successfully implement a streamlined organizational structure and achieve
project savings, the extent to which the Utility incurs unrecoverable costs that are higher than the forecasts of such costs, and changes in cost forecasts or the
scope and timing of planned work resulting from changes in customer demand for electricity and natural gas or other reasons;
 
 
●
the timing and outcome of the complaint filed by the CPUC and certain other parties with the FERC on February 2 , 2017; the complaint requests that the
Utility provide an open and transparent planning process for its capital transmission projects that do no t go through the California ISO’s Transmission
Planning Process in order to allow for participation and input from interested parties.  The planning process that may result from come out of the proceeding
may impact the scope and timing of capital transmis sion projects that the Utility will execute in the future;
 
 
●
the amount and timing of additional common stock and debt issuances by PG&E Corporation, including the dilutive impact of common stock issuances to fund
PG&E Corporation’s equity contributions to the Utility as the Utility incurs charges and costs, including fines, that it cannot recover through rates;
 
 
●
the outcome of the CPUC’s investigation into the Utility’s safety culture, and future legislative or regulatory actions that may be taken t o require the Utility to
separate its electric and natural gas businesses, restructure into separate entities, undertake some other corporate restructuring, or implement corporate
governance changes;
 
●
the outcomes of the SED’s investigations of potential violations identified th r ough audits, investigations, or self-reports including in connection with the
Utility’s February 2017 self-report related to its customer service representatives’ drug and alcohol testin g program;
 
●
the outcome of future investi gations or other enforcement proceedings that may be commenced relating to the Utility’s compliance with laws, rules,
regulations, or orders applicable to its operations, including the construction, expansion or replacement of its electric and gas faciliti es, inspection and
maintenance practices, customer billing and privacy, and physical and cyber security, environmental laws and regulations;
 
 
●
the impact of environmental remediation laws, regulations, and orders; the ultimate amount of costs incurred to discharge the Utility’s known and unknown
remediation obligations; and the extent to which the Utility is able to recover environmental costs in rates or from other sources;
 
 
●
the ultimate amount of unrecoverable environmental costs the Utility incurs associated with the Utility’s natural gas compressor station site located near
Hinkley, California;
 
 
●
the impact of maintenance costs of the Utility electric transmission facilities;
 
 
●
the impact of new legislation or NRC regulations, recommendations, policies, decisions, or orders relating to the nuclear industry, including operations, seismic
design, security, safety, relicensing, the storage of spent nuclear fuel, decommissioning, cooling water intake, or other issues; the impact of actions taken by
state agencies that may affect the Utility’s ability to continue operating Diablo Canyon; whether the CPUC approves the joint proposal that will phase out the
Utility’s Diablo Canyon nuclear units at the expiration of their licenses in 202 4 and 2025; whether the Utility obtains the approvals required to withdraw its
NRC application to renew the two Diablo Canyon operating licenses; whether the State Lands Commission could be required to perform an environmental
review of the new lands lease as a result of the WBA assertion that the State Lands Commission committed legal error when it determined that the short term
lease extension for an existing facility was exempt from review under the California Environmental Quality Act; and whether the U tility will be able to
successfully implement its retention and retraining and development programs for Diablo Canyon employees, and whether these programs will be recovered in
rates;
 
●
whether the Utility is successful in ensuring physical security of it s critical assets and whether the Utility’s information technology, operating systems and
networks, including the advanced metering system infrastructure, customer billing, financial, records management, and other systems, can continue to function
accurate ly while meeting regulatory requirements; whether the Utility and its third party vendors and contractors (who host, maintain, modify and update some
of the Utility’s systems) are able to protect the Utility’s operating systems and networks from damage, di sruption, or failure caused by cyber-attacks, computer
viruses, or other hazards; whether the Utility’s security measures are sufficient to protect against unauthorized or inadvertent disclosure of information
contained in such systems and networks, includ ing confidential proprietary information and the personal information of customers; and whether the Utility can
continue to rely on third-party vendors and contractors that maintain and support some of the Utility’s information technology and operating sys tems;
79
 

 
 
 
●
the impact of droughts or other weather-related conditions or events, wildfires (such as the Butte fire), climate change, natural disasters, acts of terrorism, war,
vandalism (including cyber-attacks), and other events, that can cause unplanned ou tages, reduce generating output, disrupt the Utility’s service to customers, or
damage or disrupt the facilities, operations, or information technology and systems owned by the Utility, its customers, or third parties on which the Utility
relies; whether t he Utility incurs liability to third parties for property damage or personal injury caused by such events; whether the Utility is subject to civil,
criminal, or regulatory penalties in connection with such events; and whether the Utility’s insurance covera ge is available for these types of claims and
sufficient to cover the Utility’s liability;
 
 
●
how the CPUC and the CARB implement state environmental laws relating to GHG, renewable energy targets, energy efficiency standards, DERs, electric
vehicles, and similar matters, including whether the Utility is able to continue recovering associated compliance costs, such as the cost of emission allowances
and offsets under cap-and-trade regulations; and whether the Utility is able to timely recover its associ ated investment costs;
 
 
●
the impact of the SB 887 directing DOGGR and CARB to develop permanent regulations for gas storage facility operations in California to comply with new
safety and reliability measures, as well the impact of the PHMSA rules effec tive January 18, 2017 regulating gas storage facilities at the federal level;
 
●
whether the Utility’s climate change adaptation strategies are successful;
 
 
●
the impact that reductions in customer demand for electricity and natural gas have on the Utility’s ability to make and recover its investments through rates and
earn its authorized return on equity, and whether the Utility is successful in addressing the impact of growing distributed and renewable generation resources,
changing customer demand for natural gas and electric services , and an increasing number of customers departing for CCAs ;
 
 
●
the supply and price of electricity, natural gas, and nuclear fuel; the extent to which the Utility can manage and respond to the volatility of energy co mmodity
prices; the ability of the Utility and its counterparties to post or return collateral in connection with price risk management activities; and whether the Utility is
able to recover timely its electric generation and energy commodity costs through rates, including its renewable energy procurement costs;
 
 
●
the amount and timing of charges reflecting probable liabilities for third-party claims; the extent to which costs incurred in connection with third-party claims
or litigation can be recovered through insurance, rates, or from other third parties; and whether the Utility can continue to obtain adequate insurance coverage
for future losses or claims, especially following a major event that causes widespread third-party losses;
 
 
●
the ability of PG&E Corporation and the Utility to access capital markets and other sources of debt and equity financing in a timely manner on acceptable
terms;
 
 
●
changes in credit ratings which could result in increased borrowing costs especially if PG&E Corporation or the Utility were to lose their investment grade
credit ratings;
 
 
●
the impact of federal or state laws or regulations, or their interpretation, on energy policy and the regulation of utilities and their holding companies, including
how the CPUC interprets and enforces the financial and other conditions imposed on PG&E Corporation when it became the Utility’s holding company, and
whether the ultimate outcomes of the CPUC’s pending investigations, the jury’s verdict in the federal criminal trial of the Utility and its possible conviction,
and other enforcement matters affect the Utility’s ability to make distributions to PG&E Corporation, and, in turn, PG&E Corporation’s ability to pay
dividends;
 
 
●
the impact of the corporate tax reform considere d by the new federal administration and the outcome of federal or state tax audits and the impact of any
changes in federal or state tax laws, policies, regulations, or their interpretation;
 
80
 

 
●
changes in the regulatory and economic environment, including potential changes affecting renewable energy sources and associated tax credits, as a result
of the new federal administration; and
 
 
●
the impact of changes in GAAP, standards, rules, or policies, including those related to regulatory accounting, and the impact of changes in their
interpretation or application.
 
For more information about the significant risks that could affect the outcome of the forward-looking statements and PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s future
financial condition, resul ts of operations, and cash flows, see Item. 1A. Risk Factors above and our detailed discussion of these matters contained elsewhere in
MD&A.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements, whether in response to new information, future
events, or otherwise.
81
 

 
ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
 
Information responding to Item 7A is set forth under the heading “Risk Management Activities,” in MD&A in Item 7 and in Note 9: Derivatives and Note 10: Fair
Value Measurements of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
82
 

 
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
 
PG&E Corporation
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
(in millions, except per share amounts)
 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Operating Revenues
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electric
$
13,864    
$
13,657    
$
13,658  
Natural gas
 
3,802    
 
3,176    
 
3,432  
Total operating revenues
 
17,666    
 
16,833    
 
17,090  
Operating Expenses
 
  
 
  
 
 
Cost of electricity
 
4,765    
 
5,099    
 
5,615  
Cost of natural gas
 
615    
 
663    
 
954  
Operating and maintenance
 
7,354    
 
6,951    
 
5,638  
Depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning
 
2,755    
 
2,612    
 
2,433  
Total operating expenses
 
15,489    
 
15,325    
 
14,640  
Operating Income
 
2,177    
 
1,508    
 
2,450  
Interest income
 
23    
 
9    
 
9  
Interest expense
 
(829)  
 
(773)  
 
(734)
Other income, net
 
91    
 
117    
 
70  
Income Before Income Taxes
 
1,462    
 
861    
 
1,795  
Income tax provision (benefit)
 
55    
 
(27)  
 
345  
Net Income
 
1,407    
 
888    
 
1,450  
Preferred stock dividend requirement of subsidiary
 
14    
 
14    
 
14  
Income Available for Common Shareholders
$
1,393    
$
874    
$
1,436  
Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding, Basic
 
499    
 
484    
 
468  
Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding, Diluted
 
501    
 
487    
 
470  
Net Earnings Per Common Share, Basic
$
2.79    
$
1.81    
$
3.07  
Net Earnings Per Common Share, Diluted
$
2.78    
$
1.79    
$
3.06  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
83
 

 
PG&E Corporation
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
(in millions)
 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Net Income
$
1,407    
$
888  
 
$
1,450  
Other Comprehensive Income
 
  
 
  
 
 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plans obligations
 
  
 
  
 
 
   (net of taxes of $1, $0, and $10, at respective dates)
 
(2)
 
 
(1)
 
 
(14)
Net change in investments
 
  
 
  
 
 
   (net of taxes of $0, $12, and $17 at respective dates)
 
-    
 
(17)  
 
(25)
Total other comprehensive income (loss)
 
(2)  
 
(18)  
 
(39)
Comprehensive Income
 
1,405    
 
870  
 
 
1,411  
Preferred stock dividend requirement of subsidiary
 
14    
 
14    
 
14  
Comprehensive Income Attributable to Common Shareholders
$
1,391    
$
856    
$
1,397  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
84
 

 
PG&E Corporation
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions)
 
 
Balance at December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
ASSETS
 
  
 
 
Current Assets
 
  
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
177    
$
123  
Restricted cash
 
7    
 
234  
Accounts receivable
 
  
 
 
Customers (net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $58 and $54
 
  
 
 
at respective dates)
 
1,252    
 
1,106  
Accrued unbilled revenue
 
1,098    
 
855  
Regulatory balancing accounts
 
1,500    
 
1,760  
Other
 
801    
 
286  
Regulatory assets
 
423    
 
517  
Inventories
 
  
 
 
Gas stored underground and fuel oil
 
117    
 
126  
Materials and supplies
 
346    
 
313  
Income taxes receivable
 
160    
 
155  
Other
 
283    
 
338  
Total current assets
 
6,164    
 
5,813  
Property, Plant, and Equipment
 
  
 
 
Electric
 
52,556    
 
48,532  
Gas
 
17,853    
 
16,749  
Construction work in progress
 
2,184    
 
2,059  
Other
 
2    
 
2  
Total property, plant, and equipment
 
72,595    
 
67,342  
Accumulated depreciation
 
(22,014)  
 
(20,619)
Net property, plant, and equipment
 
50,581    
 
46,723  
Other Noncurrent Assets
 
  
 
 
Regulatory assets
 
7,951    
 
7,029  
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
 
2,606    
 
2,470  
Income taxes receivable
 
70    
 
135  
Other
 
1,226    
 
1,064  
Total other noncurrent assets
 
11,853    
 
10,698  
TOTAL ASSETS
$
68,598    
$
63,234  
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
85
 

 
PG&E Corporation
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions, except share amounts)
 
 
Balance at December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
 
  
 
 
Current Liabilities
 
  
 
 
Short-term borrowings
$
1,516    
$
1,019  
Long-term debt, classified as current
 
700    
 
160  
Accounts payable
 
  
 
 
Trade creditors
 
1,495    
 
1,414  
Regulatory balancing accounts
 
645    
 
715  
Other
 
433    
 
398  
Disputed claims and customer refunds
 
236    
 
454  
Interest payable
 
216    
 
206  
Other
 
2,323    
 
1,997  
Total current liabilities
 
7,564    
 
6,363  
Noncurrent Liabilities
 
  
 
 
Long-term debt
 
16,220    
 
15,925  
Regulatory liabilities
 
6,805    
 
6,321  
Pension and other postretirement benefits
 
2,641    
 
2,622  
Asset retirement obligations
 
4,684    
 
3,643  
Deferred income taxes
 
10,213    
 
9,206  
Other
 
2,279    
 
2,326  
Total noncurrent liabilities
 
42,842    
 
40,043  
Commitments and Contingencies (Note 13)
 
  
 
 
Equity
 
  
 
 
Shareholders' Equity
 
  
 
 
Common stock, no par value, authorized 800,000,000 shares;
 
  
 
 
506,891,874 and 492,025,443 shares outstanding at respective dates
 
12,198    
 
11,282  
Reinvested earnings
 
5,751    
 
5,301  
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
 
(9)  
 
(7)
Total shareholders' equity
 
17,940    
 
16,576  
Noncontrolling Interest - Preferred Stock of Subsidiary
 
252    
 
252  
Total equity
 
18,192    
 
16,828  
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
$
68,598    
$
63,234  
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
86
 

 
PG&E Corporation
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in millions)
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net income
$
1,407    
$
888    
$
1,450  
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
 
  
 
  
 
 
operating activities:
 
  
 
  
 
 
Depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning
 
2,755    
 
2,612    
 
2,433  
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
 
(112)  
 
(107)  
 
(100)
Deferred income taxes and tax credits, net
 
1,030    
 
693    
 
690  
Disallowed capital expenditures
 
507    
 
407    
 
116  
Other
 
379    
 
326    
 
286  
Effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
  
 
  
 
 
Accounts receivable
 
(473)  
 
(177)  
 
13  
Butte-related insurance receivable
 
(575)  
 
-    
 
-  
Inventories
 
(24)  
 
37    
 
(22)
Accounts payable
 
180    
 
(55)  
 
(61)
Butte-related third-party claims
 
690    
 
-    
 
-  
Income taxes receivable/payable
 
(5)  
 
43    
 
376  
Other current assets and liabilities
 
83    
 
(288)  
 
218  
Regulatory assets, liabilities, and balancing accounts, net
 
(1,214)  
 
(244)  
 
(1,642)
Other noncurrent assets and liabilities
 
(219)  
 
(355)  
 
(67)
Net cash provided by operating activities
 
4,409    
 
3,780    
 
3,690  
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
 
  
 
  
 
 
Capital expenditures
 
(5,709)  
 
(5,173)  
 
(4,833)
Decrease in restricted cash
 
227    
 
64    
 
3  
Proceeds from sales and maturities of nuclear decommissioning
 
  
 
  
 
 
trust investments
 
1,295    
 
1,268    
 
1,336  
Purchases of nuclear decommissioning trust investments
 
(1,352)  
 
(1,392)  
 
(1,334)
Other
 
13    
 
22    
 
114  
Net cash used in investing activities
 
(5,526)  
 
(5,211)  
 
(4,714)
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
 
  
 
  
 
 
Borrowings (repayments) under revolving credit facilities
 
-    
 
-    
 
(260)
Net issuances (repayments) of commercial paper, net of discount
 
  
 
  
 
 
of $6, $3, and $2 at respective dates
 
(9)  
 
683    
 
(583)
Short-term debt financing
 
500    
 
-    
 
300  
Short-term debt matured
 
-    
 
(300)  
 
-  
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, net of premium, discount and
 
  
 
  
 
 
issuance costs of $17, $27 and $17 at respective dates
 
983    
 
1,123    
 
2,308  
Repayments of long-term debt
 
(160)  
 
-    
 
(889)
Common stock issued
 
822    
 
780    
 
802  
Common stock dividends paid
 
(921)  
 
(856)  
 
(828)
Other
 
(44)  
 
(27)  
 
29  
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
1,171    
 
1,403    
 
879  
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
 
54    
 
(28)  
 
(145)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1
 
123    
 
151    
 
296  
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
$  
177    
$  
123    
$  
151  
87
 

 


Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information
 
  
 
  
 
 
Cash received (paid) for:
 
  
 
  
 
 
Interest, net of amounts capitalized
$
(726)  
$
(684)  
$
(633)
Income taxes, net
 
231    
 
77    
 
501  
Supplemental disclosures of noncash investing and financing
 
  
 
  
 
 
activities
 
  
 
  
 
 
Common stock dividends declared but not yet paid
$
248    
$
224    
$
217  
Capital expenditures financed through accounts payable
 
403    
 
440    
 
339  
Noncash common stock issuances
 
20    
 
21    
 
21  
Terminated capital leases
 
18    
 
-    
 
71  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
88
 

 
PG&E Corporation
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY
(in millions, except share amounts)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accumulated
 
 
controlling
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other
 
Interest -
 
 
Common
Common
 
Comprehensive
Total
Preferred
 
 
Stock
Stock
Reinvested
Income
Shareholders'
Stock  of
Total
 
Shares
Amount
Earnings
(Loss)
Equity
Subsidiary
Equity
Balance at December 31, 2013
456,670,424  
$
9,550  
$
4,742   $
50  
$
14,342  
$
252  
$
14,594  
Net income
-  
 
-  
 
1,450    
-  
 
1,450  
 
-  
 
1,450  
Other comprehensive income
-  
 
-  
 
-    
(39)
 
(39)
 
-  
 
(39)
Common stock issued, net
19,242,980  
 
823  
 
-    
-  
 
823  
 
-  
 
823  
Stock-based compensation amortization
-  
 
65  
 
-    
-  
 
65  
 
-  
 
65  
Common stock dividends declared
-  
 
-  
 
(862)  
-  
 
(862)
 
-  
 
(862)
Tax expense from employee stock plans
-  
 
(17)
 
-    
-  
 
(17)
 
-  
 
(17)
Preferred stock dividend requirement of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsidiary
-  
 
-  
 
(14)  
-  
 
(14)
 
-  
 
(14)
Balance at December 31, 2014
475,913,404  
$
10,421  
$
5,316   $
11  
$
15,748  
$
252  
$
16,000  
Net income
-  
 
-  
 
888    
-  
 
888  
 
-  
 
888  
Other comprehensive loss
-  
 
-  
 
-    
(18)
 
(18)
 
-  
 
(18)
Common stock issued, net
16,112,039  
 
801  
 
-    
-  
 
801  
 
-  
 
801  
Stock-based compensation amortization
-  
 
66  
 
-    
-  
 
66  
 
-  
 
66  
Common stock dividends declared
-  
 
-  
 
(889)  
-  
 
(889)
 
-  
 
(889)
Tax expense from employee stock plans
-  
 
(6)
 
-    
-  
 
(6)
 
-  
 
(6)
Preferred stock dividend requirement of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsidiary
-  
 
-  
 
(14)  
-  
 
(14)
 
-  
 
(14)
Balance at December 31, 2015
492,025,443  
$
11,282  
$
5,301   $
(7)
$
16,576  
$
252  
$
16,828  
Cumulative effect of change
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
in accounting principle
-    
-    
29    
-    
29    
-    
29  
Net income
-    
-    
1,407    
-    
1,407    
-    
1,407  
Other comprehensive loss
-  
 
-  
 
-    
(2)
 
(2)
 
-  
 
(2)
Common stock issued, net
14,866,431  
 
842  
 
-    
-  
 
842  
 
-  
 
842  
Stock-based compensation amortization
-  
 
74  
 
-    
-  
 
74  
 
-  
 
74  
Common stock dividends declared
-  
 
-  
 
(972)  
-  
 
(972)
 
-  
 
(972)
Preferred stock dividend requirement of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subsidiary
-  
 
-  
 
(14)  
-  
 
(14)
 
-  
 
(14)
Balance at December 31, 2016
506,891,874  
$
12,198  
$
5,751   $
(9)
$
17,940  
$
252  
$
18,192  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
89
 

 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
(in millions)
 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Operating Revenues
 
  
 
  
 
 
Electric
$
13,865    
$
13,657    
$
13,656  
Natural gas
 
3,802    
 
3,176    
 
3,432  
Total operating revenues
 
17,667    
 
16,833    
 
17,088  
Operating Expenses
 
  
 
  
 
 
Cost of electricity
 
4,765    
 
5,099    
 
5,615  
Cost of natural gas
 
615    
 
663    
 
954  
Operating and maintenance
 
7,352    
 
6,949    
 
5,635  
Depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning
 
2,754    
 
2,611    
 
2,432  
Total operating expenses
 
15,486    
 
15,322    
 
14,636  
Operating Income
 
2,181    
 
1,511    
 
2,452  
Interest income
 
22    
 
8    
 
8  
Interest expense
 
(819)  
 
(763)  
 
(720)
Other income, net
 
88    
 
87    
 
77  
Income Before Income Taxes
 
1,472    
 
843    
 
1,817  
Income tax provision (benefit)
 
70    
 
(19)  
 
384  
Net Income
 
1,402    
 
862    
 
1,433  
Preferred stock dividend requirement
 
14    
 
14    
 
14  
Income Available for Common Stock
$
1,388    
$
848    
$
1,419  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
90
 

 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
(in millions)
 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Net Income
$
1,402    
$
862  
  $
1,433  
Other Comprehensive Income
 
  
 
  
 
 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plans obligations
 
  
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $1, $1, and $6, at respective dates)
 
(1)  
 
(2)  
 
(8)
Total other comprehensive income (loss)
 
(1)  
 
(2)  
 
(8)
Comprehensive Income
$
1,401    
$
860    
$
1,425  
 
   
 
   
 
   
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
91
 

 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions)
 
 
Balance at December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
ASSETS
 
  
 
 
Current Assets
 
  
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
71    
$
59  
Restricted cash
 
7    
 
234  
Accounts receivable
 
  
 
 
Customers (net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $58 and $54
 
  
 
 
at respective dates)
 
1,252    
 
1,106  
Accrued unbilled revenue
 
1,098    
 
855  
Regulatory balancing accounts
 
1,500    
 
1,760  
Other
 
801    
 
284  
Regulatory assets
 
423    
 
517  
Inventories
 
  
 
 
Gas stored underground and fuel oil
 
117    
 
126  
Materials and supplies
 
346    
 
313  
Income taxes receivable
 
159    
 
130  
Other
 
282    
 
338  
Total current assets
 
6,056    
 
5,722  
Property, Plant, and Equipment
 
  
 
 
Electric
 
52,556    
 
48,532  
Gas
 
17,853    
 
16,749  
Construction work in progress
 
2,184    
 
2,059  
Total property, plant, and equipment
 
72,593    
 
67,340  
Accumulated depreciation
 
(22,012)  
 
(20,617)
Net property, plant, and equipment
 
50,581    
 
46,723  
Other Noncurrent Assets
 
  
 
 
Regulatory assets
 
7,951    
 
7,029  
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
 
2,606    
 
2,470  
Income taxes receivable
 
70    
 
135  
Other
 
1,110    
 
958  
Total other noncurrent assets
 
11,737    
 
10,592  
TOTAL ASSETS
$
68,374    
$
63,037  
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
92
 

 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions , except share amounts )
 
 
Balance at December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
 
  
 
 
Current Liabilities
 
  
 
 
Short-term borrowings
$
1,516    
$
1,019  
Long-term debt, classified as current
 
700    
 
160  
Accounts payable
 
  
 
 
Trade creditors
 
1,494    
 
1,414  
Regulatory balancing accounts
 
645    
 
715  
Other
 
453    
 
418  
Disputed claims and customer refunds
 
236    
 
454  
Interest payable
 
214    
 
203  
Other
 
2,072    
 
1,750  
Total current liabilities
 
7,330    
 
6,133  
Noncurrent Liabilities
 
  
 
 
Long-term debt
 
15,872    
 
15,577  
Regulatory liabilities
 
6,805    
 
6,321  
Pension and other postretirement benefits
 
2,548    
 
2,534  
Asset retirement obligations
 
4,684    
 
3,643  
Deferred income taxes
 
10,510    
 
9,487  
Other
 
2,230    
 
2,282  
Total noncurrent liabilities
 
42,649    
 
39,844  
Commitments and Contingencies (Note 13)
 
  
 
 
Shareholders' Equity
 
  
 
 
Preferred stock
 
258    
 
258  
Common stock, $5 par value, authorized 800,000,000 shares;
 
  
 
 
264,374,809 shares outstanding at respective dates
 
1,322    
 
1,322  
Additional paid-in capital
 
8,050    
 
7,215  
Reinvested earnings
 
8,763    
 
8,262  
Accumulated other comprehensive income
 
2    
 
3  
Total shareholders' equity
 
18,395    
 
17,060  
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
$
68,374    
$
63,037  
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
93
 

 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in millions)
 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
 
  
 
  
 
 
Net income
$
1,402    
$
862    
$
1,433  
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
 
  
 
  
 
 
operating activities:
 
  
 
  
 
 
Depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning
 
2,754    
 
2,611    
 
2,432  
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
 
(112)  
 
(107)  
 
(100)
Deferred income taxes and tax credits, net
 
1,042    
 
714    
 
731  
Disallowed capital expenditures
 
507    
 
407    
 
116  
    Other
 
306    
 
263    
 
226  
Effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities:
 
  
 
  
 
 
Accounts receivable
 
(475)
 
 
(177)
 
 
16  
Butte-related insurance receivable
 
(575)
 
 
-  
 
 
-  
Inventories
 
(24)
 
 
37  
 
 
(22)
Accounts payable
 
179  
 
 
(2)
 
 
(55)
Butte-related third-party claims
 
690  
 
 
-  
 
 
-  
Income taxes receivable/payable
 
(29)
 
 
38  
 
 
395  
Other current assets and liabilities
 
112  
 
 
(315)
 
 
168  
Regulatory assets, liabilities, and balancing accounts, net
 
(1,214)
 
 
(244)
 
 
(1,642)
    Other noncurrent assets and liabilities
 
(219)  
 
(340)  
 
(66)
Net cash provided by operating activities
 
4,344    
 
3,747    
 
3,632  
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capital expenditures
 
(5,709)
 
 
(5,173)
 
 
(4,833)
Decrease in restricted cash
 
227  
 
 
64  
 
 
3  
Proceeds from sales and maturities of nuclear decommissioning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trust investments
 
1,295  
 
 
1,268  
 
 
1,336  
Purchases of nuclear decommissioning trust investments
 
(1,352)
 
 
(1,392)
 
 
(1,334)
Other
 
13    
 
22    
 
29  
Net cash used in investing activities
 
(5,526)  
 
(5,211)  
 
(4,799)
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
 
  
 
  
 
 
Net issuances (repayments) of commercial paper, net of discount
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of $6, $3, and $2 at respective dates
 
(9)
 
 
683  
 
 
(583)
Short-term debt financing
 
500  
 
 
-  
 
 
300  
Short-term debt matured
 
-  
 
 
(300)
 
 
-  
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, net of premium, discount and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
issuance costs of $17, $27, and $14 at respective dates
 
983  
 
 
1,123  
 
 
1,961  
Repayments of long-term debt
 
(160)
 
 
-  
 
 
(539)
Preferred stock dividends paid
 
(14)
 
 
(14)
 
 
(14)
Common stock dividends paid
 
(911)
 
 
(716)
 
 
(716)
Equity contribution from PG&E Corporation
 
835    
 
705    
 
705  
Other
 
(30)  
 
(13)  
 
43  
Net cash provided by financing activities
 
1,194    
 
1,468    
 
1,157  
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
 
12    
 
4    
 
(10)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1
 
59    
 
55    
 
65  
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
$
71    
$
59    
$
55  
94
 

 
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information
 
  
 
  
 
 
Cash received (paid) for:
 
  
 
  
 
 
Interest, net of amounts capitalized
$
(717)  
$
(675)  
$
(618)
Income taxes, net
 
244    
 
77    
 
500  
Supplemental disclosures of noncash investing and financing
 
  
 
  
 
 
activities
 
  
 
  
 
 
Capital expenditures financed through accounts payable
$
403    
$
440    
$
339  
Terminated capital leases
 
18    
 
-    
 
71  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
 
 
 
 
 
95
 

 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS ’ EQUITY
(in millions)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accumulated
 
 
 
 
 
Additional
 
Other
Total
 
Preferred
Common
Paid-in
Reinvested
Comprehensive
Shareholders'
 
Stock
Stock
Capital
Earnings
Income (Loss)
Equity
Balance at December 31, 2013
$
258   $
1,322   $
5,821   $
7,427   $
13   $
14,841  
Net income
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
1,433  
 
-  
 
1,433  
Other comprehensive income
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
(8)
 
(8)
Equity contribution
 
-  
 
-  
 
705  
 
-  
 
-  
 
705  
Tax expense from employee stock plans
 
-  
 
-  
 
(12)
 
-  
 
-  
 
(12)
Common stock dividend
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
(716)
 
-  
 
(716)
Preferred stock dividend
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
(14)
 
-  
 
(14)
Balance at December 31, 2014
$
258   $
1,322   $
6,514   $
8,130   $
5   $
16,229  
Net income
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
862  
 
-  
 
862  
Other comprehensive loss
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
(2)
 
(2)
Equity contribution
 
-  
 
-  
 
705  
 
-  
 
-  
 
705  
Tax expense from employee stock plans
 
-  
 
-  
 
(4)
 
-  
 
-  
 
(4)
Common stock dividend
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
(716)
 
-  
 
(716)
Preferred stock dividend
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
(14)
 
-  
 
(14)
Balance at December 31, 2015
$
258   $
1,322   $
7,215   $
8,262   $
3   $
17,060  
Cumulative effect of change
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
in accounting principle
 
-    
-    
-    
24    
-    
24  
Net income
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
1,402  
 
-  
 
1,402  
Other comprehensive loss
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
(1)
 
(1)
Equity contribution
 
-  
 
-  
 
835  
 
-  
 
-  
 
835  
Common stock dividend
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
(911)
 
-  
 
(911)
Preferred stock dividend
 
-  
 
-  
 
-  
 
(14)
 
-  
 
(14)
Balance at December 31, 2016
$
258   $
1,322   $
8,050   $
8,763   $
2   $
18,395  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
96
 

 
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
NOTE 1: ORGANIZATION AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION
 
PG&E Corporation is a holding company whose primary operating subsidiary is Pacific Gas and Electric Company, a public utility serving northern and central
California.  The Utility generates revenues mainly through the sale and delivery of electricity and natural gas to customers.  The Utility is primarily regulated by the
CPUC and the FERC.  In addition, the NRC oversees the licensing, construction, operation, and decommissi oning of the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities. 
 
This is a combined annual report of PG&E Corporation and the Utility.  PG&E Corporation’s C onsolidated F inancial S tatements include the accounts of PG& E
Corporation, the Utility, and other wholly owned and controlled subsidiaries.  The Utility’s Consolidated F inancial S tatements include the accounts of the Utility and
its wholly owned and controlled subsidiaries.  All intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation.   The Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements apply to both PG&E Corporation and the Utility.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility assess financial performance and allocate resources on a consolidated
basis (i.e., the compan ies operate in one segment).
 
The accompanying C onsolidated F inancial S tatements have been prepared in conformity with GAAP and in accordance with the reporting requirements of Form 10-
K.  The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP req uire s the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets,
liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilitie s.  Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions relate to the Utility
’s regulatory assets and liabilities, legal and regulatory contingencies, environmental remediation liabilities, ARO s, and pension and other postretirement benefit plans
obligations.  Management believes that its estimates and assumptions reflected in the C onsolidated F inancial S tatements are appropriate and reasonable.  A change
in management’s estimates or assumptions could result in an adjustment that would have a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial
condition and results of operations and cash flows during the period in which such change occurred.
 
NOTE 2: SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
 
Regulation and Regulated Operations
 
The Utility follows accounting principles for rate-regulated entities and collects rates f rom customers to recover “revenue requirements” that have been authorized by
the CPUC or the FERC based on the Utility’s cost of providing service.  T he Utility’s ability to recover a significant portion of its authorized revenue requirements
through rates is generally independent, or “decoupled,” from the volume of the Utility’s electricity and natural gas sales.  The Utility records assets and liabilities that
result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be recorded under GAAP for nonregula ted entities.  The Utility capitalizes and records, as regulatory
assets, costs that would otherwise be charged to expense if it is probable that the incurred costs will be recovered in future rates.  Regulatory assets are amortized over
the future periods in which the costs are recovered.  If costs expected to be incurred in the future are currently being recovered through rates, the Utility records those
expected future costs as regulatory liabilities.  A mounts that are probable of being credited or refun ded to customers in the future are also recorded as regulatory
liabilities.
 
The Utility also records a regulatory balancing account asset or liability for differences between customer billings and authorized revenue requirements that are
probable of reco very or refund.  In addition, t he Utility records a regulatory balancing account asset or liability for differences between incurred costs and customer
billings or authorized revenue meant to recover those costs , t o the extent that these differences are pr obable of recovery or refund .  These differences have no
impact on net income.  (S ee “Revenue Recognition” below. )
 
Management continues to believe the use of regulatory accounting is applicable a nd that all regulatory assets and liabilitie s are recoverabl e or refundable.  To the
extent that portions of the Utility’s operations cease to be subject to cost of service rate regulation, or recovery is no longer probable as a result of changes in
regulation or other reasons, the related regulatory assets and lia bilities are written off.
 
97
 

 
 
Revenue Recognition
 
The Utility recognizes revenues when electricity and natural gas services are delivered .   The Utility records unbilled revenues for the estimated amount of energy
delivered to customers but not yet billed at the end of the period.  Unbilled revenues are included in accounts receivable on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.   Rates
charged to customers are based on CPUC and FERC authorized revenue requirements.
 
The CPUC authorizes most of the Utility’s revenues i n the Utility’s GRC and its GT&S rate cases, which generally occur every three or four years.   T he Utility’s
ability to recover r evenue requirements authorized by the CPUC in these rates cases is independent, or “decoupled” from the volume of the Utility’s sales of
electricity and natural gas services.   The U tility recognizes revenues that have been authorized for rate recovery, are objectively determinable and probable of
recovery, and are expected to be collected within 24 months.   Generally, revenue is r ecognized ratably over the year.  
 
The CPUC also has authorized the Utility to collect additional revenue requirements to recover costs that the Utility has been authorized to pass on to customers,
including costs to purchase electricity and natural gas; and to fund public purpose, demand response, and customer energy efficiency programs.   In general , the
revenue recognition criteria for pass-through costs billed to customers are met at the time the costs are incurred.
 
The FERC authorizes the Utility’s r evenue requirements in periodic (often annual) TO rate cases.   The Utility’s ability to recover revenue requirements authorized by
the FERC is dependent on the volume of the Utility’s electricity sales, and revenue is recognized only for amounts billed and unbilled.
 
C ash and Cash Equivalents
 
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.  Cash equivalents are stated at fair
value. 
 
Restricted Cash
 
Prior to October 20 16, r estricted cash primarily consist ed of the Utility’s cash held in escrow pending the resolution of the remaining disputed claims made by
electricity suppliers in the Utility’s proceeding under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.  (See “ Resolution o f Remaining Chapter 11 Disputed Claims” in Note
13 below .) 
 
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts Receivable
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize an allowance for doubtful accounts to record uncollectable customer accounts receivable at estimated net re alizable
value.  The allowance is determined based upon a variety of factors, including historical write-off experience, aging of receivables , current economic conditions, and
assessment of customer collectability.
 
Inventories
 
Inventories are carried at weighted- average cost and include natural gas stored underground as well as materials and supplies .   Natural gas stored underground is
recorded to inventory when injected and then expensed as the gas is withdrawn for distribut ion to customers or to be used as fuel for electric generation.   Materials
and supplies are recorded to inventory when purchased and expensed or capitalized to plant, as appropriate, when consumed or installed.
 
Emission Allowances
 
The Utility purchases GHG emission allowances to satisfy its compliance obligations.  Associated costs are recorded as inventory and included in current assets –
other and other noncurrent assets – other on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.  Costs are carried at weighted-average and are recoverable throug h rates.
 
98
 

 
Property, Plant, and Equipment
 
Property, plant, and equipment are reported at the lower of their historical cost less accumulated depreciation or fair value .  Historical costs include labor and
materials, construction overhead, and AFUDC.  (See “AFUDC” below.)  The Utility’s total estimated useful lives and balances of its property, plant, and equipment
were as follows:
 
 
Estimated Useful
 
Balance at December 31,
(in millions, except estimated useful lives)
Lives (years)
 
2016
 
2015
Electricity generating facilities (1)
5 to 100
 
$
11,308   
$
9,860  
Electricity distribution facilities
15 to 55
 
 
29,836   
 
28,476  
Electricity transmission facilities
15 to 75
 
 
11,412   
 
10,196  
Natural gas distribution facilities
5 to 60
 
 
11,362   
 
10,397  
Natural gas transmission and storage facilities
5 to 65
 
 
6,491   
 
6,352  
Construction work in progress
 
 
 
2,184   
 
2,059  
Total property, plant, and equipment
 
 
 
72,593   
 
67,340  
Accumulated depreciation
 
 
 
(22,012) 
 
(20,617)
Net property, plant, and equipment
 
 
$
50,581   
$
46,723  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Balance includes nuclear fuel inventories.  Stored nuclear fuel inventory is stated at weighted- average cost.  Nuclear fuel in the reactor is expensed as it is used based on the amount of energy
output.  (See Note 13 below.)
 
The Utility depreciates property, plant, and equipment using the composite, or group, method of depreciation, in which a single depreciation rate is applied to the
gross investment balance in a particular class of property.  This method approximates the straight line method of depreciation over the useful lives of property, plant,
and equipment.  The Utility’s co mposite depreciation rates were 3.73 % in 2016 , 3.80 % in 2015 , and 3.77 % in 2014 .   The useful lives of the Utility’s property,
plant, and equipment are authorized by the CPUC and the FERC, and the depreciation expense is recovered through rates charged to customers.  Depreciation expense
includes a component for the original cost of assets and a component for estimated cost of future removal, net of any salvage value at r etirement.  Upon retirement,
the original cost of the retired assets, net of salvage value, is charged against accumulated depreciation.  The cost of repairs and maintenance, including planned major
maintenance activities and minor replacements of property , is charged to operating and maintenance expense as incurred.
 
AFUDC
 
AFUDC represents the estimated cost s of debt (i.e., interest) and equity funds used to finance regulated plant additions before they go into service and is capitalized
as part of the c ost of construction.  AFUDC is recoverable from customers through rates over the life of the related property once the property is placed in service. 
AFUDC related to the cost of debt is recorded as a reduction to interest expense.  AFUDC related to the c ost of equity is recorded in other income.  The Utility
recorded AFUDC related to debt and equity, respectively, of $ 51 million and $ 112 million during 2016 , $ 48 million and $ 107 million during 2015 , and $ 45
million and $ 100 million during 2014 .
 
Asset Retirement Obligations
 
The following table summarizes the changes in ARO liability during 2016 and 2015 , including nuclear decommissioning obligations :
 
(in millions)
 
2016
 
 
2015
ARO liability at beginning of year
$
3,643  
 
$
3,575  
Revision in estimated cash flows
 
968    
 
13  
Accretion
 
194    
 
169  
Liabilities settled
 
(121)
 
 
(114)
ARO liability at end of year
$
4,684    
$
3,643  
 
99
 

 
The Utility has not recorded a liability related to certain ARO’s for assets that are expe cted to operate in perpetuity.  As t he Utility cannot estimate a settlement date
or range of potential settlement dates for these assets , rea sonable estimate s of fair value cannot be made.  As such, ARO liabilities are not recorded for retirement
activities associated with substations, photovoltaic facilities, and certain hydroelectric facilities; removal of lead-based paint in some facilities and certain
communications equipment from leased property; and restoration or land to the conditions under certain agreements.  
 
Nuclear Decommissioning Obligation
 
Detailed studies of the cost to decommission the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities a re generally conducted every three years in conjunction with the Nuclear
Decommissioning Cost Triennial Proceeding conducted by the CPUC.  In   March   2016, the Utility submitted its updated decommissioning   cost estimate to the
CPUC.  As a result, the estimat ed undiscounted cost to decommission the Utility’s nuclear power plants increased by approximately $1.4   billion.   The change in
total estimated cost resulted in an $818 million adjustment to the   ARO.   The adjustment was a result of increased estimated   cost s related to spent   fuel storage,
staffing, and out-of-state waste disposal.   The decommissioning cost estimates are based on the plant location and cost characteristics for the Utility's nuclear power
plants.   Actual decommissioning costs may vary from the se estimates as a result of changes in assumptions such as decommissioning dates; regulatory requirements;
technology; and costs of labor, materials, and equipment.  The Utility recovers its revenue requirements for decommissioning costs from customers thr ough a non-
bypassable charge that the Utility expects will continue until   those costs are fully recovered.   The Utility requested that the CPUC authorize the collection of  
increased annual revenue requirements   beginning on January 1, 2017 based on   these   up dated cost estimates.
 
On August 11, 2016, the Utility submitted an application to the CPUC to retire Diablo Canyon at the expiration of its current operating licenses in 2024 (Unit 1) and
2025 (Unit 2).   The application includes a joint proposal between t he Utility and certain interested parties, entered into on June 20, 2016 , which result ed in a $115
million increase to the ARO recognized on the Consolidated Balance Sheets in June 2016.
 
The Utility adjusts its nuclear decommissioning obligation to reflec t changes in the estimated costs of decommissioning its nuclear power facilities and records this as
an adjustment to the ARO liability on its Consolidated Balance Sheets.  The total nuclear decommissioning obligation accrued was $ 3.5 billion and $2.5 billion at
December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.   The estimated undiscounted nuclear decommissioning cost for the Util ity’s nuclear power plants was $ 5.1 billion and
$3.5 billion at December 31, 2016 and 2015 (or $ 7.3 billion in future dollars), respectively.  These estimates are based on the 2016 decommissioning cost studies,
prepared in accordance with CPUC requirements.
 
Disallowance of Plant Costs
 
PG& E Corporation and the Utility record a charge when it is both probable that costs incurred or projected to be incurred for recently completed plant will not be
recoverable through rates charged to customers and the amount of disallowance can be reasonably estimated.  (See “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13
below.)
 
Nuclear Decommissioning Trusts
 
The Utility’s nuclear generation facilities consist of two units at Diablo Canyon and one retired facility at Humboldt Bay.  Nuclear decommissioning requires the safe
removal of a nuclear generation facilit y from service and the reduction of residual radioactivity to a level that permits termination of the NRC license and release of
the property for unrestricted use.  The Utilit y's nuclear decommissioning costs are recovered from customers through rates and are held in trusts until authorized for
release by the CPUC . 
 
The Utility classifies its investments held in the nuclear decommissioning trust s as “available-for-sale.”  Sin ce the Utility’s nuclear decommissioning trust assets are
managed by external investment managers, the Utility does not have the ability to sell its investments at its discretion.  Therefore, all unrealized losses are considered
other-than-temporary impair ments.  Gains or losses on the nuclear decommissioning trust investments are refundable or recoverable, respectively, from customers
through rates.   Therefore, trust earnings are deferred and included in the regulatory liability for recoveries in excess of the ARO.  There is no impact on the Utility’s
earnings or accumulated other comprehensive income.  The cost of debt and equity securities sold by the trust is determined by specific identification.
 
Variable Interest Entities
 
A VIE is an entity that does not have sufficient equity at risk to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support from other parties, or whose
equity investors lack any characteristics of a controlling financial interest.  An enterprise that has a controllin g financial interest in a VIE is a primary beneficiary and
is required to consolidate the VIE. 
 
100
 

 
Some of the counterparties to the Utility’s power purchase agreements are considered VIEs.  Each of these VIEs was designed to own a power plant that would ge
nerate electricity for sale to the Utility.  To determine whether the Utility was the primary beneficiary of any of these VIE s at December 31, 2016, it assessed whether
it absorbs any of the VIE’s expected losses or receives any portion of the VIE’s expect ed residual returns under the terms of the power purchase agreement , analyzed
the variability in the VIE’s gross margin , and considered whether it had any decision-making rights associated with the activities that are most significant to the VIE’s
performa nce, such as dispatch rights and operating and maintenance activities.   T he Utility’s financial obligation is limited to the amount the Utility pays for
delivered electricity and capacity.  The Utility did not have any decision-making rights associated wit h any of the activities that are most significant to the economic
performance of any of these VIEs .  Since the Utility was not the primary beneficiary of any of these VIEs at December 31, 2016 , it did not consolidate any of them .
 
Other Accounting Policies
 
For other accounting policies impacting PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s consolidated financial statements, see “Income Taxes” in Note 8, “D erivatives ” in
Note 9, “Fair Value Measurements” in Note 10 , and “Contingencies and Commitments” in Note 13 herein.
 
Reporting of Amounts Reclassified Out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
 
The changes, net of income tax, in PG&E Corporation’s acc umulated other comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2016 consisted of the
following:
 
 
Pension
 
Other
 
 
 
(in millions, net of income tax)
Benefits
 
Benefits
 
Total
Beginning balance
$
(23)
 $
16  
 $
(7)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Unrecognized prior service cost
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $37 and $15, respectively)
 
54  
 
 
(21)  
 
33  
Unrecognized net actuarial loss
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $45 and $15, respectively)
 
(64)
 
 
21    
 
(43)
Regulatory account transfer
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $5 and $0, respectively)
 
7  
 
 
-    
 
7  
Amounts reclassified from other comprehensive income:
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Amortization of prior service cost
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $3 and $6, respectively) (1)
 
5  
 
 
9    
 
14  
Amortization of net actuarial loss
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(net of taxes of $10 and $2, respectively) (1)
 
14  
 
 
2  
 
 
16  
Regulatory account transfer
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $13 and $8, respectively) (1)
 
(18)
 
 
(11)  
 
(29)
Net current period other comprehensive loss
 
(2)
 
 
-  
 
 
(2)
Ending balance
$
(25)
 $
16  
 $
(9)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) These components are included in the computation of net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit costs.  (See Note 11 below for additional details.)
 
101
 

 
The changes, net of income tax, in PG& E Corporation’s accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2015 consisted of the
following:
 
 
Pension
 
Other
 
Other
 
 
 
(in millions, net of income tax)
Benefits
 
Benefits
 
Investments
 
Total
Beginning balance
$
(21)  $
15    $
17    $
11  
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Unrecognized net actuarial loss
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $51, $21, and $0, respectively)
 
(76)  
 
(31)  
 
-    
 
(107)
Regulatory account transfer
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $51, $21, and $0, respectively)
 
73    
 
31    
 
-    
 
104  
Amounts reclassified from other comprehensive income:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Amortization of prior service cost
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $7, $8, and $0, respectively) (1)
 
8    
 
11    
 
-    
 
19  
Amortization of net actuarial loss
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $4, $1, and $0, respectively) (1)
 
6    
 
3    
 
-    
 
9  
Regulatory account transfer
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $10, $9, and $0, respectively) (1)
 
(13)  
 
(13)  
 
-    
 
(26)
Realized gain on investments
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(net of taxes of $0, $0, and $12, respectively)
 
-    
 
-    
 
(17)  
 
(17)
Net current period other comprehensive loss
 
(2)  
 
1    
 
(17)  
 
(18)
Ending balance
$
(23)  
$  
16    
$  
-    
$  
(7)
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(1) These components are included in the computation of net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit costs.  (See Note 11 below for additional details.)
 
With the exception of other investments, there was no material difference between PG&E Corporation and the Utility for the information disclosed above.
 
102
 

 
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
 
Share- B ased Payment Accounting
 
In March 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-09, Compensation – Stock Compensation (Topic 718) , which amends the existing guidance relating to the accounting
for share-based payment awards issued to employees, including the income tax consequenc es, classification of awards as either equity or liabilities, and classification
on the statement of cash flows.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility have adopted this standard as of the fourth quarter of 2016. 
 
ASU 2016-09 requires recognition of excess ta x benefits and deficiencies in the income statement, which resulted in the recognition of $6.3 million   in income tax
benefit for PG&E Corporation and the Utility for the year ended December 31, 2016.  Previously, these amounts were recognized in additional paid-in capital. 
Previously unrecognized excess tax benefits were reclassified via a cumulative-effect adjustment .  ASU 2016-09 also requires excess tax benefits and deficiencies to
be prospectively excluded from assumed future proceeds in the calculatio n of diluted shares when calculating diluted earnings per share utilizing the treasury stock
method.  The effect of this change on diluted EPS is immaterial.  Additionally, excess income tax benefits from stock-based compensation arrangements are now class
ified as cash flows from operating activities rather than as cash flows from financing activities, which resulted in an increase to cash flows from operating activities of
approximately $7.2 million   for the year ended December 31, 2016. 
 
Furthermore, ASU 2016-09 requires, on a retrospective basis, that employee taxes paid for withheld shares be classified as cash flows from financing activities rather
than as cash flows from operating activities.  As such, the consolidated statements of cash flows for PG& E Corporation and the Utility for the prior periods presented
were restated.  This change resulted in an increase to cash flows from operating activities and a decrease to cash flows from financing activities of $34.6 million, $26.8
million, and $13.2 mill ion   for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015, and 2014, respectively.
 
PG&E Corporation and th e Utility have elected to continue to estimate forfeitures expected to occur to determine the amount of compensation cost to be recognized
in each period and h ave not changed their policy on statutory withholding requirements and will continue to allow the employee to withhold up to the minimum
statutory withholding requirements.
 
Fair Value Measurement
 
In May 2015, the FASB issued ASU No. 2015-07, Fair Value M easurement (Topic 820): Disclosures for Investments in Certain Entities That Calculate Net Asset
Value per Share (or Its Equivalent) , which standardizes reporting practices related to the fair value hierarchy for all investments for which fair value is mea sured
using net asset value per share.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility adopted this guidance effective January 1, 2016. The adoption of this standard did not have a
material impact on their C onso lidated F inancial S tatements.  All pr ior periods presented in these Consolidated F inancial S tatements reflect the retrospective
adoption of this guidance. (See Note s 10 and 11 below.)
 
Accounting for Fees Paid in a Cloud Computing Arrangement
 
In April 2015, the FASB issued ASU No. 2015-05, Intangibles – Goodwi ll and Other – Internal-Use Software (Subtopic 350-40): Customer’s Accounting for Fees
Paid in a Cloud Computing Arrangement , which adds guidance to help entities evaluate the accounting treatment for cloud computing arrangements.  PG&E
Corporation and the Utility adopted this guidance effective January 1, 2016.  The adoption of this guidance did not have a material impact on their C onsolidated
Financial S tatements.
 
Presentation of Debt Issuance Costs
 
In April 2015, the FASB issued ASU No. 2015-03, Intere st - Imputation of Interest (Subtopic 835-30): Simplifying the Presentation of Debt Issuance Costs , which
amends the existing guidance relating to the presentation of debt issuance costs.  The amendments in this ASU require that debt i ssuance costs related to a recognized
debt liability be presented in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from the carrying amount of that debt liability, consistent with debt discounts.  PG&E Corporation
and the Utility adopted this guidance effective January 1, 2016 and a pplied the requirements retrospectively for all periods presented.  The adoption of this guidance
did not have a material impact on their Consolidated Financial Statements.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility restated $105 million and $103 million, respectiv ely,
of debt issuance costs as of December 31, 2015 with no impact to net income or total shareholders’ equity previously reported.  All prior periods presented in these
Consolidated Financial Statements reflect the retrospective adoption of this guidance.
 
103
 

 
Accounting Standards Issued But Not Yet Adopted
 
Restricted Cash
 
In November 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-18 , Statement of Cash Flows – Restricted Cash (Topic 230 ) , which amends the existing guidance relating to the
disclosure of restricted cash and restricted cash equivalents on the statement of cash flows.  The ASU will be effective for PG&E Corporation and the Utility on
January 1, 2018, with early adoption permitted.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility are currentl y evaluating the impact the guidance will have on their Consolidated
Statements of Cash Flows.
 
Recognition of Lease Assets and Liabilities
 
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) , which amends the existing guidance relating to the recognition of lease assets and lease
liabilities on the balance sheet and the disclosure of key information about leasing arrangements.   Under the new standard, an entity must recognize an asset and
liability for operating leases on the balance sh eet, which were previously not recognized.   The ASU will be effective for PG&E Corporation and the Utility on
January 1, 2019 with retrospective application.   PG&E Corporation and the Utility are currently evaluating the impact t he guidance will have on th eir C onsolidated
Financial S tatements and related disclosures.
 
Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities
 
In January 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-01, Financial Instruments—Overall (Subtopic 825-10): Recognition and Me asurement of Financial Assets and
Financial Liabilities , which amends the existing guidance relating to the recognition and measurement of financial instruments.     The ASU will be effective for
PG&E Corporation and the Utility on January 1, 2018.   PG&E Co rporation and the Utility are currently evaluating the impact t he guidance will have on their C
onsolidated Financial S tatements and related disclosures.
 
Revenue Recognition Standard
 
In May 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts wi th Customers, which amends existing revenue recognition guidance , effective Jan uary
1, 2018.  The objective of the new standard is to provide a single, comprehensive revenue recognition model for all contracts with customers to improve comparability
across entities, industries, jurisdiction, and capital markets and to provide more useful information to users of financial statements through improved disclosure
requirements.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not plan to early adopt the standard and are cur rently reviewing all revenue streams and evaluating the impact
the guidance will have on their Consolidated Financial Statements and related disclosures.  The Utility does not expect ASU 2014-09 to materially impact the timing
or recognition of revenue gen erated through the sale and delivery of electricity and natural gas to customers.  However, the Utility continues to consider the impacts
of outstanding industry-related issues being addressed by the American Institute of CPAs’ Revenue Recognition Working Group and the FASB’s Transition Resource
Group.
 
104
 

 
NOTE 3: REGULATORY ASSETS, LIABILITIES, AND BALANCING ACCOUNTS
 
Regulatory Assets
 
Long-term regulatory assets are comprised of the following:
 
 
Balance at December 31,
 
Recovery
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
Period
Pension benefits (1)
$
2,429  
 
$
2,414   Indefinitely (3)
Deferred income taxes   (1)
 
3,859  
 
 
3,054   
47 years  
Utility retained generation   (2)
 
364  
 
 
411   
9 years  
Environmental compliance costs (1)
 
778  
 
 
748   
32 years  
Price risk management (1)
 
92  
 
 
138   
10 years  
Unamortized loss, net of gain, on reacquired debt (1)
 
76  
 
 
94   
26 years  
Other
 
353  
 
 
170   
Various  
Total long-term regulatory assets
$
7,951  
 
$  
7,029   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
(1) Represents the cumulative differences between amounts recognized for ratemaking purposes and expense or accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) recog nized in accordance with
GAAP.
(2) In connection with the settlement agreement entered into among PG &E  Corporation,  the  Utility,  and  the  CPUC  in  2003 to  resolve  the  Utility’s  proceeding  under Chapter  11,  the  CPUC
authorized the Utility to recover $ 1.2 billion of costs related to the Utility’s retained generation assets.  The individual components of thes e regulatory assets are being amortized over the
respective lives of the underlying generation facilities, consistent with the period over which the related revenues are recognized. 
( 3 ) Payments into the pension and other benefits plans are based on annu al contribution requirements. As these annual requirements continue indefinitely into the future, t he Utility expects to
continuously recover pension benefits.
 
In general, the Utility does not earn a return on regulatory assets if the related costs do not accrue interest.  Accordingly, the Utility earns a return only on its
regulatory assets for retained generation , and regulatory assets for unamortized loss, net of gain, on reacquired debt.
 
Regulatory Liabilities
 
Long-term regulatory liabilities are comprised of the following:
 
 
Balance at December 31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
Cost of removal obligations (1)
$
5,060  
 
$
4,605  
Recoveries in excess of AROs (2)
 
626  
 
 
631  
Public purpose programs   (3)
 
567  
 
 
600  
Other
 
552  
 
 
485  
Total long-term regulatory liabilities
$
6,805  
 
$
6,321  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Represents the cumulative differences between asset removal costs recorded and amounts collected in rates for expected asset removal costs.
(2) Represents the cumulative differences between ARO expenses and amounts collected in rates.  Decommissioning costs related to the Utility’s nuclear facilities are recovered through rates and are
placed in nuclear decommissioning trusts.  This regulatory li ability also represents the deferral of realized and unrealized gains and losses on the se nuclear decommissioning trust investments. 
(See Note 10 below.)
(3) Represents amounts received from customers designated for public purpo se program costs expected to be incurred beyond the next 12 months, primarily related to energy efficiency programs.
 
105
 

 
Regulatory Balancing Accounts
 
The Utility tracks (1) differences between the Utility’s authorized revenue requirement and customer billings, and (2) differences between incurred costs and customer
billings.  To the extent these differences are probable of recovery or refund over the next 12 months, the Utility records a current regulatory balancing account
receivable or payable.     Regu latory balancing accounts that the Utility expects to collect or refund over a period exceeding 12 months are recorded as other
noncurrent assets – regulatory assets or noncurrent liabilities – regulatory liabilities, respectively, in the Consolidated Bala nce Sheets.  These differences do not have
an impact on net income .  Balancing accounts will fluctuate during the year based on seasonal electric and gas usage and the timing of when costs are incurred and cu
stomer revenues are collected. 
 
Current regula tory balancing accounts receivable and payable are comprised of the following:
 
 
Receivable
 
Balance at December 31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
Electric distribution
$
132  
 
$
380  
Utility generation
 
48  
 
 
122  
Gas distribution and transmission
 
541  
 
 
493  
Energy procurement
 
132  
 
 
262  
Public purpose programs
 
106  
 
 
155  
Other
 
541  
 
 
348  
Total regulatory balancing accounts receivable
$
1,500  
 
$
1,760  
 
 
Payable
 
Balance at December 31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
Gas distribution and transmission
$
48  
 
$
-  
Energy procurement
 
13  
 
 
112  
Public purpose programs
 
264  
 
 
244  
Other
 
320  
 
 
359  
Total regulatory balancing accounts payable
$
645  
 
$
715  
 
The electric distribution and utility generation accounts track the collection of revenue requirements approved in the GRC.  The gas distribution and transmission
accounts track the collection of revenue requirements approved in the GRC and the GT&S rate case.  Energy procurement balancing accounts track recovery of costs
related to the procurement of elect ricity, including any environmental compliance-related activities.  P ublic purpose programs balancing accounts are primarily used
to record and recover authorized revenue requirements for commission-mandated pro grams such as energy efficiency.
 
106
 

 
NOTE 4: DEBT
 
Long-Term Debt
 
The following table summarizes PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s long-term debt:
 
 
 
 
December 31,
(in millions)
 
 
2016
 
2015
PG&E Corporation
 
 
  
 
Senior notes:
 
 
 
  
 
 
Maturity
 
Interest Rates
 
  
 
 
2019
 
2.40%
 
350    
 
350  
Unamortized discount, net of premium and debt issuance costs
 
 
 
(2)  
 
(2)
Total PG&E Corporation long-term debt
 
 
 
348    
 
348  
Utility
 
 
 
  
 
 
Senior notes:
 
 
 
  
 
 
Maturity
 
Interest Rates
 
  
 
 
2017
 
5.625%
 
700    
 
700  
2018
 
8.25%
 
800    
 
800  
2020
 
3.50%
 
800    
 
800  
2021
 
3.25% to 4.25%
 
550    
 
550  
2022 through 2046
 
2.45% to 6.35%
 
12,775    
 
11,775  
Less: current portion
 
 
 
(700)  
 
-  
Unamortized discount, net of premium and debt issuance costs
 
 
 
(161)  
 
(156)
Total senior notes, net of current portion
 
 
 
14,764    
 
14,469  
Pollution control bonds:
 
 
 
  
 
 
Maturity
 
Interest Rates
 
  
 
 
Series 2004 A-D, due 2023 (1)
 
4.75%
 
345    
 
345  
Series 2009 A-D, due 2026 (2)
 
variable rate (4)
 
149    
 
309  
Series 1996 C, E, F, 1997 B due 2026 (3)
 
variable rate (5)
 
614    
 
614  
Less: current portion
 
 
 
-    
 
(160)
Total pollution control bonds
 
 
 
1,108    
 
1,108  
Total Utility long-term debt, net of current portion
 
 
 
15,872    
 
15,577  
Total consolidated long-term debt, net of current portion
 
 
$  
16,220    $
15,925  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(1) The Utility has obtained credit support from an insurance company for these bonds.
(2) Each series of these bonds is supported by a separate direct-pay letter of credit .  Subject to certain requirements, the Utility may choose not to provide a credit faci lity without issuer consent.
Series C and D pollution control bonds were redeemed on November 30, 2016.
( 3 ) Each series of these bonds is supported by a separate letter of credit .  In December 2015, the letters of credit were extended to December 1, 20 20 . Although the stated maturity date is 2026,
each series will remain outstanding only if the Utility extends or replaces the letter of credit related to the series or otherwise obtains consent from the issuer to the continuation of the series
without a cre dit facility.
  ( 4 ) At December 31 , 2016 , the interest rate on these bonds was 0.74 % .
  (5) At December 31, 2016, the interest rate on thes e bonds ranged from 0.72% - 0.73%.
 
107
 

 
Pollution Control Bonds
 
The California Pollution Control Financing Authority and the California Infrastructure and Economic Development Bank have issued various series of fixed rate and
multi-modal tax-exempt pollution control bonds for the benefit of the Utility.  Substantially all of the net proceeds of the pollution control bonds were used to finance
or refinance pollution control and sewage and solid waste disposal facilities at the Geysers geothermal power plant or at the Utility’s Diablo Canyon nuclear power
plant .  In 1999, the Utility sold all bond-financed facilities at the non-retired units of the Geysers geothermal power plant to Geysers Power Company, LLC pursuant
to purchase and sale s agreements stating that Geysers Power Company, LLC will use the bond-financed facilities solely as pollution control facilities for so long as
any tax-exempt pollution control bonds issued to finance the Geysers project are outstanding .  Except for components that may have been abandoned in place or
disposed of as scrap or that are permanently non-operational, t he Utility has no knowledge that Geysers Power Company, LLC intends to cease using the bond-
financed facilities solely as pollution control facilities.
 
Repayment Schedule
 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s combined long-term debt principal repayment amounts at December 31, 2016 are reflected in the table below:
 
(in millions,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
except interest rates)
2017
 
2018
 
2019
 
2020
 
 
2021
 
Thereafter
 
Total
PG&E Corporation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Average fixed interest ra te
 
-     
 
-     
 
2.40%
  
 
-     
 
-     
 
-   
 
 
2.40%
Fixed rate obligations
$
-     
$
-     
$
350     
$
-     
$
-     
$
-    
 
$
350  
Utility
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
 
Average fixed interest rate
 
5.625%
 
 
 
8.25%
 
 
 
-  
 
 
3.50%
 
 
 
3.80%
 
 
 
4.84%
 
 
 
4.94%
Fixed rate obligations
$
700     
$
800     
$
-     
$
800     
$
550     
$
13,120    
 $
15,970  
Variable interest rate
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
    as of December 31, 2016
 
-    
 
 
-    
 
 
0.74%
 
 
 
0.73%
 
 
 
-    
 
 
-    
 
 
0.73%
Variable rate obligations 
(1)
$
-     
$
-     
$
149     
$
614  
 
 
$
-  
 
 
$
-    
 $
763  
Total consolidated debt
$
700     
$
800     
$
499     
$
1,414     
$
550     
$
13,120    
 
$
17,083  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) The bonds due in 2026 are backed by separate letters of credit that expire June 5, 2019, or December 1, 2020.
 
Short-term Borrowings
 
The following table summarizes PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s outsta nding borrowings under their revolving credit facilities and commercial paper program s
at December 31, 2016 :
 
 
 
 
Credit
 
Letters of
 
Commercial
 
 
 
 
Termination
 
Facility
 
Credit
 
Paper
 
Facility
(in millions)
Date
 
Limit
 
Outstanding
 
Outstanding
 
Availability
PG&E Corporation
April 2021
 
$
300  (1)
 $
-  
 $
-  
 $
300  
Utility
April 2021
 
 
3,000  
(2)
 
 
41  
 
 
1,016  
 
 
1,943  
Total revolving credit facilities
 
 
$
3,300  
 
 $
41  
 $
1,016  
 $
2,243  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Includes a $ 50 million lender commitment to the letter of credit sublimit s and a $100 million commitment for swingline loans defined as loans that are made available on a same-day basis and
are repayable in full within 7 days.
(2) Includes a $ 50 0 m illion lender commitment to the letter of credit sublimit s and a $ 75 million commitment for swingline loans.
 
For the year ended December 31, 2016 , PG&E Corporation’s average outstanding commercial paper balance was $ 84 million and the maximum outstanding balance
during the year was $ 176 million.  For 2016 , the Utility’s aver age outstanding commercial paper balance was $ 837 million and the maximum outstanding balance
during the year was $ 1.4 billion .  There were no bank borrowings for PG&E Corporation or t he U tility in 2016 .
 
108
 

 
Revolving Credit Facilities
 
In June 2016, PG&E Corporation and the Utility each extended the termination dates of their existing revolving credit facilities by one year from April 27, 2020 to
April 27, 2021.   PG&E Corporation's and the Utility's revolving credit facilities may be used for working capital, the repayment of commercial paper, and other
corporate purposes.  At PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s request and at the sole discretion of each lender, the facilities may be extended for one additional
period. 
 
Borrowings under each credit agreement (other than swingline loans) will bea r interest based, at each borrower’s election, on (1) a London Interbank Offered Rate
(“LIBOR”) plus an applicable margin or (2) the base rate plus an applicable margin.  The base rate will equal the higher of the following:   the administrative agent’s
annou nced base rate, 0.5% above the overnight federal funds rate, and the one-month LIBOR plus an applicable margin.  The applicable margin for LIBOR loans will
range between 0.9% and 1.475% under PG&E Corporation’s credit agreement and between 0.8% and 1.275% under the Utility’s credit agreement.   The applicable
margin for base rate loans will range between 0% and 0.475% under PG&E Corporation’s credit agreement and between 0% and 0.275% under the Utility’s credit
agreement.  In addition, the facility fee under PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s credit agreements will range between 0.1% and 0.275% and between 0.075% and
0.225%, respectively.
 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s revolving credit facilities include usual and customary provisions for revolving credit facilities of this type, including those
regarding events of default and covenants limiting liens to those permitted under their senior note indentures, mergers, sales of all or substantially all of their assets,
and other fundamental changes.  In a ddition, the respective revolving credit facilities require that PG&E Corporation and the Utility maintain a ratio of total
consolidated debt to total consolidated capitalization of at most 65% as of the end of each fiscal quarter .  PG&E Corporation’s revo lving credit facility agreement
also requires that PG&E Corporation own, directly or indirectly, at least 80% of the outstanding common stock and at least 70% of the outstanding voting capital
stock of the Utility.
 
Commercial Paper Program s
 
The borrowin gs from PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility ’s commercial paper programs are used primarily to fund temporary financing needs.  PG&E Corporation
and the Utility can issue commercial paper up to the maximum amounts of $300 million and $2.5 billion, respective ly. PG&E Corporation and the Utility treat the
amount of outstanding commercial paper as a reduction to the amount available under their respective revolving credit facilities.  The commercial paper may have
maturities up to 365 days and ranks equally with PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s other unsubordinated and unsecured indebtedness.  Commercial paper notes
are sold at an interest rate dictated by the market at the time of issuance.   For 2016 , the average yield on outstanding PG&E Corporation and Uti lity commercial
paper was 0.63 % and 0.64 % , respectively .
 
Other Short-term Borrowings
 
In March 2016, the Utility entered into a $250 million floating rate unsecured term loan that matures on February 2, 2017.  Additionally, in December 2016, the
Utility issued a $250 million unsecured senior floating rate note that matures on November 30, 2017.  The proceeds were used for general corporate purposes,
including the repayment of a portion of the Utility’s outstanding commercial paper.
 
NOTE 5: COMMON STOCK AND SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION
 
PG &E Corporation had 506,891,874 shares of common stock outstanding at December 31, 2016 .  PG&E Corporation held all of the Utility’s outstanding common
stock at December 31, 2016 .
 
During 2016 , PG&E Corporation sold 2.6 million shares of common stock under the February 2015 equity distribution agreement for cash proceeds of $ 149 million,
net of commissions paid of $ 1.3 million.  As of December 31, 2016, the remaining gross sales available under this agreement were $275 m illion.
 
In August 2016 , PG&E Corporation sold 4.9 million shares of its common stock in an underwritten public offering for net cash proceeds of $309 million .
 
In addition, during 2016 , PG&E Corporation sold 7.4 million shares of common stock under its 401(k) plan, the Dividend Reinvestment and Stock Purchase Plan, and
share-based compensation plans for total cash proceeds of $ 364 million .
 
109
 

 
Dividends
 
The Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation and the Utility declare dividends quarterly.  Under the Utility’s Articles of Incorporation, the Utility cannot pay
common stock dividends unless all cumulative preferred dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock have been paid.  For the first quarter of 2016, the Board of
Directors of PG&E Corporation declared a common stock dividend of $0.455 per share .  In May 2016, the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation adopted a new
quarterly common stock dividend of $0.49 per share. In 2016, tota l dividends were $1.925 per share.
 
Under their respective credit agreements, PG&E Corporation and the Utility are each required to maintain a ratio of consolidated total debt to consolidated
capitalization of at most 65%.  Additionally, the CPUC requires the Utility to maintain a capital structure composed of at least 52% equity on a weighted average over
five years.  At December 31, 2016, the Utility had restricted net assets of $ 15.8 billion and was limited to $ 25 million of additional common stock dividends it could
pay to PG&E Corporation.
 
Long-Term Incentive Plan
 
The PG&E Corporation LTIP permits various forms of share-based incentive awards, including restricted stock awards, res tricted stock units , performance shares,
and other share-based awards, to eligible employees of PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries.  Non-employee directors of PG&E Corporation are also eligible to
receive certain share-based awards.  A maximum of 1 7 mil lion shares o f PG&E Corporation common stock (subject to certain adjustment s ) has been reserved for
issuance under the 20 14 LTIP, of which 13,826,995 shares were available for future award s at December 31, 201 6 .
 
The following table provides a summary of total share-based compensation expense recognized by PG&E Corporation for share-based incentive awards for 2016 ,
2015 , and 2014 :
 
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Restricted stock units
$  
53    
$  
47    
$  
42  
Performance shares
 
55    
 
46    
 
36  
Total compensation expense (pre-tax)
$
108    
$
93    
$
78  
Total compensation expense (after-tax)
$
64    
$
55    
$
47  
 
The amount of s hare-based compensation costs capitalized during 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 was immaterial .  There was no material difference between PG&E
Corporation and the Utility for the information disclosed above.
 
Restricted Stock Units
 
Prior to 2014, restricted stock units generally vest ed over four year s in 20% increments on the first business day of March in year one, two, and three, with the
remaining 40% vesting on the first business day of March in year four.  R estricted stock units granted after 2014 generally vest equally over three year s . Vested
restricted stock units are settled in shares of PG&E Corp oration common stock accompanied by cash payments to settle any dividend equivalents associated with the
vested restricted stock units.  Compensation expense is generally recognized rateably over the vesting period based on grant-date fair value .  The weig hted average
grant-date fair value for restricted stock units granted during 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 was $ 56.68 , $ 53.30 , and $ 43.76 , respectively.  The total fa ir value of
restricted stock units that vested during 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 was $ 36 million, $ 57 million, and $34 million, respectively.  The tax benefit from restricted stock
units that vested during each period was not material.   In general, f orfeitures are recorded rateably over the vesting period, using historical averages and adjusted to
actuals when vesting occurs.  As of December 31, 2016 , $ 37 mil lion of total unrecognized compensation costs related to nonvested restricted stock units was
expected to be recognized over the remai ning weighted average period of 1.22 years.
 
110
 

 
The following table summarizes restricted stock unit activity for 2016 :
 
 
Number of
 
Weighted Average Grant-
 
Restricted Stock Units
 
Date Fair Value
Nonvested at January 1
1,972,899  
 $
47.33  
Granted
776,312  
 $
56.68  
Vested
(770,968)
 $
46.79  
Forfeited
(55,233)
 $
49.65  
Nonvested at December 31
1,923,010  
 $
51.26  
 
Performance Shares
 
Performance shares generally will vest three years after the grant date.  Upon vesting, performance shares are settled in shares of common stock based on either PG&E
Corporation’s total shareholder return relative to a specified group of industry peer companies over a three-year performance period or , for a small number of awards,
an internal PG&E Corporation metric .  Dividend equivalents are paid in cash based on the amount of common stock to which the recipients are entitled. 
 
Compensation expense attributable to performance share is generally recognized rateably over the applicab le three-year period based on the grant-date fair value
determined using a Monte Carlo simulation valuation model for the total shareholder return based awards or the grant-date market value o f PG&E Corporation
common stock for internal metric based awards .   The weighted average grant-date fair value for performance shares granted during 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 was $
53.61 , $ 68.27 , and $ 51.81 respective ly.  The re was no tax benefit associated with performance shares during each of these periods .   In general, f orfeitures are
recorded rateably over the vesting period, using historical averages and adjusted to actuals when vesting occurs.   As of December 31, 2016 , $ 40 million of total
unrecognized compensation costs related to nonvested performance shares was expected to be recognized over the remaining weighted average period of 1.57 ye ar s .
 
The following table summarizes activity for performance shares in 2016 :
 
 
Number of
 
Weighted Average Grant-
 
Performance Shares
 
Date Fair Value
Nonvested at January 1
1,450,612  
 $
59.24  
Granted
1,233,884  
 
 
53.61  
Vested
(777,719)
 
 
51.81  
Forfeited (1)
(67,922)
 
 
58.20  
Nonvested at December 31
1,838,855  
 $
58.65  
 
 
 
 
 
(1)   Includes performance shares that expired with zero value as performance targets were not met.
 
NOTE 6: PREFERRED STOCK
 
PG&E Corporation has authorized 80 million shares of no par value preferred stock and 5 million shares of $ 100 par value preferred stock , which may b e issued as
redeemable or nonredeemable preferred stock.  PG&E Corporation does not have any preferred stock outstanding .
 
The Utility has authorized 75   million shares of $ 25 par value preferred stock and 10 million shares of $ 100 par value preferred stock.  At December 31, 2016 and
December 31, 2015, the Utility’s preferred stock outstanding included $ 145 million of shares with interest rates between 5% and 6% designated as nonredeemable
preferred stock and $ 113 million of shares with interest rates between 4.36%   and 5% that ar e redeemable between $ 25.75 and $ 27.25 per share.  The Utility’s
preferred stock outstanding are not subject to mandatory redemption.  All outstanding preferred stock has a $2 5 par value.
 
111
 

 
At December 31, 2016 , annual dividends on the Utility’s nonredeemable preferred stock ranged from $ 1.25 to $ 1.50 per share.  The Utility’s redeemable preferred
stock is subject to redemption at the Utility’s option, in whole or in part, if the Utility pays the specified redemption price plus accumulated and unpaid dividends
through th e redemption date.  At December 31, 2016 , annual dividends on redeemable preferred stock ranged from $ 1.09 to $ 1.25 per share.
 
Dividends on all Utility preferred stock are cumulative.  All shares of preferred stock have voting rights and an equal preference in dividend and liquidation rights. 
Upon liquidation or dissolution of the Utility, holders of preferred stock would be entitled to the par value of such shares plus all accumulated and unpaid dividends,
as specified for the class and series.   T he Utility paid $ 14 million of dividends on preferred s tock in each of 2016 , 2015, and 2014.
 
NOTE 7: EARNINGS PER SHARE
 
PG&E Corporation’s basic EPS is calculated by dividing the income available for common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding.  PG&E Corporation applies the treasury stock method of reflecting the dilutive effect of outstanding share-based compensation in the calculation of
diluted EPS.  The following is a reconciliation of PG&E Corporation’s income available for common shareholder s and weighted average common shares outstanding
for calculating diluted EPS for 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 .
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
(i n millions, except per share amounts)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Income available for common shareholders
$
1,393  
 $
874  
 $
1,436  
Weighted average common shares outstanding, basic
 
499  
 
 
484  
 
 
468  
Add incremental shares from assumed conversions:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Employee share-based compensation
 
2  
 
 
3  
 
 
2  
Weighted average common share outstanding, diluted
 
501  
 
 
487  
 
 
470  
Tot al earnings per common share, diluted
$
2.78  
 
$
1.79  
 $
3.06  
 
For each of the periods presented above, the calculation of outstanding common shares on a diluted basis excluded an insignificant amount of options and securities
that were antidilutive.
 
NOTE 8: INCOME TAXES
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes.  The i ncome tax provision includes current and deferred income
taxes resulting from operations during the year. PG&E Corporation and the Utility estimate current period tax expense in addition to calculating deferred tax assets
and liabilities.  Deferred tax assets and liabilities result from temporary tax and accounting timing differences, such as those arising from depreciation expen se.
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize a tax benefit if it is more likely than not that a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return will be sustained
upon examination by taxing authorities based on the merits of the position.  T he tax benefit recognized in the financial statements is measured based on the largest
amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement.  As such, t he difference between a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a t
ax return in future periods and the benefit recognized and measured pursuant to this guidance in the financial statements represents an unrecognized tax benefit. 
 
Investment tax credits are deferred and amortized to income over time.  PG&E Corporation am ortizes its investment tax credits over the projected investment
recovery period.   The Utility amortizes its investment tax credits over the life of the related property in accordance with regulatory treatment.
 
PG&E Corporation files a consolidated U.S. f ederal income tax return that includes the Utility and domestic subsidiaries in which its ownership is 80% or more. 
PG&E Corporation files a combined state income tax return in California.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility are parties to a tax-sharing agr eement under which the
Utility determines its income tax provision (benefit) on a stand-alone basis.  
 
112
 

 
The significant components of income tax provision (benefit) by taxing jurisdiction were as follows :
 
 
PG&E Corporation
 
Utility
 
Year Ended December 31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Current:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal
$
(105)
 $
(89)
 $
(84)
 $
(105)
 $
(88)
 $
(84)
State
 
(70)
 
 
11  
 
 
(41)
 
 
(66)
 
 
6  
 
 
(29)
Defe rred:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal
 
218  
 
 
131  
 
 
396  
 
 
229  
 
 
136  
 
 
426  
Stat e
 
16  
 
 
(76)
 
 
78  
 
 
16  
 
 
(69)
 
 
75  
Tax credits
 
(4)
 
 
(4)
 
 
(4)
 
 
(4)
 
 
(4)
 
 
(4)
Inco me tax provision (benefit)
$
55  
 $
(27)
 $
345  
 $
70  
 $
(19)
 $
384  
 
The following table describes net deferred income tax liabilities:
 
 
PG&E Corporation
 
Utility
 
Year Ended December 31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2016
 
2015
Deferred income tax assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tax carryforwards
 
1,851     
1,703     
1,596     
1,462  
Other   (1)
 
463     
757     
402     
700  
Total deferred income tax assets
$  
2,314    $  
2,460    $  
1,998    $  
2,162  
D eferred income tax liabilities:
 
   
   
   
 
Property related basis differences
 
10,429     
9,656     
10,411     
9,638  
Income tax regulatory asset (2)
 
1,572     
1,244     
1,572     
1,245  
Other   (3)
 
526     
766     
525     
766  
Total deferred income tax liabilities
$  
12,527    $  
11,666    $  
12,508    $  
11,649  
Total net deferred income tax liabilities
$  
10,213    $  
9,206    $  
10,510    $  
9,487  
 
 
   
   
   
 
(1) Amounts include compensation and benefits, environmental reserve, and customer advances for construction. 
( 2 ) Represents the deferred income tax component of the cumulative differences between amounts recognized for ratemaking purposes and amounts recognized in accordance with GAAP.  (See
Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
( 3 ) Amounts primarily relate to regulatory balancing accounts.  Greenhouse gas allowances are temporary timing differences that reverse through regulatory balancing accounts. 
113
 

 
The following table reconciles income tax expense at the federal statutory rate to the income tax provision :
 
 
PG&E Corporation
 
Utility
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Federal statutory income tax rate
35.0   %
 
35.0   %
 
35.0   %
 
35.0   %
 
35.0   %
 
35.0   %
Increase (decrease) in income
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
tax rate resulting from:
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
State income tax (net of
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
federal benefit) (1)
(2.5)  
 
(4.9)  
 
1.4    
 
(2.2)  
 
(4.8)  
 
1.6    
Effect of regulatory treatment
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
of fixed asset differences (2)
(23.7) 
 
(33.6) 
 
(15.0) 
 
(23.4) 
 
(33.7) 
 
(14.7) 
Tax credits
(0.8) 
 
(1.3) 
 
(0.7) 
 
(0.8) 
 
(1.3) 
 
(0.7) 
Benefit of loss carryback
(1.1) 
 
(1.5) 
 
(0.8) 
 
(1.1) 
 
(1.5) 
 
(0.8) 
Non deductible penalties (3)
0.8    
 
4.3    
 
0.3    
 
0.8    
 
4.3    
 
0.3    
Other, net   (4)
(3.9)  
 
(1.1)  
 
(0.8)  
 
(3.5)  
 
(0.2)  
 
0.4    
Effective tax rate
3.8   %
 
(3.1) %
 
19.4   %
 
4.8   %
 
(2.2) %
 
21.1   %
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
(1) Includes the effect of state flow-through rate making treatment.  In 2016 and 2015, amounts include an agreement with the IRS on a 2011 audit related to electric transmission and distribution
repairs deductions.   
(2) I nclude s the effect of federal flow-through ratemaking treatment for certain property-related costs as authorized by the 2014 GRC decision in all periods presented and by the 2015 GT&S
decision which impacts only 2016.  All amounts are impacted by the level of income before income taxes.  The 2014 GRC and 2015 GT&S rate case decisions authorized revenue requirements
that reflect flow-through ratemaking for temporary income tax differences attributable to repair costs and certain other property-related c osts for federal tax purposes.  For these temporary tax
differences, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize the deferred tax impact in the current period and record offsetting regulatory assets and liabilities.  Therefore, PG&E Corporation’s and
the Ut ility’s effective tax rates are impacted as these differences arise and reverse.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize such differences as regulatory assets or liabilities as it is probable
that these amounts will be recovered from or returned to cus tomers in future rates. 
( 3 ) Primarily represen ts the effect s of non-tax deductible fines and penalties associated with the natural gas distribution facilities record-keeping decision for the year ended December 31, 2016
and the effects of the Penalty Dec ision for the year ended December 31, 2015 .   For more information about the Penalty Decision see “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 13 of the
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 .
( 4 ) In 2016, the amount primarily represents the impact of tax audit settlements.
 
Unrecognized tax benefits
 
The following table reconciles the changes in unrecognized tax benefits:
 
 
PG&E Corporation
 
Utility
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Balance at beginning of year
$
468    
$
713    
$
666    
$
462    
$
707    
$
660  
Additions for tax position taken
 
   
   
   
   
   
 
during a prior year
 
-    
 
40    
 
7    
 
-    
 
40    
 
7  
Reductions for tax position
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
taken d uring a prior year
 
(77)  
 
(349)  
 
(9)  
 
(77)  
 
(349)  
 
(9)
Additio ns for tax position
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
taken during the current year
 
56    
 
64    
 
61    
 
56    
 
64    
 
61  
Settlements
 
(59)  
 
-    
 
(12)  
 
(59)  
 
-    
 
(12)
Balance at end of year
$  
388    
$  
468    
$  
713    
$  
382    
$  
462    
$  
707  
 
The component of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the effective tax rate at December 3 1, 2016 for PG &E Corporation and the Utility was
$ 25 million .
 
114
 

 
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s unrecognized tax benefits may change significantly wi thin the next 12 months due to the resolution of several matters,
including audits.   As of December 31, 2016, it is reasonably possible that unrecognized tax benefits will decrease by approximately $ 70 million within the next 12
months.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe that the majority of the decrease will not impact net income.
 
Interest income, interest expense and penalties associated with income taxes are reflected in income tax expense on the Consolidated Statements of Income.  For t he
years ended December 31, 2016 , 2015, and 201 4 , these amounts were immaterial.
 
IRS settlements
 
PG&E Corporation previously participated in the Compliance Assurance Process, a real-time IRS audit intended to expedite resolution of tax matters.  The
Compliance Assurance Process audit culminates with a letter from the IRS indicating its acceptance of the return.  PG&E Corporation’s participation in the
Compliance Assurance Process ended effective with the submission of its 2015 tax return .
 
PG&E Corporation’s tax returns have been accepted through 2015 except for a few matters, the most significant of which relates to deductible repair costs.  In March
2016, PG&E Corporation reached an agreement with the IRS on deductible electric transmis sion and distribution repair costs for the 2012 tax year.  The agreement
provided that the methodology used in determining the deductible amount should be followed for all subsequent periods, absent any material change in facts. 
Deductible repair costs fo r other lines of business will continue to be subject to examination by the IRS for subsequent years.  The IRS is expected to issue guidance
in 2017 that clarifies which repair costs are deductible for the natural gas transmission and distribution business es. 
 
Tax years after 2008 remain subject to examination by the state of California.
 
2015 Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Case
 
In comments to the proposed decision in phase two of the 2015 GT&S rate case , the Utility question ed whether the methodology employed to calculate the capital
disallowance portion of the San Bruno penalty might constitute a normalization violation.  In recognition of this concern, the C PUC , in the final phase two decision,
provided the Utility an opportunity to submit a ruling to the IRS for guidance and establish a memorandum account to track the additional revenue that would be
recoverable if the method is deemed to be a normalization violation.   The Utility anticipates filing the ruling request in early 2017.
 
As a result of the final phase two decision, PG&E Corporation and the Utility applied flow through accounting to property - related timing differences for 2016 and
2015 .
 
Carryforwards
 
The following table describes PG&E Corporation’s operating loss and tax credit carryfo rward balances :
 
 
December 31,
 
Expiration
(in millions)
2016
 
Year
Federal:
 
 
 
 
Net operating loss carryforward
$
5,009    
2029 - 2036
Tax credit carryforward
 
116    
2029 - 2036
Charitable contribution loss carryforward
 
192    
2017 - 2021
 
 
  
 
State:
 
  
 
Net operating loss carryforward
$
-    
N/A
Tax credit carryforward
 
51    
Various
Charitable contribution loss carryforward
 
112    
2019 - 2021
 
PG&E Corporation believes it is more likely than not the tax benefits associated with the federal and California net operating loss es, charitable contributions and tax
credits can be realized within the carryforward periods, therefore no valuation allowance was recognized as of December 31, 201 6 for these tax attributes.  
 
115
 

 
NOTE 9: DERIVATIVES
 
Use of Derivative Instruments
 
The Utility is exposed to commodity price risk as a result of its electricity and natural gas procurement activities.  Procurement costs are recovered through customer
rates.  The Utility uses both derivative and non-derivative contracts to manage volatility in customer rates due to fluctuating commodity prices.  Derivatives include
forward contracts, swaps, futures, options, and CRRs.
 
Derivatives are pres ented in the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets on a net basis in accor dance with master netting arrangements for each counterparty.  The fair
value of derivative instruments is further offset by cash collateral paid or received where the right of offset and the intention to offset exist.  
 
Price risk management activities that meet the definition of derivatives are recorded at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.  These instruments are not held
for speculative purposes and are subject to certain regulatory requirements.  The Utility expects to fully recover in rat es all costs related to derivatives under the
applicable ratemaking mechanism in place as long as the Utility’s price risk management activities are carried out in accordance with CPUC directives.  Therefore, all
unrealized gains and losses associated with the change in fair value of these derivatives are deferred and recorded within the Utility’s regulatory assets and liabilities
on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.  Net realized gains or losses on commodity derivatives are recorded in the cost of electrici ty or the cost of natural gas with
corresponding increases or decreases to regulatory balancing accounts for recovery from or refund to customers.
 
The Utility elects the normal purchase and sale exception for eligible derivatives.  Eligible derivatives ar e those that require physical delivery in quantities that are
expected to be used by the Utility over a reasonable period in the normal course of business, and do not contain pricing provisions unrelated to the commodity
delivered.  These items are not ref lected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value.  Eligible derivatives are accounted for under the accrual method of
accounting.
 
Volume of Derivative Activity
 
At December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively , the volume s of the Utility’s outstanding derivatives w ere as follows:
 
 
 
 
 
Contract Volume
Underlying Product
 
Instruments
 
2016
 
2015
Natural Gas (1)   (MMBtus (2) )
 
Forwards and Swaps
 
323,301,331
 
333,091,813
 
 Options
 
96,602,785
 
111,550,004
Electricity (Megawatt-hours)
 
Forwards and Swaps
 
3,287,397
 
3,663,512
 
 Congestion Revenue Rights (3)
 
278,143,281
 
216,383,389
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1 ) Amounts shown are for the combined positions of the electric fuels and core gas supply portfolios.
(2 ) Million British Thermal Units.
(3 ) CRRs are financial instruments that enable the holders to manage variability in electric energy congestion charges due to transmission grid limitations.
 
Presentation of Derivative Instruments in the Financial Statements
 
At December 31, 2016 , the Utility’s outstanding derivative balances were as follows:
 
 
Commodity Risk
 
Gross Derivative
 
 
 
 
 
Total Derivative
(in millions)
Balance
 
Netting
 
Cash Collateral
 
Balance
Current assets – other
$
91   
$
(10)  
$
1   
$
82  
Other noncurrent assets – other
 
149   
 
(9)  
 
-   
 
140  
Current liabilities – other
 
(48)  
 
10   
 
-   
 
(38)
Noncurrent liabilities – other
 
(101)  
 
9   
 
3   
 
(89)
Total commodity risk
$
91   
$
-   
$
4   
$
95  
 
116
 

 
At December 31, 2015 , the Utility’s outstanding derivative balances were as follows:
 
 
Commodity Risk
 
Gross Derivative
 
 
 
 
 
Total Derivative
(in millions)
Balance
 
Netting
 
Cash Collateral
 
Balance
Current assets – other
$
97   
$
(4)  
$
25   
$
118  
Other noncurrent assets – other
 
172   
 
(2)  
 
-   
 
170  
Current liabilities – other
 
(102)  
 
4   
 
44   
 
(54)
Noncurrent liabilities – other
 
(140)  
 
2   
 
21   
 
(117)
Total commodity risk
$
27   
$
-   
$
90   
$
117  
 
Gains and losses associated with price risk management activities were recorded as follows:
 
 
Commodity Risk
 
For the year ended December 31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Unrealized gain/(loss) - regulatory assets and liabilities (1)
$
64   
$
(6)
 
$
124  
Realized loss - cost of electricity (2)
 
(53)  
 
(14)
 
 
(83)
Realized loss - cost of natural gas (2)
 
(18)  
 
(10)
 
 
(8)
Total commodity risk
$
(7)  
$
(30)
 
$
33  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
( 1) Unrealized gains and losses on commodity risk-related derivative instruments are recorded to regulatory liabilities or assets, respectively, rather than being recorded to the Consolidated
Statements of Income.  These amounts exclude the impact of cash collateral postings.
( 2) These amounts are fully passed through to customers in rates.  Accordingly, net income was not impacted by realized amounts on these instruments.
 
Cash inflows and outflows associated with derivatives are included in operating cash flows on the Utility’s Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
 
The majority of the Utility’s derivatives contain collateral posting provisions tied to the Utility’s credit rating from each of the major credit rating agencies.  At
December 3 1, 2016 , the Utility’s credit rating was investment grade.  If the Utility’s credit rating were to fall below investment grade, the Utility would be required
to post additional cash immediately to fully collateralize some of its n et liability derivative positions.
 
T he additional cash collateral that the Utility would be required to post if the credit risk-related contingency features were triggered was as follows:
 
 
Balance at December 31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
Derivatives in a liability position with credit risk-related
 
 
 
 
 
contingencies that are not fully collateralized
$
(24)
 
$
(2)
Related derivatives in an asset position
 
19  
 
 
-  
Collateral posting in the normal course of business related to
 
  
 
 
these derivatives
 
4  
 
 
-  
Net position of derivative contracts/additional collateral
 
 
 
 
 
posting requirements   (1)
$
(1)
 
$
(2)
 
  
 
  
( 1) This calculation excludes the impact of closed but unpaid positions, as their settlement is not impacted by any of the Utility’s cre dit risk-related contingencies.
 
117
 

 
NOTE 10: FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility measure their cash equivalents, trust assets and price risk management instruments at fair value.  A three-tier fair value hierarchy is
established that pri oritizes the inputs to valuation methodologies used to measure fair value :
 
Level   1 – Observable inputs that reflect quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
 
Level   2 – Other inputs that are directly or indirectly observable in the marketplace.
 
Level   3 – Unobservable inputs which are supported by little or no market activities.
 
The fair value hierarchy requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when meas uring fair value.
 
118
 

 
Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis for PG&E Corporation and the Utility are summarized below .  A ssets held in rabbi trusts are held by
PG&E Corporation and not the Utility .
 
 
Fair Value Measurements
 
At December 31, 2016
(in millions)
Level 1
 
Level 2
 
Level 3
 
Netting (1)
 
Total
Assets:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Short-term investments
$
105   
$
-   
$
-   
$
-   
$
105  
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Short-term investments
 
9   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
9  
Global equity securities
 
1,724   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
1,724  
Fixed-income securities
 
665   
 
527   
 
-   
 
-   
 
1,192  
Assets measured at NAV
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
14  
Total nuclear decommissioning trusts (2)
 
2,398   
 
527   
 
-   
 
-   
 
2,939  
Price risk management instruments
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(Note 9)
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Electricity
 
30   
 
18   
 
181   
 
(18)  
 
211  
Gas
 
-   
 
11   
 
-   
 
-   
 
11  
Total price risk management
 
30   
 
29   
 
181   
 
(18)  
 
222  
instruments
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Rabbi trusts
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Fixed-income securities
 
-   
 
61   
 
-   
 
-   
 
61  
Life insurance contracts
 
-   
 
70   
 
-   
 
-   
 
70  
Total rabbi trusts
 
-   
 
131   
 
-   
 
-   
 
131  
Long-term disability trust
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Short-term investments
 
8   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
8  
Assets measured at NAV
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
170  
Total long-term disability trust
 
8   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
178  
TOTAL ASSETS
$
2,541   
$
687   
$
181   
$
(18)  
$
3,575  
Liabilities:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Price risk management instruments
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(Note 9)
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Electricity
$
9   
$
12   
$
126   
$
(21)  
$
126  
Gas
 
-   
 
2   
 
-   
 
(1)  
 
1  
TOTAL LIABILITIES
$
9   
$
14   
$
126   
$
(22)  
$
127  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
(1) Includes the effect of the contractual ability to settle contracts under master netting agreements and margin cash collateral.
(2) Represents amount before deducting $ 333 million , primarily related to deferred taxes on appreciation of investment value.
 
119
 

 
 
Fair Value Measurements
 
At December 31, 2015
(in millions)
Level 1
 
Level 2
 
Level 3
 
Netting (1)
 
Total
Assets:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Short-term investments
$
64   
$
-   
$
-   
$
-   
$
64  
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Short-term investments
 
36   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
36  
Global equity securities
 
1,520   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
1,520  
Fixed-income securities
 
694   
 
521   
 
-   
 
-   
 
1,215  
Assets measured at NAV
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
13  
Total nuclear decommissioning trusts (2)
 
2,250   
 
521   
 
-   
 
-   
 
2,784  
Price risk management instruments
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(Note 9)
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Electricity
 
-   
 
9   
 
259   
 
18   
 
286  
Gas
 
-   
 
1   
 
-   
 
1   
 
2  
Total price risk management
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
instruments
 
-   
 
10   
 
259   
 
19   
 
288  
Rabbi trusts
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Fixed-income securities
 
-   
 
57   
 
-   
 
-   
 
57  
Life insurance contracts
 
-   
 
70   
 
-   
 
-   
 
70  
Total rabbi trusts
 
-   
 
127   
 
-   
 
-   
 
127  
Long-term disability trust
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Short-term investments
 
7   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
7  
Assets measured at NAV
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
158  
Total long-term disability trust
 
7   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
165  
TOTAL ASSETS
$
2,321   
$
658   
$
259   
$
19   
$
3,428  
Liabilities:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Price risk management instruments
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(Note 9)
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Electricity
$
69   
$
1   
$
170   
$
(70)  
$
170  
Gas
 
-   
 
2   
 
-   
 
(1)  
 
1  
TOTAL LIABILITIES
$
69   
$
3   
$
170   
$
(71)  
$
171  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Includes the effect of the contractual ability to settle contracts under master netting agreements and margin cash collateral.
(2) Represents amount before deducting $314 million, primarily related to deferred taxes on appreciation of investment value.
 
V aluation Techniques
 
The following describes the valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of the assets and liabi lities shown in the tables above.  Equity investments valued at
net asset value per share utilize investment strategies aimed at matching the performance of indexed funds.  Transfers between levels in the fair value hierarchy are
recognized as of the end of the reporting period.   There were no material transfers between any levels for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 .
 
Trust Assets
 
In general, investments held in the trusts are exposed to various risks, such as interest rate, credit, and market volatility risks.   N uclear decommissioning trust assets
and other trust assets are composed primarily of equity and fixed-income securities and also include short-term investments that are money market funds valued at
Level 1 .  Global e quity securities primarily include i nvestments in common stock that are valued based on quoted prices in active markets and are classified as Level
1.
 
120
 

 
 
 
Fixed-income securities are primarily composed of U.S. government and agency securities, municipal secu rities, and other fixed-income securities, including
corporate debt securities.  U.S. government and agency securities primarily consist of U.S. Treasury securities that are classified as Level 1 because the fair value is
determined by observable market pr ices in active markets.  A market approach is generally used to estimate the fair value of debt securities classified as Level 2 using
evaluated pricing data such as broker quotes, for similar securities adjusted for observable differences.  Significant in puts used in the valuation model generally
include benchmark yield curves and issuer spreads.  The external credit ratings, coupon rate, and maturity of each security are considered in the valuation model, as
applicable.
 
On January 1, 2016, PG&E Corporati on and the Utility adopted FASB ASU No. 2015-07, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosures for Investments in
Certain Entities That Calculate Net Asset Value per Share (or Its Equivalent) and applied it retrospectively for the periods presented in th eir Consolidated Financial
Statements.  (See Note 2 above.) In accordance with this guidance, investments in the nuclear decommissioning trusts and the long-term disability trust that are
measured at fair value using the NAV per share practical expedient ha ve not been classified in the fair value hierarchy tables above.  The fair value amounts are
included in the tables above in order to reconcile to the amounts presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. These investments include commingled funds that are
composed of equity securities traded publicly on exchanges as well as fixed-income securities that are composed primarily of U.S. government securities and asset-
backed securities.  There are no restrictions on the terms and conditions upon which the inves tments may be redeemed. 
 
Price Risk Management Instruments
 
Price risk management instruments include physical and financial derivative contracts, such as power purchase agreements, forwards, swaps, options, and CRRs that
are traded either on an exchange or over-the-counter. 
 
Power purchase agreements, forwards, and swaps are valued using a discounted cash flow model.  Exchange-traded forwards and swaps that are valued using
observable market forward prices for the underlying commodity are classified as Level 1.  Over-the-counter forwards and swaps that are identical to exchange-traded
forwards and swaps , or are valued using forward prices from broker quotes that are corroborated with market data are classified as Level 2.  Exchange-traded options
are va lued using observable market data and market-corroborated data and are classified as Level 2.  
 
Long-dated power purchase agreements that are valued using significant unobservable data are classified as Level 3.  These Level 3 contracts are valued using e ither
estimated basis adjustments from liquid trading points or techniques, including extrapolation from observable prices, when a contract term extends beyond a period for
which market data is available.   Market and credit risk ma nagement utilizes models to derive pricing inputs for the valuation of the Utility’s Level 3 instruments
using pricing inputs from br okers and historical data.
 
The Utility holds CRRs to hedge the financial risk of CAISO-imposed congestion charges in the day-ahead market.  Limited market data is available in the CAISO
auction and between auction dates; therefore, the Utility utilizes historical prices to forecast forward prices . CRRs are classified as Level 3.
 
Level 3 Measurements and Sensitivity Analysis
 
The Utility’s market and credit risk m anagement function, which reports to the Chief Financial Officer, is responsible for determining the fair value of the Utility’s
price risk manag ement derivatives.  The Utility’s finance and risk management functions collaborate to determi ne the appropriate fair value methodologies and
classification for each derivative.  Inputs used and the fair value of Level 3 instruments are reviewed period-over-period and compared with market conditions to
determine reasonableness.
 
Significant increas es or decreases in any of those inputs would result in a significantly higher or lower fair value, respectively.  All reasonable costs related to Level 3
instruments are expected to be recoverable through customer rates; therefore, there is no impact to ne t income resulting from changes in the fair value of these
instruments.   (See Note 9 above.)
 
121
 

 

 
 
Fair Value at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(in millions)
 
At December 31, 2016
 
Valuation
 
Unobservable
 
 
 
Fair Value Measurement
 
Assets
 
Liabilities
 
Technique
 
Input
 
Range (1)
Congestion revenue rights
 
$
181   
$  
35   Market approach
 CRR auction prices
 
$ (11.88) - 6.93
Power purchase agreements
 
$
-   
$  
91   Discounted cash flow
 Forward prices
 
$ 18.07 - 38.80
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
 

(1)   Represents price per megawatt-hour

 

 
 
Fair Value at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(in millions)
 
At December 31, 2015
 
Valuation
 
Unobservable
 
 
 
Fair Value Measurement
 
Assets
 
Liabilities
 
Technique
 
Input
 
Range (1)
Congestion revenue rights
 
$
259   
$
63   Market approach
 CRR auction prices
 
$ (161.36) - 8.76
Power pur chase agreements
 
$
-   
$
107   Discounted cash flow
 Forward prices
 
$ 15.08 - 37.27
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
 

(1) Represents price per megawatt-hour

 

Level 3 Reconciliation

 

The following table presents the reconciliation for Level 3 price risk management instruments for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively:

 

 
Price Risk Management Instruments
(in millions )
2016
 
2015
Asset (liability) balance as of January 1
$
89  
 $
69  
Net realized and unrealized gains:
 
 
 
 
 
Included in regulatory assets and liabilities or balancing accounts (1)
 
(34)
 
 
20  
Asset (liability) balance as of December 31
$
55  
 $
89  
 
 
  
 
 

(1) The costs related to price risk management activities are recoverable through customer rates, therefore, balancing account revenue is recorded for amounts settled and purchased and there is no
impact to net income. Unrealized gains and losses are defer red in regulatory liabilities and assets.

 

Financial Instruments

 

PG&E Corporation and the Utility use the following methods and assumptions in estimating fair value for financial instruments:

 

The fair values of cash , restricted cash , net accounts receivable, short-term borrowings, accounts payable, customer deposits, floating rate senior notes, and
the Utility’s variable rate pollution control bond loan agreement s approximate their carrying values at December 31, 2016 and 2015 , as they are short-term
in nature or have interest rates that reset daily .  
 
The fair values of the Utility’s fixed - rate senior notes and fixed - rate pollution control bond s and PG&E Corporation’s fixed - rate s enior notes were based
on quoted market prices at December 31, 2016 and 2015 .
 
The carrying amount and fair value of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s debt instruments were as follows (the table below excludes financial instruments with
carrying values that approximate their fair values):
 
 
At December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
(in millions)
Carrying Amount
 
Level 2 Fair Value
 
Carrying Amount
 
Level 2 Fair Value
Debt (Note 4)
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
PG&E Corporation
$
348   
$
352   
$
348   
$
354  
Utility
 
15,813   
 
17,790   
 
14,818   
 
16,422  
 
122
 

 
Available for Sale Investments
 
The following table provides a summary of available-for-sale investments:
 
 
 
 
 
Total
 
 
Total
 
 
 
 
Amortized
 
 
Unrealized
 
 
Unrealized
 
 
Total Fair
(in millions)
Cost
 
 
Gains
 
 
Losses
 
 
Value
As of December 31, 2016
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  Short-term investments
$
9    
$
-    
$
-    
$
9  
  Global equity securities
 
584    
 
1,157    
 
(3)  
 
1,738  
  Fixed-income securities
 
1,156    
 
48    
 
(12)  
 
1,192  
Total (1)
$
1,749    
$
1,205    
$
(15)  
$
2,939  
As of December 31, 2015
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  Short-term investments
$
36    
$
-    
$
-    
$
36  
  Global equity securities
 
508    
 
1,034    
 
(9)  
 
1,533  
  Fixed-income securities
 
1,165    
 
58    
 
(8)  
 
1,215  
Total   (1)
$
1,709    
$
1,092    
$
(17)  
$
2,784  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
(1) Represents amounts before deducting $ 333 million and $314 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively, primarily related to deferred taxes on appreciation of investment value.
 
The fair value of fixed-income securities by contractual maturity is as follows:
 
 
As of
(in millions)
December 31, 2016
Less than 1 year
$
13  
1–5 years
 
419  
5–10 years
 
255  
More than 10 years
 
505  
Total maturities of fixed-income securities
$
1,192  
 
The following table provides a summary of activity for the fixed-income and equity securities:
 
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
(in millions)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceeds from sales and maturities of nuclear decommissioning
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
investments
$
1,295  
 $
1,268  
 $
1,336  
Gross realized gains on securities held as available-for-sale
 
18  
 
 
55  
 
 
118  
Gross realized losses on securities held as available-for-sale
 
(26)
 
 
(37)
 
 
(12)
 
NOTE 11: EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
 
Pension Plan and Postretirement Benefits Other than Pensions (“PBOP”)
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility sponsor a non-contributory defined benefit pension plan for eligible employees hired before December 31, 2012 and a cash balance
plan for those eligible employees hired after this date or who made a one-time election to participate (“Pension Plan”).  T he trusts u nderlying certain of these plans
are qualified trusts under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.   If certain conditions are met, PG&E Corporation and the Utility can deduct payments
made to the qualified trusts, subject to certain limitations.  P G&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s funding policy is to contribute tax-deductible amounts, consistent
with applicable regulatory decisions and federal minimum funding requirements.  Based upon current assumptions and available information, the Utility ’s m inimum
funding requirements related to its pension plans is zero . 
 
123
 

 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility also sponsor contributory postretirement medical plans for retirees and their eligible dependents, and non-contributory
postretirement life insurance plan s for eligible employees and retirees.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility use a fiscal year-end measurement date for all plans.
 
Change in Plan Assets, Benefit Obligations , and Funded Status
 
The following tables show the reconciliation of changes in plan assets, benefit obligations, and the plans’ aggregate funded status for pension benefits and other
benefits for PG&E Corporation during 2016 and 2015 :
 
Pension Plan
 
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
Change in plan assets:
 
 
 
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
13,745  
 $
14,216  
Actual return on plan assets
 
1,358  
 
 
(176)
Company contributions
 
334  
 
 
334  
Benefits and expenses paid
 
(708)
 
 
(629)
Fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
14,729  
 $
13,745  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Change in benefit obligation:
 
 
 
 
 
Benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
16,299  
 $
16,696  
Service cost for benefits earned
 
453  
 
 
479  
Interest cost
 
715  
 
 
673  
Actuarial (gain) loss
 
637  
 
 
(922)
Plan amendments
 
(91)
 
 
1  
Transitional costs
 
-  
 
 
1  
Benefits and expenses paid
 
(708)
 
 
(629)
Benefit obligation at end of year (1)
$
17,305  
 $
16,299  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Funded Status:
 
 
 
 
 
Current liability
$
(7)
 $
(6)
Noncurrent liability
 
(2,569)
 
 
(2,547)
Net liability at end of year
$
(2,576)
 $
(2,553)
 
 
 
 
 
 
( 1) PG&E Corporation’s accumulated benefit obligation was $ 15.6 billion and $14. 7 billion at December 31, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
 
124
 

 
Postretirement Benefits Other than Pensions
 
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
Change in plan assets:
 
 
 
 
 
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
2,035  
 $
2,092  
Actual return on plan assets
 
167  
 
 
(26)
Company contributions
 
52  
 
 
61  
Plan participant contribution
 
85  
 
 
68  
Benefits and expenses paid
 
(166)
 
 
(160)
Fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
2,173  
 $
2,035  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Change in benefit obligation:
 
 
 
 
 
Benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
1,766  
 $
1,811  
Service cost for benefits earned
 
52  
 
 
55  
Interest cost
 
76  
 
 
71  
Actuarial (gain) loss
 
11  
 
 
(98)
Plan amendments
 
37  
 
 
-  
Transitional costs
 
-  
 
 
1  
Benefits and expenses paid
 
(153)
 
 
(146)
Federal subsidy on benefits paid
 
3  
 
 
4  
Plan participant contributions
 
85  
 
 
68  
Benefit obligation at end of year
$  
1,877  
 $  
1,766  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Funded Status: (1)
 
 
 
 
 
Noncurrent asset
$  
368  
 $  
344  
Noncurrent liability
 
(72)
 
 
(75)
Net asset at end of year
$  
296  
 $  
269  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) At December 31, 2016 and 2015 , the postretirement medical plan was in an overfunded position and the postretirement life insurance plan was in an underfunded position.
 
There was no material difference between PG&E Corporation and the Utility for the information disclosed above.
 
125
 

 
Components of Net Periodic Benefit Cost
 
Net periodic benefit cost as reflected in PG&E Corporation ’ s Consol idated Statements of Income was as follows:
 
Pension Plan
 
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Service cost
$
453  
 $
479  
 $
383  
Interest cost
 
715  
 
 
673  
 
 
695  
Expected return on plan assets
 
(828)
 
 
(873)
 
 
(807)
Amortization of prior service cost
 
8  
 
 
15  
 
 
20  
Amortization of net actuarial loss
 
24  
 
 
10  
 
 
2  
Net periodic benefit cost
 
372  
 
 
304  
 
 
293  
Less: transfer to regulatory account (1)
 
(34)
 
 
34  
 
 
42  
Total e xpense recognized
$
338  
 $
338  
 $
335  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) The Utility recorded these amounts to a regulatory account as they are probable of recovery from customers in future rates.
 
Postretirement Benefits Other than Pensions
 
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Service cost
$
52  
 $
55  
 $
45  
Interest cost
 
76  
 
 
71  
 
 
76  
Expected return on plan assets
 
(107)
 
 
(112)
 
 
(103)
Amortization of prior service cost
 
15  
 
 
19  
 
 
23  
Amortization of net actuarial loss
 
4  
 
 
4  
 
 
2  
Net periodic benefit cost
$
40  
 $
37  
 $
43  
 
There was no material difference between PG&E Corporation and the Utility for the information disclosed above. 
 
Components of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility record unrecognized prior service costs and unrecognized gains and losses related to pension and post-retirement benefits other
than pension as components of accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax .  In addition, regulatory adjustments are recorded in the Consolidated Statements
of Incom e and Consolidated Balance Sheets to reflect the difference between expense or income calculated in accordance with GAAP for accounting purposes and
expense or income for ratemaking purposes, which is based on authorized plan contributions.   For pension be nefits, a regulatory asset or liability is recorded for
amounts that would otherwise be recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income.   For post-retirement benefits other than pension, the Utility generally records
a regulatory liability for amounts t hat would otherwise be recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income.   As the Utility is unable to record a regulatory asset
for these other benefits, the charge remains in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
 
The estimated amounts that wil l be amortized into net periodic benefit cost s for PG&E Corporation in 2017 are as follows:
 
 
 
 
 
(in millions)
Pension Plan
 
PBOP Plans
Unrecognized prior service cost
$
(7)  
$
15  
Unrecognized net loss
 
22    
 
4  
Total
$
15  
 
$
19  
 
There were no material differences between the estimated amounts that will be amortized into net period ic benefit costs for PG&E Corporation and the Utility.
126
 

 
 
Valuation Assumptions
 
The following actuarial assumptions were used in determining the projected benefit obligations and the net periodic benefit cost s .  The following weighted average
year-end assumptions were used in determining the plans’ projected benefit obligations and ne t benefit cost.
 
 
Pension Plan
 
PBOP Plans
 
December 31,
 
December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Discount rate
4.11   %
 
4.37   %
 
4.00   %
 
4.05 - 4.19   %
 
4.27 - 4.48   %
 
3.89 - 4.09   %
Rate of future compensation
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
increases
4.00   %
 
4.00   %
 
4.00   %
 
-  
  
-  
  
-    
Expected return on plan
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
assets
5.30   %
 
6.10   %
 
6.20   %
 
2.80 - 6.00   %
 
3.20 - 6.60   %
 
3.30 - 6.70   %
 
The assumed health care cost trend rate as of December 31, 2016 was 7.2 % , decreasing gradually to a n ul timate trend rate in 2025 and beyond of approximately 4.5
% .  A one-percentage-point change in assumed health care cost trend rate would have the following effects:
 
 
One-Percentage-Point
 
One-Percentage-Po int
(in millions)
Increase
 
Decrease
Effect on postretirement benefit obligation
$
118  
 
$
(120)
Effect on service and interest cost
 
9  
 
 
(10)
 
Expected rates of return on plan assets were developed by determining projected stock and bond returns and then applying these returns to the target asset allocations
of the employee benefit plan trusts, resulting in a weighted average rate of return on pl an assets.  Returns on fixed-income debt investments were projected based on
real maturity and credit spreads added to a long-term inflation rate.  Returns on equity investments were estimated based on estimates of dividend yield and real
earnings growth a dded to a long-term inflation rate .  For the pension plan, the assumed return of 5.3 % compares to a ten-year actual return of 7.3 %.  The rate used
to discount pension benefits and ot her benefit s was based on a yield curve developed from market data of over approximately 696 Aa-grade non-callable bonds at
December 31, 2016 .  This yield curve has discount rates that vary based on the duration of the obligations.  The estimated future cash flows for the pension benefits
and other benefit obligations were matched to the corresponding rates on the yield curve to derive a weighted average dis count rate.
 
Investment Policies and Strategies
 
The financial position of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s funded status is the difference between the fair value of plan assets and projected benefit obligations. 
Volatility in funde d status occurs whe n asset values change differently from liability values and can result in fluctuations in costs in financial reporting , as well as
the amount of minimum contributions required under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended .  P G&E Cor poration’s and the Utility’s
investment policies and strategies are designed to increase the ratio of trust assets to plan liabilities at an acceptable level of funded status volatility. 
 
The trusts ’ asset allocations are meant to manage volatility, reduce costs, and diversify its holdings .   Interest rate, credit, and equity risk are the key determinants of
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s funded status volatility.  In addition to affecting the trusts’ fixed income portfolio market values, interes t rate changes also
influence liability valuations as discount rates move with current bond yields.  To manage volatility , PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s trust s hold significant
allocations in long maturity fixed-income investments . A lthough they co ntribute to funded status volatility, equity investments are held to reduce long-term funding
costs due to their higher expected return.  Real assets and absolute return investments are held to diversify the trust ’s holdings in equity and fixed-income inve
stments by exhibiting returns with low correlation to the direction of these markets. R eal assets include commodities futures, global REITS, global listed
infrastructure equities, and private real estate funds.  Absolute return investments include hedge f und portfolios .
 
127
 

 
In the Pension Plan, target allocations for 2017 were updated to reflect a 2% increase in global equity investments and a 2% decrease in fixed income investments.  
Target allocations for PBOP Plans remain unchanged.   Derivative instruments such as equity index futures are used to meet target equity exposure.   Derivative
instruments, such as equity index futures and U.S. treasury futures, are also used to rebalance the fixed income/equity allocation of the pension’s portfolio.   Foreign
curre ncy exchange contracts are used to hedge a portion of the non U.S. dollar exposure of global equity investments.
 
The target asset allocation percentages for major categories of trust assets for pension and other benefit plans are as follows:
 
 
Pension Pl an
 
PBOP Plans
 
2017
 
2016
 
2015
 
2017
 
2016
 
2015
Global equity
27   %
 
25   %
 
25   %
 
32   %
 
32   %
 
31   %
Absolute return
5   %
 
5   %
 
5   %
 
3   %
 
3   %
 
3   %
Real assets
10   %
 
10   %
 
10   %
 
7   %
 
7   %
 
8   %
Fixed income
58   %
 
60   %
 
60   %
 
58   %
 
58   %
 
58   %
Total
100   %
 
100   %
 
100   %
 
100   %
 
100   %
 
100   %
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility apply a risk management framework for managing the risks associated with employee benefit plan trust assets.  The guiding
principles of this risk management framework are the clear articulation of roles an d responsibilities, appropriate delegation of authority, and proper accountability and
documentation.  Trust investment policies and investment manager guidelines include provisions designed to ensure prudent diversification, manage risk through
appropriat e use of physical direct asset holdings and derivative securities, and identify permitted and prohibited investments.
 
Fair Value Measurements
 
The following tables present the fair value of plan assets for pension and other benefits plans by major asset category at December 31, 2016 and 2015 . 
 
 
Fair Value Measurements
 
At December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
(in millions)
Level 1
 
Level 2
 
Level 3
 
Total
 
Level 1
 
Level 2
 
Level 3
 
Total
Pension Plan:
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short-term investments
$
364   
$
369   
$
-   
$
733   
$
247   
$
375   
$
-   
$
622  
Global equity
 
996   
 
-   
 
-   
 
996   
 
903   
 
-   
 
-   
 
903  
Real assets
 
610   
 
-   
 
-   
 
610   
 
581   
 
-   
 
-   
 
581  
Fixed-income
 
1,754   
 
4,774   
 
5   
 
6,533   
 
1,841   
 
4,495   
 
3   
 
6,339  
Assets measured at NAV
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
5,950   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
5,308  
Total
$
3,724   
$
5,143   
$
5   
$
14,822   
$
3,572   
$
4,870   
$
3   
$
13,753  
PBOP Plans:
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Short-term investments
$
33   
$
-   
$
-   
$
33   
$
20   
$
-   
$
-   
$
20  
Global equity
 
115   
 
-   
 
-   
 
115   
 
104   
 
-   
 
-   
 
104  
Real assets
 
70   
 
-   
 
-   
 
70   
 
69   
 
-   
 
-   
 
69  
Fixed-income
 
150   
 
656   
 
-   
 
806   
 
150   
 
632   
 
-   
 
782  
Assets measured at NAV
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
1,153   
 
-   
 
-   
 
-   
 
1,065  
Total
$
368   
$
656   
$
-   
$
2,177   
$
343   
$
632   
$
-   
$
2,040  
Total plan assets at fair value
 
  
 
  
 
  
$
16,999   
 
  
 
  
 
  
$
15,793  
 
In addition to the total plan assets disclosed at fair value in the table above, the trusts had other net assets of $ 97 million and $13 million at December 31, 2016 and
2015 , respe ctively, comprised primarily of cash, accounts receivable, deferred taxes, and accounts payable.
 
128
 

 
Valuation Techniques
 
The following describes the valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of the assets and liabilities shown in the table above.   All investments that are valued
using a net asset value per share can be redeemed quarterly with a notice not to exceed 90 days.
 
Short-Term Investments
 
Short-term investments consist primarily of commingled funds across government, credit, and asset-backed sectors. These securities are categorized as Level 1 and
Level 2 assets.
 
Global Equity
 
The global equity category include s investments in common stock and equity-index futures .  Equity investments in common s tock are actively traded on public
exchanges and are therefore considered Level 1 assets.  These equity investments are generally valued based on unadjusted prices in active mar kets for identical
securities.  Equity-index futures are valued based on unadju sted prices in active markets and are Level 1 assets .
 
Real Assets
 
The real asset category includes portfolios of commodity futures, global REITS, global listed infrastructure equities, and private real estate funds.  The commodity
futures, global REITS , and global listed infrastructure equities are actively traded on a public exchange and are therefore considered Level 1 assets. 
 
Fixed-Income
 
Fixed-income   securities are primarily composed of U.S. government and agency securities, municipal securities , and other fixed-income securities, including
corporate debt securities.   U.S. government and agency securities primarily consist of U.S. Treasury securities that are classified as Level 1 because the fair value is
determined by observable market prices i n active markets.   A market approach is generally used to estimate the fair value of debt securities classified as Level 2
using evaluated pricing data such as broker quotes, for similar securities adjusted for observable differences.   Significant inputs u sed in the valuation model generally
include benchmark yield curves and issuer spreads.   The external credit ratings, coupon rate, and maturity of each security are considered in the valuation model, as
applicable.
 
Assets Measured at NAV
 
On January 1, 20 16, PG&E Corporation and the Utility adopted FASB ASU No. 2015-07, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820): Disclosures for Investments in
Certain Entities That Calculate Net Asset Value per Share (or Its Equivalent) and applied it retrospectively for the perio ds presented in their Consolidated Financial
Statements.  (See Note 2 above.)  In accordance with this guidance, investments in the pension and PBOP plans that are measured at fair value using the NAV per
share practical expedient have not been classified in the fair value hierarchy tables above.  The fair value amounts are included in the tables above in order to reconcile
to the amounts presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.  These investments include commingled funds that are composed of equity se curities traded publicly on
exchanges, hedge funds, private real estate funds, and fixed-income securities that are composed primarily of U.S. government securities and asset-backed securities.
 
Transfers Between Levels
 
Any transfers between levels in the fair value hierarchy are recognized as of the en d of the reporting period.  No material transfers between levels occurred in the
years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 .
 
129
 

 
Level 3 Reconciliation
 
The following table is a reconciliation of changes in the fair value of instruments for the pension p lan that have been classified as Level 3 for the years ended
December 31, 2016 and 2015 :
 
 
 
(in millions)
Fixed-
For the year ended December 31, 2016
Income
Balance at beginning of year
$
3  
Actual return on plan assets:
 
 
Relating to assets still held at the reporting date
 
3  
Relating to assets sold during the period
 
-  
Purchases, issuances, sales, and settlements:
 
 
Purchases
 
-  
Settlements
 
(1)
Balance at end of year
$
5  
 
 
 
 
 
(in millions)
Fixed-
For the year ended December 31, 2015
Income
Balance at beginning of year
$
12  
Actual return on plan assets:
 
 
Relating to assets still held at the reporting date
 
(3)
Relating to assets sold during the period
 
1  
Purchases, issuances, sales, and settlements:
 
 
Purchases
 
2  
Settlements
 
(9)
Balance at end of year
$
3  
 
There were no material transfers out of Level 3 in 2016 and 2015 .
 
Cash Flow Information
 
Employer Contributions
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility contributed $ 334 million to the pension benefit plans and $ 52 million to the other benefit plans in 2016 .  These contributions are
consistent with PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s funding policy, which is to contribute amounts that are tax-deductible and consistent with applicable regulatory
decisi ons and federal minimum funding requirements.  None of these pension or other benefits were subject to a minimum funding requirement requiring a cash
contribution in 2016 .  The Utility’s pension benefits met all the funding requireme nts under ERISA.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility expect to make total
contributions of approximately $ 327 million and $ 61 million to the pension plan and other postretirement benefit plans, respective ly, for 2017 .
 
130
 

 
Benefits Payments and Receipts
 
As of December 31, 2016 , the estimated benefits expected to be paid and the estimated federal subsidies expected to be receive d in each of the next five fiscal years,
and in aggregate for the five fiscal years thereafter, are as follows:
 
 
Pension
 
PBOP
 
Federal
(in millions)
Plan
 
Plans
 
Subsidy
2017
$
739  
 $
87  
 $
(8)
2018
 
781  
 
 
93  
 
 
(9)
2019
 
821  
 
 
97  
 
 
(10)
2020
 
857  
 
 
103  
 
 
(10)
2021
 
892  
 
 
108  
 
 
(11)
Thereafter in the succeeding five years
 
4,879  
 
 
592  
 
 
(15)
 
There were no material differences between the estimated benefits expected to be paid by PG&E Corporation and paid by the Utility for the years presented above. 
There were also no material differences between the estimated subsidies expected to be received by PG&E Corporation and received by the Utility for the years
presented above.
 
Retirement Savings Plan
 
PG&E Corporation sponsors a retirement savings plan, which qualifies as a 401(k) defined contribution benefit plan under the Internal Revenue Code 1986, as
amended.  This plan permits eligible employees t o make pre-tax and after-tax contributions into the plan, and provide for employer contributions to be made to
eligible parti cipants.  Total expenses recognized for defined contribution benefit plans reflected in PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Statements of Income were $
97 million, $89 million, and $80 million in 2016 , 2015 , and 2014 , respectively.
 
There were no material differences between the employer contribution expense for PG&E Corporation and the Utility for the years presented above.
 
NOTE 12: RELATED PARTY AGREEMENTS AND TRANSACTIONS
 
The Utility and other subsidiaries provide and receive various services to and from their parent, PG&E Corporation, and among themselves.  The Utility and PG&E
Corporation excha nge administrative and professional services in support of operations.  Services provided directly to PG&E Corporation by the Utility are priced at
the higher of fully loaded cost (i.e., direct cost of good or service and allocation of overhead costs) or f air market value, depending on the nature of the services. 
Services provided directly to the Utility by PG&E Corporation are generally priced at the lower of fully loaded cost or fair market value, depending on the nature and
value of the services.  PG&E Corporation also allocates various corporate administrative and general costs to the Utility and other subsidiaries using agreed-upon
allocation factors, including the number of employees, operating and maintenance expenses, total assets, and other cost al location methodologies.  Management
believes that the methods used to allocate expenses are reasonable and meet the reporting and accounting requirements of its regulatory agencies.
 
The Utility ’ s significant related party transactions were :
 
 
Year Ended D ecember 31,  
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Utility revenues from:
 
 
 
 
 
Administrative services provided to PG&E Corporation
$
7  
 $
6  
 $
5  
Utility expenses from:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Administrative services received from PG&E Corporation
$
74  
 $
53  
 $
54  
Utility employee benefit due to PG&E Corporation
 
91  
 
 
82  
 
 
70  
 
At December 31, 2016 and 2015 , the Utility had receivable s of $ 18 million and $ 22 m illion, respectively, from PG&E Corporation included in accounts receivable
– other and other noncurrent assets – other on the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets, and payable s of $ 22 million and $21 million, respectively, to PG&E
Corporation included in accounts payable – other on the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
131
 

 
NOTE 13: CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
 
PG &E Corporation and the Utility have significant contingencies arising from their operations, including contingencies related to enforcement and litigation matters
and environmental remediation .  A provision for a loss contingency is recorded when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can
be reasonably estimated.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility evaluate the range of reasonably estimated losses and record a provision based on the lower end of the
range, unless an amount within the ra nge is a better estimate than any other amount.  The assessment of whether a loss is probable or reasonably possible, and
whether the loss or a range of loss is estimable, often involves a series of complex judgments about future events.  Loss contingencie s are reviewed quarterly and
estimates are adjusted to reflect the impact of all known information, such as negotiations, discovery, settlements and payments, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and
other information and events pertaining to a particular mat ter.  PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s policy is to exclude anticipated legal costs from the provision
for loss and expense these costs as incurred.   The Utility also has substantial financial commitments in connection with agreements entered into to s upport its
operating activities.   See “Purchase Commitments” below.  PG&E Corporation has financial commitments described in “Other Commitments” below.   PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows may be materially affected by the outcome of the following matters.
 
Enforcement and Litigation Matters
 
CPUC Matters
 
Order Instituting an Investigation into Compliance with Ex Parte Communication Rules
 
During 2014 and 2015, the Utility filed several reports to notify the CPUC of communications that the Utility believes may have constituted or described ex parte
communications that either should not have occurred or that should have been timely report ed to the CPUC.  Ex parte communications include communications
between a decision maker or a commissioner’s advisor and interested persons concerning substantive issues in certain formal proceedings.  Certain communications
are prohibited and others are p ermissible with proper noticing and reporting.
 
On November 23, 2015, the CPUC issued an OII into whether the Utility should be sanctioned for violating rules pertaining to ex parte communications and Rule 1.1
of the CPUC’s Rules of Practice and Procedure governing the conduct of those appearing before the CPUC.  The OII cites some of the communications the Utility
reported to the CPUC.  The OII also cites the ex parte violations alleged in the City of San Bruno’s July 2014 motion, which it filed in CPUC i nvestigations related to
the Utility’s natural gas transmission pipeline operations and practices.
 
On October 14, 2016, the Cities of San Bruno and San Carlos, ORA, the SED, TURN, and the Utility submitted a status report to the CPUC which proposed an up
date to the framework for resolving the proceeding.  The revised f ramework includes a total of 164 communications in the scope of the proceeding.  Throughout
2016, the parties jointly submitted stipulations on all of the communications, and on November 30, 2016, the parties began settlement discussions .  In the event a
settlement c annot be reached, the parties will brief the matter based upon the ide ntified communications and some related discove ry as well as factual stipulations
and agreed upon issues of policy and law for CPUC resolution.  T he opening briefs are due on March 24, 2017, and reply briefs are due on April 14, 2017.
 
The Utility expects that the other parties may argue that the number of violations exceeds the 164 communications referenced in the October 14, 2016 joint status
report either because a single communication may have violated more than one rule or because they believe some of the material provided during discovery
constitutes impermissible ex parte communications.  The Utility expects to contest many of these assertions.  If the matter does not settle, the CPUC will determine
which communications included within the scope of th e proceeding were in violation of its rules.  The CPUC will also determine whether to impose penalties or other
remedies, as a result of a potential settlement or otherwise.  The CPUC can impose fines up to $50,000 for each violation, and up to $50,000 per day if the CPUC
determines that the violation was continuing.  The CPUC has wide discretion to determine the amount of penalties based on the totality of the circumstances, including
such factors as how many days each violation continued; the gravity of t he violations; the type of harm caused by the violations and the number of persons affected;
and the good faith of the entity charged in attempting to achieve compliance, after notification of a violation.  The CPUC is also required to consider the appropr
iateness of the amount of the penalty to the size of the entity charged.  The CPUC has historically exercised broad discretion in determining whether violations are
continuing and the amount of penalties to be imposed. 
 
132
 

 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility b elieve it is probable that the CPUC will impose penal ties on the Utility in the OII.  In light of recent CPUC decisions, such as the
Penalty Decision and the decision in the 2015 GT&S rate case, the Utility expects that such penalties could include fines a nd future revenue requirement reductions. 
In accordance with accounting rules, r evenue requirement reductions would be recorded in the period they are incurred and fines would be recorded when considered
probable and their amount or range can be reasonabl y estimated.  The Utility is unable to determine the form or amount of penalties or reasonably estimate the
amount or range of future charges that could be incurred because it is uncertain how the CPUC will calculate the number of violations or the penalty for any
violations.
 
Finally, in 2014, both the U.S. Attorney's Office in San Francisco and the California Attorney General's office opened investigations into matters related to allegedly
improper communication between the Utility and CPUC personnel.  Th e Utility has cooperated with those investigations.   It is uncertain whether any charges will be
brought against the Utility.
 
CPUC Investigation Regarding Natural Gas Distribution Facilities   Record-Keeping
 
On November 20, 2014, the CPUC began an inves tigation into whether the Utility violated applicable laws pertaining to record-keeping practices with respect to
maintaining safe operation of its natural gas distribution service and facilities.  The order also required the Utility to show cause why (1) the CPUC should not find
that the Utility violated provisions of the California Public Utilities Code, CPUC general orders or decisions, other rules, or requirements, and/or engaged in
unreasonable and/or imprudent practices related to these matters, and ( 2) the CPUC should not impose penalties, and/or any other forms of relief, if any violations are
found.  In particular, the order cited the SED’s investigative reports alleging that the Utility violated rules regarding safety record-keeping in connection w ith six
natural gas distribution incidents, including the natural gas explosion that occurred in Carmel, California on March 3, 2014.  
 
On August 18, 2016, the CPUC approved a final decision in this investigation.  The CPUC assessed a fine of $25.6 million.  With the $10.85 million citation
previously paid in 2015 for the City of Carmel-by-the-Sea (“Carmel”) incident, the total fine imposed on the Utility was $36.5 million.  The remaining $25.6 million
was paid in September 2016.  The decision denied the appeals previously filed by the SED and Carmel from the presiding officer’s decision, and closed this
proceeding but allowed the parties an opportunity to request that this proceeding be reopened if needed to ensure proper implementation of a complian ce plan to be
developed by the parties. 
 
On September 26, 2016, the SED filed an application for reh earing of the CPUC’s decision.  Specifically, the application indicates that the CPUC erred in certain of
its determinations (including those related to m aximum all owable operating pressure documentation that, if adopted, could result in an add itional fine of $7 million),
calculations (including those related to the missing De Anza records violations) and certain other findings, and requests that the CPU C a dopt its recommendations. 
On October 11, 2016, the Utility submi tted its response to the CPUC in which it opposed the SED’s application for rehearing arguing that the application failed to
identify a legal error warranting rehearing by the CPUC.  The Util ity cannot predict when or if the C PUC will grant the rehearing or if it will ad opt the SED’s
recommendations.
 
On October 24, 2016 and November 30 , 2016, the Utility held meet and confer sessions with parties to develop remedial measures necessary to add ress the issues
identified in the CPUC decision with the objective of establishing a compliance plan .  O n December 16, 2016 , the Utility submitted its Initial Gas Distribution
Records Compliance Plan that includes feasible and cost-effective measures neces sary to improve natural gas di stribution system record-keeping. 
 
Natural Gas Transmission Pipeline Rights-of-Way   
 
In 2012, the Utility notified the CPUC and the SED that the Utility planned to complete a system-wide survey of its transmission pipelines in an effort to address a
self-reported violation whereby the Utility did not properly identify encroachments (such as building structures and vegetation overgrowth) on the Utility’s pipeline
rights-of-way.   The Utility also submitted a proposed compliance plan that set forth the scope and timing of remedial work to remove identified encroachments over a
multi-year period and to pay penalties if the proposed milestones were not met.   In March 2014, the Utility informed the SED that the survey had been completed and
that remediation work, including removal of the encroachments, was expected to continue for several years. The SED has not addressed the Utility’s proposed
compliance plan, and it is reasonably possible that the SED will impose fines on the Utility in the future based on the Utility’s failure to continuously survey its system
and remove encroachments.  T he Utility is unable to reasonably estimate the amount or range of future charges that could be incurred given the SED’s wide
discretion and the number of factors that can be considered in determining penalties.
 
133
 

 
Potential Safety Citations
 
The SED periodically audits utility operating practices and conducts investigations of potential violations of laws and regulations applicable to the s afety of the
California utilities’ electric and natural g as facilities and operations.  The CPUC has delegated authority to the SED to issue citations and impose penalties for
violations identified through audits, investigations, or self -reports.  Under bo th the gas and electric programs, the SED has discretion whether to issue a penalty for
each violation, but if it assesses a penalty for a violation, it is required to impose the maximum statutory penalty of $50,000.  The SED may, at its discretion, impose
penalties on a daily basis, or on a less than daily basis, for violations that continued for more than one day.  The SED can consider the discretionary factors discussed
above (see “Order Instituting an Investigation into Compliance with Ex Parte Communic ation Rules” above) in determining the number of violations and whether to
impose daily fin es for continuing violations.  There is also an administrative limit of $8 million per citation issued.
 
The SED has imposed fines on the Utility ranging from $50,0 00 to $16.8 million for violations of electric and natural gas laws and regulations.  The Utility believes it
is probable that the SED will impose penalties or take other enforcement action based on some of the Utility’s self-reported non-compliance with l aws and
regulations, based on the SED’s investigations of incidents reported to the CPUC, or based on allegations of non-compliance with such laws and regulations that are
contained in some of the SED’s audits or investigations.  The Utility is unable to r easonably estimate the amount or range of future charges that could be incurred for
fines imposed by the SED with respect to these matters given the wide discretion the SED and other CPUC staff has in determining whether to bring enforcement
action and the number of factors that can be considered in determining the amount of fines.
 
In September 2016, the Utility reported that it discovered in November 2015 that approximately 550,000 atmospheric corrosion inspections on above-ground gas
distribution meters completed in 2014, which constitute d 35% of such inspections in 2014, were performed by non-operator qualified personnel.  The Utility did not
provide timely notification of su ch non-compliance to the CPUC.  On December 23, 2016, the SED issued the Utility a citation with a $5.45 million fine related to
this self-report.  The citation included a $5.05 million fine for not ensuring that contractor inspectors were operator-qualified, a $350,000 fine for not completing
inspections within 39 months from the pre vious inspections, and a $50,000 fine for not reporting the self-identified violations within ten days of discovery.  The
amount of the fine is conditioned upon the Utility implementing certain remedial measu res.  The Utility paid the fine in January 2017.
 
In February 2017, the Utility reported that it discovered in April 2014 that customer service representatives who handle gas emergency calls within the Utility’s call
centers are not included in the drug and alcohol testing program as required by PHMSA r egulations.  The Utility did not provide timely notification of su ch non-
compliance to the CPUC.  The SED could impose fines on the Utility of $50,000 per violation , and also for failure to timely file a self-report in connection with the
non-compliance .  The SED has the authority to issue more than one citation for a series of related incidents and can impose daily fines for continuing violations , and
the CPUC can issue an OII and possible additional fines even after the SED has issued a citation.  The Uti lity is unable to reasonably estimate the amount or range of
future charges that could be incurred for fines that could be imposed with respect to this self-report, for the reasons indicated above, or to predict whether the CPUC
will open a formal proceedi ng. 
 
Federal Matters
 
Federal Criminal Trial
 
On June 14, 2016, a federal criminal trial against the Utility began in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, in San Francisco, on 12
felony counts alleging that the Utility knowingly and willfully violated minimum safety standards under the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act relating to record-
keeping, pipeline integrity management, and identification of pipeline threats, and one felony count charging that the Utility obstructed the NTSB investigation into
the cause of the San Bruno accident.  On July 26, 2016, the court granted the go vernment’s motion to dismiss one count alleging that the Utility knowingly and
willfully failed to retain a strength test pressure record with respect to a distri bution feeder main , thereby reducing the total number of counts from 13 to 12.
 
On August 9, 2 016, the jury returned its verdict.  The jury acquitted the Utility on all six of the record-keeping allegations but found the Utility guilty on six felony
counts that include one count of obstructing a federal agency proceeding and five counts of violat ions of pipeline integrity management regulations of the Natural Gas
Pipeline Safety Act.  
 
134
 

 
On January 26, 2017, the court issued a judgment of conviction sentencing the Utility to a five-year corporate probation period, oversight by a third-party monitor for
a period of five years, with the ability to apply for earl y termination after three years, a fine of $3 million to be paid to the federal government, certain advertising
requirements, and community service.  The Utility has decided not to appeal the conviction s.  The probation includes a requirement that the Utility not commit any
local, state, or federal crimes during the probation period.  As part of the probation, the Utility is required to retain a third-party monitor.  The goal of the monitorship
will be t o prevent the criminal conduct with respect to gas pipeline transmission safety that gave rise to the conviction.  To that end, the goal of the monitor will be to
help ensure that the Utility takes reasonable and appropriate steps to maintain the safety of the gas transmission pipeline system, performs appropriate integrity
management assessments on its gas transmission pipelines, and maintains an effective ethics and compliance program and safety related incentive program.
 
After an initial assessment is c onducted and an initial report is prepared by the monitor, the monitor will prepare reports on a semi-annual basis setting forth the
monitor’s continued assessment and making recommendations consistent with the goals and scope of the monitorship.  The Util ity expects that the monitor will be
retained before the end of the second quarter of 2017. 
 
At December 31, 2016, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets include a $3 million accrual in connection with this matter.  On February
1, 2017, the Utility paid the $3 mil lion fine imposed by the court.  The Utility could incur material costs, not recoverable through rates, in the event of non-
compliance with the terms of probation and in connection with the monitorship (including but not limited to the monitor’s compensation or costs resulting from
recommendations of the monitor).
 
Other Federal Matters
 
In 2014, both the U.S. Attorney's Office in San Francisco and the California Attorney General's office opened investigations into matt ers related to allegedly improper
communication between the Utility and CPUC personnel.  The Utility has cooperated with those investigations.   In addition, in October 2016, the Utility received a
grand jury subpoena and letter from the U.S. Attorney for t he Northern District of California advising that the Utility is a target of a federal investigation regarding
possible criminal violations of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act and conspiracy to violate the act.  The investigation involves a removal by the Util ity of a hazard ous
tree that c ontained an osprey nest and egg in Inverness, California, on March 18, 2016.  It is uncertain wheth er any charges will be brought against the Utility as a
result of these investigations.
 
 
135
 

Other Matters
 
Butte Fire Litigation
 
In September 2015, a wildfire (known as the “Butte fire”) ignited and spread in Amador and Calaveras Counties in Northern California.  On April 28, 2016, Cal Fire  
released its report of the investigation of the origin and cause of the wildfire.   According to Cal Fire’s report, the fire bu rned 70,868 acres, resulted in two fatalities,
destroyed 549 homes, 368 outbuildings and four commercial properties , and damaged 44 structures .  Cal Fire’s   report conclu ded that the wildfire was caused when
a Gray Pine tree contacted   the Utility’s   electric line which ignited portions of the tree, and determined that the failure by the Utility   and /or its vegetation
management contractors , ACRT Inc. and Trees, Inc.,   to identify certain potential hazards during its vegetation m anagement program ultimately led to the failure of
the tree.   In a press release also issued on April 28, 2016, Cal Fire indicated that it will seek to recover firefighting costs in excess of $90 million from the Utility.
 
On May 23, 2016, individual plain tiffs filed a master complaint against the Utility and its two vegetation management contractors in the Superior Court of California
for Sacramento County.   Subrogation insurers also filed a separate master complaint on the same date.   The California Judic ial Council had previously authorized
the coordination of all cases in Sacramento County.   As of December 31, 2016, complaints have been filed against the Utility and its two vegetation management
contractors in the Supe rior Court of California in the Coun ties of Calaveras ,   San Francisco, Sacramento, and Amador involving approximately 1,950 individual
plaintiffs representing approximately 950 households and their insurance compani es.   These complaints are part of or are in the process of being added to the two
master complaints.     Plaintiffs seek to recover damages and other costs, principally based on inverse condemnation and negligence theories of liability.  The number
of individual complaints and plaint iffs may increase in the future. 
 
The Utility conti nues mediating and settling cases.  The next case management conference is scheduled for March 2, 2017.
 
 
136
 

 
In connection with this matter, the Utility may be liable for property damages, interest , and attorneys’ fees without having been found negligent, through the theory of
inverse condemnation.  In addition, the Utility may be liable for fire suppression costs, personal injury damages, and other damages if the Utility were found to have
been negligent.  The Utility believes it was not negligent; however , there can be no assurance that a court or jury would agree with the Utility.  The Utility believes
that it is probable that it will incur a loss of at least $750 million for all potential damages described above.  This amount is based on assumptions abou t the number,
size, and type of structures damaged or destroyed, the contents of such structures, the number and types of trees damaged or destroyed, as well as assumptions about
personal injury damages, attorneys’ fees, fire suppression costs, and other d amages that the Utility could be liable for under the theories of inverse condemnation
and/or negligence.
 
The following table present s changes in the third-party claims liability since December 31, 2015.  The balance for the third-party claims liability is included in O ther
current liabilities in PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets:
 
Loss Accrual  (in millions)
 
 
Balance at December 31, 2015
$
-  
Accrued losses
 
750  
Payments
 
(60)
Balance at December 31, 2016
$
690  
 
 
 
 
In add ition to the amounts reflected in the table above, the Utility has incurred c umulative legal expenses of $27 million.
 
The Utility believes that it is reasonably possible that it will incur losses related to Butte fire claims in excess of $750 million accrued through December 31, 2016 but
is currently unable to reasonably estimate the upper end of the range of losses because it is still in an early stage of the evaluation of claims, the mediation and
settlement process, and discovery.  The process for e stimating costs associated with claims relating to the Butte fire requires management to exercise significant
judgment based on a number of assumptions and subjective factors.  As more information becomes known, including additional discovery from the plai ntiffs and
results from the ongoing mediation and settlement process, management estimates and assumptions regarding the financial impact of the Butte fire may result in
material increases to the loss accrued. 
 
The Utility has liability insurance from va rious insurers, which provides coverage for third-party liability attributable to the Butte fire in an aggregate amount of
approximately $900 million.  The Utility records insurance recoveries when it is deemed probable that a recovery will occur and the U tility can reasonably estimate
the amount or its range.  The Utility has recorded $625 million for probable insurance recoveries in connection with losses related to the Butte fire.  While the Utility
plans to seek recovery of all insured losses, it is una ble to predict the ultimate amount and timing of such insurance recoveries.  In addition, the Utility is pursuing
coverage under the insurance policies of its two vegetation management contractors, including under policies where the Utility is listed as an additional insured. 
Recoveries of any amounts under these policies are uncertain.
 
The following table presents changes in the insurance receivable since December 31, 2015.  The balance for the insurance receivable is included in Other accounts
receivab le in PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated Balan ce Sheets:
 
Insurance Receivable (in millions)
 
 
Balance at December 31, 2015
$
-  
Accrued insurance recoveries
 
625  
Reimbursements
 
(50)
Balance at December 31, 2016
$
575  
 
 
 
If the Utility records losses in connection with claims relating to the Butte fire that materially exceed the amount the Utility accrued for these liabilities, PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows could be materially affected in the reporting periods during which additional
charges are recorded, depending on whether the Utility is able to record or collect insurance recoveries in amounts sufficient to offset such additional accruals.
 
137
 

 
Other Contingencies
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are subject to various claims, lawsuits and regulatory proceeding s that separately are not considered material .  Accruals for
contingencies related to such matters (excluding amounts related to the contingencies discussed a bove under “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” ) totaled $45
million at December 31, 2016 and $63 million at Decembe r 31, 2015.  These amounts are included in O ther current liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
The resolution of these matters is not expected to have a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, or cash
flows. 
 
Disallowance of Plant Costs
 
PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a charge when it is both probable that costs incurred or projected to be incurred for recently completed plant will not be
recoverable through rates and the amount of disallowance can be reasonably estimated.  Capital disallowances are reflected in operating and maintenance expenses in
the Consolida ted Statements of Income .  Disallowances as a result of the CPUC’s June 23, 2016 final phase one decision and December 1, 2016 final phase two
decision in the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case , the April 9, 2015 Penalty Decision and the Utility’s Pipeline Safe ty Enhancement Plan are discussed below.
 
2015 GT&S Rate Case Disallowance of Capital Expenditures
 
On June 23, 2016, the CPUC approved a final phase one decision in the Utili ty’s 2015 GT&S rate case.   The d ecision permanently disallowed a portion of the 2011
through 2014 capital spending in excess of the am ount adopted and established various cost caps that will increase the risk of overspend over the current rate case
cycle, including new one-way capital balancing accounts.  As a result, in 2016, the Uti lity incurred charges of $219 million for capital expenditures that the Utility
believes are probable of disallowance based on the decision.  This included $134 million to the net plant balance for 2011 through 2014 capital expenditures in e xcess
of adopted amounts and $85 million for the Utility’s estimate of 2015 through 2018 capital expenditures that are probable of exceeding authoriz ed amounts. 
Additional charges may be required in the future based on the Utility’s ability to manage its capital spending and on the outcome of the CPUC’s audit of 2011 through
2014 capital spending.
 
Penalty Decision’s Disallowance of Natural Gas Capital Expenditures
 
On Ap ril 9, 2015, the CPUC issued a decision in its investigative enforcement proceedings against the Util ity to impose total penalties of $1.6 billion on the Utility
after determining that the Utility had committed numerous violations of laws and regulations related to its natural gas transmission operations (the “Penalty Decision”)
. In January 2016, the CPUC closed the investigative proceedings.  The total penalty includes (1) a $300 million fine, (2) a one-time $400 million bill credit to the
Utility’s natural gas customers, (3) $850 million to fund pipeline safety projects and progr ams, and (4) remedial measures that the CPUC estimates will cost the
Utility at least $50 million.
 
On December 1 , 2016, the CPUC approved a final phase two decision in the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case , which applies $689 million of the $850 million p ena lty
to capital expenditures.  The decision also approves the Utility’s list of programs and projects that meet the CPUC’s definition of “safety related,” the costs of which
are to be funded through t he $850 million penalty.
 
138
 

 
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2016, the Utility recorded charges for disallowed capital spending of $283 million as a result of the Penalty Decision.  The
cumulative charges at December 31, 2016, and the additional future charges that will be recognized in the first quarte r of 2017 are shown in the following table:
 
 
 
     
 
 
     
 
Twelve Months
 
Cumulative
 
Future
 
 
 
Ended
 
Charges
 
Charges
 
 
 
 
December 31,
 
 
December 31,
 
and
 
Total
(in millions)
2016
 
2016
 
Costs
 
Amount
Fine paid to the state
$
-    $  
300    $  
-    $  
300  
Customer bill credit paid
 
-     
400     
-     
400  
Charge for disallowed capital (1)
 
283     
689     
-     
689  
Disallowed revenue for pipeline safety
 
   
   
   
 
    expenses (2)
 
129     
129     
32     
161  
CPUC estimated cost of other remedies (3)
 
-     
-     
-     
50  
Total Penalty Decision fines and remedies
$
412    $  
1,518    $  
32    $  
1,600  
 
 
 
     
     
     
(1) The Penalty Decision disallows the Utility from recovering $850 million in costs associated with pipeline safety-related projects and programs .  On December 1, 2016, the CPUC approved a
final phase two decision in the Utility’s 2015 GT& S rate case which allocates $689 million of the $850 million penalty to capital expenditures.
(2 ) GT&S revenues have been reduced for these unrecovered expenses. The remaining charges will be recognized in the first quarter of 2017.
(3 ) In the Penalty De cision, the CPUC estimated that the Utility would incur $50 million to comply with the remedies spec ified in the Penalty Decision.  This table does not reflect the Utility’s
remedy-related costs already incurred or the Utility’s estimated future remedy-rel ated costs.
 
Capital Expenditures Relating to Pipeline Safety Enhancement Plan
 
The CPUC has authorized the Utility to collect $766 million for recovery of PSEP capital costs.  As of December 31, 2016 , th e Utility has spent $1.35 billion on
PSEP-related capital costs, of which $665 million was expensed in previous years for costs that are expected t o exceed the authorized amount.  The Utility expects the
remaining PSEP work to co ntinue beyond 2 017.  The Utility would be required to record charges in future periods to the extent PSEP-related capital costs are higher
than currently expected.
139
 

 
Environm ental Remediation Contingencies
 
Given the complexities of the legal and regulatory environment and the inherent uncertainties involved in the early stages of a remediation project, the process for
estimating remediation liabilities is subjective and requires significant judgment.   The Utility records an environmental remediation liability when the site
assessments indicate that remediation is probable and the Utility can reasonably estimate the loss or a range of probable amounts.  The Utility records an
environmental remediation liability based on the lower end of the range of estimated probable costs, unless an amount within the range is a better estimate than any
other amount.   Amounts recorded are not discounted to their present value.  The Utility’s environmental remediation liability is primarily included in non-current
liabilities on the Consolida ted Balance Sheets and is composed of the following:
 
 
Balance at
 
December 31
 
December 31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
Topock natural gas compressor station (1)
$
299
 $  
300
Hinkley natural gas compressor station (1)
 
135
  
140
Former manufactured gas plant sites owned by the Utility or third parties
 
285
  
271
Utility-owned generation facilities (other than fossil fuel-fired),
  other facilities, and third-party disposal sites
 
131
  
164
Fossil fuel-fired generation facilities and sites
 
108
  
94
Total environmental remediation liability
$
958
 $  
969
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) See “Natural Gas Compressor Station Sites” below.
 
The Utility’s gas compressor stations, former manufactured gas plant sites, power plant sites, gas gathering sites, and sites used by the Utility for the storage,
recycling, and disposal of potentially hazardous substances are subject to requirements issued by the EPA under the federal Resource Conversation and Recovery Act
as well as other state hazardous waste laws.  The Utility has a com prehensive program in place designed to comply with federal, state, and local laws and regulations
related to hazardous materials, waste, remediation activities, and other environmental requirements.  The Utility assesses and monitors, on an ongoing basis, measures
that may be necessary to comply with these laws and regulations and implements changes to its program as deemed appropriate.   The Utility’s remediation activities
are overseen by the DTSC , several California regional water quality control boards, and various other federal, state, and local agencies.
 
The Utility’s environmental remediation liability at December 31, 2016 reflects its best estimate of probable future costs associated with its final remediati on plan. 
Future costs will depend on many factors, including the extent of work to implement final remediation plans and the Utility’s required time frame for remediation. 
Future changes in cost estimates and the assumptions on which they are based may h ave a material impact on future financial condition and cash flows.
 
At December 31, 2016 the Utility expected to recover $ 671 million of its environmental remediation liability through various ratemaking mechanisms authorized by
the CPUC.  One of these mechanisms allows the Utility rate recovery for 90% of its hazardous substance remediation costs for certain approved s ites (including the
Topock site) without a reasonableness review.  T he Utility may incur environmental remediation costs that it does not seek to recover in rates, such as the co sts
associated with the Hinkley site.
 
Natural Gas Compressor Station Sites
 
T he Utility is legally responsible for remediating groundwater contamination caused by hexavalent chromium used in the past at the Utility’s natural gas compressor
stations.  One of these stations is located near Needles, California and is referred to below as the “Topock site.”  Another station is located near Hinkley, California
and is referred to below as the “Hinkley site.”  The Utility is also required to take measures to abate the effects of the contamination on the environment.
 
140
 

 
Topock Site
 
The Utili ty’s remediation and abatement efforts at the Topock site are subject to the regulatory authority of the DTSC and the DOI.  In November 2015, the Utility
submitted its final remediation design to the agencies for approval.  The Utility’s design proposes tha t the Utility construct an in-situ groundwater treatment system to
convert hexavalent chromium into a non-toxic and non-soluble form of chromium.  The DTSC conducted an additional environmental review of the proposed design
and issued a draft environmental impact report for public comment in January 2017.  After the DTSC considers public comments that may be made, the DTSC is
expected to issue a final environmental impact report in mid-2017. After the Utility modifies its design in response to the final rep ort, the Utility will seek approval to
begin construction of the new in-situ treatment system in late 2017 or early 2018.
 
Hinkley Site
 
The Utility has been implementing interim remediation measures at the Hinkley site to reduce the mass of the chromium p lume and to monitor and control movement
of the plume.  The Utility’s remediation and abatement efforts at the Hinkley site are subject to the regulatory authority of the Regional Board.  In November 2015, the
Regional Board adopted a final clean-up and ab atement order to contain and remediate the underground plume of hexavalent chromium and the potential
environmental impacts.  The final order states that the Utility must continue and improve its remediation efforts, define the boundaries of the chromium p lume, and
take other action.  Additionally, the final order requires setting plume capture requirements, requires establishing a monitoring and reporting program, and finalizes
deadlines for the Utility to meet interim cleanup targets.
 
Reasonably Possible Environmental Contingencies
 
Although the Utility has provided for known environmental obligations that are probable and reasonably estimable, the Utility’s undiscounted future costs could
increase to as much as $ 1.9 billion (including amounts related to the Topock and Hinkley sites described above ) if the extent of contamination or necessary
remediation is greater than anticipated or if the other potentially re sponsible parties are not financially ab le to contribute to these costs .   The Utility may incur actual
costs in the future that are materially different than this estimate and such costs could have a material impact on results of operations, financial cond ition and cash
flows during the period in which they are recorded.
 
Nuclear Insurance
 
The Utility is a member of NEIL, which is a mutual insurer owned by utilities with nuclear facilities.  NEIL provides insurance coverage for property damages and
busine ss interruption losses incurred by the Utility if a nuclear event were to occur at the Utility’s two nuclear generating units at Diablo Canyon and the retired
Humboldt Bay Unit 3. NEIL provides property damage and business interruption coverage of up to $ 3.2 billion per nuclear incident and $2.6 billion per non-nuclear
incident for Diablo Canyon .  Humboldt Bay Unit 3 has up to $ 131 million of coverage for nuclear and non-nucl ear property damages.
 
NEIL also provide s coverage for damages caused by acts of terrorism at nuclear power plants.  Certain acts of terrorism may be “certified” by the Secretary of the
Treasury.  If damages are caused by certified acts of terrorism, NEIL can obtain compensation from the federal government and will provide up to its full policy limit
of $ 3.2 billion for each insured loss.  In contrast, NEIL would treat all non-certified terrorist acts occurring within a 12-month period against one or more c ommercial
nuclear power plants insured by NEIL as one event and the owners of the affected plants would share the $ 3.2 billion policy limit amount. 
 
In addition to the nuclear insurance the Utility maintains through the   NEIL, the Utility also is a member of the   EMANI, which provides excess insurance coverage
for property damages and business interruption losses incurred by the Utility if a nuclear or non-nuclear event were to occur at Diablo Canyon.  
 
If NEIL losses in any policy year exceed accumulated f unds, the Utility could be subject to a retrospective assessment.     If NEIL were to exercise this assessment, as
of December 31, 2016, the current maximum aggregate annual retrospective premium obligation for the Utility would be approximately $60 million.     EMANI
provides $200 million for any one accident and in the annual aggregate excess of the combined amount recoverable under the Utility’s NEIL policies.  If EMANI
losses in any policy year exceed accumulated funds, the Utility could be subject to a retro spective assessment of approximately $2 million, as of December 31, 2016.  
   
 
141
 

 
Under the Price-Anderson Act, public liability claims that arise from nuclear incid ents that occur at Diablo Canyon, and that occur during the transportation of
material to and f rom Diablo Canyon are limited to $ 13.5 billion.  The Utility purchased the maximum available public liability insurance of $ 375 million for Diablo
Canyon.  Th e balance of the $ 13.5 billion of liability protection is provided under a loss-sharing program among utilities owning nuclear reactors.  The Utility may
be assessed up to $ 255 million per nuclear incident under this program, with payments in each year lim ited to a m aximum of $38 million per incident.  Both the
maximum assessment and the maximum yearly assessment are adjusted for inflation at least every five years.  The next scheduled adjustment is due on or before
September 10, 2018 .
 
The Price-Anderson Act does not apply to claims that arise from nuclear incidents that occur during shipping of nuclear material from the nuclear fuel enricher to a
fuel fabricator or that occur at the fuel fabricator’s facility.  The Utility has a separate policy that provides coverage for claims arising from some of these incidents up
to a maximum of $ 375 million per incident.   In addition, the Utility has $ 53 million of liability insurance for Humboldt Bay Unit 3 and has a $ 500 million
indemnification from the NRC for public liability arising from nuclear incidents, covering l iabilities in excess of the lia bility insurance.
142
 

 
 
Resolution of Remaining Chapter 11 Disputed Claims
 
Various electricity suppliers filed claims in the Utility’s proceeding filed under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code seeking payment for energy suppl ied to the
Utility’s customers between May 2000 and June 2001.   While the FERC and judicial proceedings are pending, the Utility has pursued, and continues to pursue,
settlements with electricity suppliers.  The Utility has entered into a number of settlem ent agreements with various electricity suppliers to resolve some of these
disputed claims and to resolve the Utility’s refund claims agains t these electricity suppliers. Under these settlement agreements, a mounts payable by the parties are,
in some insta nces, subject to adjustment based on the outcome of the various refund offset and interest issues being considered by the FER C.  In connection with the
CPUC approved settlement agreement, on April 12, 2004, the Utility deposited approximately $1.7 billion into escrow for the payment of certain disputed claims,
previously collected from customers through rates.  Generally, any net refunds, claim offsets, or other credits that the Utility receives from electricity suppliers either
through settlement or throug h the conclusion of the various FERC and judicial proceedings are refunded to customers through rates in future periods.
 
On October 13, 2016, the Utility received approval from the bankruptcy court to release the remaining cash held in escrow to unrestric ted cash for use by the Utility. 
The approval resulted in a $ 161 million reduction to the cash in escrow within the Restricted cash balance on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
 
On September 2, 2016, the Utility’s settlement becam e effective resolving, among other matters, the Utility’s claim against the CAISO for $ 165 million, which
includes receivables and interest.   Additionally, the Utility agreed to release $ 66 million of cas h from escrow to the California Power Exchange.  The settlement
resulted in a $ 231 million reduction to the Disputed claims and customer refunds balance on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.    
 
At December 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015, respectively, the Consolidated Balance Sheets reflected $ 236 million and $ 454 million in net claims within Disputed
claims and customer refunds.  The cash held in escrow within Restricted cash was zero as of December 31, 2016 and $ 228 million as of December 31, 2015. The
Utility is uncertain when or how t he remaining net disputed claims liability will be resolved. 
143
 

 
Purchase Commitments
 
The following table shows the undiscounted future expected obligations under power purchase agreements that have been approved by the CPUC and have met
specified construc tion milestones as well as undiscounted future expected payment obligations for natural gas supplies, natural gas transportation, natural gas storage,
and nuclear fuel as of December 31, 2016 :
 
 
Power Purchase Agreements
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Renewable
 
Conventional
 
 
 
Natural
 
Nuclear
 
 
 
(in millions)
Energy
 
Energy
 
Other
 
Gas
 
Fuel
 
Total
2017
$
2,233  
 $
815  
 $
369  
 $
536    
$
97  
 $
4,050  
2018
 
2,108  
 
 
716  
 
 
284  
 
 
169    
 
93  
 
 
3,370  
2019
 
2,144  
 
 
698  
 
 
225  
 
 
160    
 
95  
 
 
3,322  
2020
 
2,139  
 
 
677  
 
 
179  
 
 
148    
 
130  
 
 
3,273  
2021
 
2,117  
 
 
585  
 
 
147  
 
 
93    
 
49  
 
 
2,991  
Thereafter
 
27,685  
 
 
1,168  
 
 
653  
 
 
455    
 
136  
 
 
30,097  
Total purchase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
commitments
$
38,426  
 $
4,659  
 $
1,857  
 $
1,561    
$
600  
 $
47,103  
 
Third-Party Power Purchase Agreements
 
In the ordinary course of business, the Utility enters into various agreements , including renewable energy agreements, QF agreements, and other power purchase
agreements to purchase power and electric capacity .  The price of purchased power may be fixed or variable.  Variable pricing is generally based on the current
market price of either natural gas or el ectricity at the date of delivery.
 
Renewable Energy Power Purchase Agreement s .  In order to comply with C alifornia’s RPS requirements, the Utility is required to deliver renewable energy to its
customers at a gradually increasing rate.   The Utility has entered into various agreements to purchase renewable energy to help meet California’s requirement . The
Uti lity’s obligations under a significant portion of these agreements are contingent on the third party’s construction of new generation facilities, which are expected to
grow.  As of December 31, 2016, renewable energy contracts expire at various dates betwe en 2017 and 2043 .
 
Conventional Energy Power Purchase Agreements .  T he Utility has entered into many power purchase agreements for conventional generation resources, which
include tolling agreements and resource adequacy agreements .  The Utility’s obligation under a portion of these agreements is contingent on the third part ies ’
development of new generation facilit ies to provide capacity and energy products to the Utility . As of December 31, 2016, these power purchase agreements expire
at various dates between 2017 and 2033 .
 
Other Power Purchase Agreements.  The Utility has entered into agr eements to purchase energy and capacity with independent power producers that own generation
facilities that meet the definition of a QF under federal law.  Several of these agreements are treated as capital leases.  At December 31, 2016 and 2015 , net capital
leases reflected in property, plant, and equipment on the Consolidated Balance Sheets were $ 35 million and $54 million including accumulated amortization of $ 148
million and $ 147 millio n, respectively.  The present value of the future minimum lease payments due under these agreements included $ 17 million and $19 million
in Current Liabilities an d $ 18 million and $35 million in Noncurrent Liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheet, respectively. As of December 31, 2016 , QF
contracts in operation expire at various dates between 2017 and 2028 .  In addition , t he Utility has agreements with various irrigation districts and water agenci es to
purchase hydroelectric power.
 
The costs incurred for all power purchase s and electric capacity amounted to $ 3.5 billion in 2016, $ 3.5 billion in 2015, and $ 3.6 billion in 2014.
 
144
 

 
Natural Gas Supply, Transportation, and Storage Commitments  
 
The Utility purchases natural gas directly from producers and marketers in both Canada and the Unit ed States to serve its core customers and to fuel its owned-
generation facilities .  The Utility also contracts for natural gas transportation from the points at which the Utility takes delivery (typically in Canada , the US Rocky
Mountain supply area, and t he southwestern United States) to the points at which the Utility’s natural gas transportation system begins.   These agreements expire at
various dates between 2017 and 2026 .  In addition, the Utility has contracted for natural gas storage services in northern California in order to more reliably meet
customers’ loads.
 
Costs incurred for natural gas purchases, natural gas transportation services, and natural ga s storage, wh ich include contracts with terms of less than 1 year, amounted
to $ 0.7 billion in 2016 , $0.9 billion in 2015 , and $1.4 billion in 2014 .
 
Nuclear Fuel Agreements
 
The Utility has entered into several purchase agreements for nuclear fuel.  These agreements expire at various dates between 2017 and 2025 and are intended to ensure
long-term nuclear fuel supply.  T he Utility relies on a number of international producers of nuclear fuel in order to diversify its sources and provide security of
supply.  Pricing terms are also diversified, ranging from market-based p rices to base prices that are escalated using published indices. 
 
Payments for nuclear fuel amounted to $ 100 milli on in 2016 , $ 128 million in 2015 , and $ 105 million in 2014 .
 
O ther Commitments
 
PG&E Corporation and t he Utility have other commitments related to operating leases (primarily office facilities and land), which expire at various dates between
2017 and 2052 .  At December 31, 2016 , the future minimum payments related to these commitments were as follows:
 
(in millions)
Operating Leases
2017
$
44  
2018
 
41  
2019
 
39  
2020
 
39  
2021
 
36  
Thereafter
 
168  
Total minimum lease payments
$
367  
 
Payments for other commitments related to operating leases amounted to $ 43 million in 2016 , $ 41 million in 2015 , and $ 42 million in 2014 .  Certain leases on
office facilities contain escalation clauses requiring annual increases in rent.  The rentals payable under these leases may increase by a fixed amount each year, a
percentage of increase over base year, or the consumer price index.  Most leases contain extension operations ranging between one and f ive years.
145
 

 
QUARTERLY CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL DATA (UNAUDITED)
 
 
Quarter ended
(in millions, except per share amounts)
December 31  
 
September 30  
 
June 30  
 
March 31  
2016
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PG&E CORPORATION
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operating revenues (1)
$
4,713  
 $  
4,810  
 $  
4,169  
 $  
3,974  
Operating income
 
1,041  
 
 
640  
 
 
401  
 
 
95  
Income tax provision (benefit)  (2)
 
160  
 
 
70  
 
 
12  
 
 
(187)
Net income (3)
 
696  
 
 
391  
 
 
210  
 
 
110  
Income available for common shareholders
 
692  
 
 
388  
 
 
206  
 
 
107  
Comprehensive income
 
694  
 
 
391  
 
 
210  
 
 
110  
Net earnings per common share, basic
 
1.37    
 
0.77   
 
0.41    
 
0.22  
Net earnings per common share, diluted
 
1.36    
 
0.77    
 
0.41    
 
0.22  
Common stock price per share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High
 
62.12    
 
65.39    
 
63.92    
 
59.72  
Low
 
58.04    
 
60.82    
 
56.62    
 
51.29  
UTILITY
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operating revenues (1)
$
4,714  
 $  
4,809  
 $  
4,169  
 $  
3,975  
Operating income
 
1,044  
 
 
640  
 
 
401  
 
 
96  
Income tax provision (benefit) (2)
 
169  
 
 
73  
 
 
13  
 
 
(185)
Net income (3)
 
696  
 
 
389  
 
 
209  
 
 
108  
Income available for common stock
 
692  
 
 
386  
 
 
205  
 
 
105  
Comprehensive income
 
694  
 
 
389  
 
 
210  
 
 
108  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PG&E CORPORATION
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operating revenues
$
4,167  
 $  
4,550  
 $  
4,217  
 $  
3,899  
Operating income
 
205  
 
 
545  
 
 
687  
 
 
71  
Income tax (benefit) provision (4)
 
(111)
 
 
67  
 
 
110  
 
 
(93)
Net income (5)
 
138  
 
 
310  
 
 
406  
 
 
34  
Income available for common shareholders
 
134  
 
 
307  
 
 
402  
 
 
31  
Comprehensive income
 
137  
 
 
310  
 
 
406  
 
 
17  
Net earnings per common share, basic
 
0.27    
 
0.63    
 
0.84    
 
0.06  
Net earnings per common share, diluted
 
0.27    
 
0.63    
 
0.83    
 
0.06  
Common stock price per share:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High
 
54.50    
 
54.41    
 
54.27    
 
60.15  
Low
 
51.65    
 
47.60    
 
49.10    
 
51.38  
UTILITY
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operating revenues
$
4,167  
 $  
4,550  
 $  
4,216  
 $  
3,900  
Operating income
 
208  
 
 
544  
 
 
687  
 
 
72  
Income tax (benefit) provision   (4)
 
(114)
 
 
72  
 
 
115  
 
 
(92)
Net income (5)
 
147  
 
 
305  
 
 
406  
 
 
4  
Income available for common stock
 
143  
 
 
302  
 
 
402  
 
 
1  
Comprehensive income
 
145  
 
 
305  
 
 
406  
 
 
4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) In the third and fourth quarters of 2016, the Utility recorded an increase in base revenues as authorized by the CPUC in the 2015 GT&S rate case decision.
(2 ) In the first quarter of 201 6, the Utility had an income tax benefit, primarily due to net loss before income taxes and various tax audit results.
 
146
 

 
( 3 ) In the first, second, and third quarters of 2016, the Utility recorded charges for disallowed capital spending of $87 million, $148 mil lion, and $51 million, respectively, as a result of the Penalty
Decision.  Additionally, in the second and fourth quarters of 2016, the Utility recorded charges of $190 million and $29 million for capital expenditures probable of disallowance related to th e
final decision in the 2015 GT&S rate case.  Also, in the first quarter of 2016 the Utility recorded a $350 million charge related to Butte Fire litigation.  In the second quarter of 2016, the Utility
recorded $260 million for probable insurance recoverie s in connection with recovery of losses related to the Butte fire .  In the fourth quarter of 2016, the Utility recorded a $400 million charge
related to the Butte fire litigation and an insurance receivable of $365 million for probable insurance recoveries in connection with the Butte fire.  (See Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8.)
 
( 4 ) In the first quarter of 2015, the Utility had an income tax benefit, primarily due to the impact of the Penalty Decision .   ( See foot not e ( 4 ) below. )  In the fourth quarter of 2015, the Utility had
an income tax benefit, primarily due to lower income before taxes and an audit settlement received.
 
( 5 ) In the first quarter of 2015 , the Utility recorded total charges of $553 million related to the Penalty Decision, including $53 million in estimated capital spending that is probable of
disallowance.  In the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2015, the Utility recorded $75 million, $142 million, and $137 million, respectively, in estimated capital spending that is probable of
disallowance.  (See Note 13 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.)
147
 

 
MANAGEMENT’S REPORT   ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER   FINANCIAL REPORTI NG
 
Management of PG&E Corporation and the Utility is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.     PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP.     Internal control
over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, (2) provide reasonable ass urance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of PG&E Corporatio n and the Utility, and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.     Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the degree of compliance with the
policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
Management assessed the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2016 , based on the criteria established in Internal Control—
Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.     Based on its assessment and those criteria,
mana gement has concluded that PG&E Corporation and the Utility maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2016 .
 
Deloitte & Touche LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, has audited PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s internal control over financial reporting
as of December   31, 2016 , based on criteria establishe d in Internal Control   — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
of the Treadway Commission.
148
 

 
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
 
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
San Francisco, California
 
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of PG&E Cor poration and subsidiaries (the “ Company ” ) and of Pacific Gas a nd Electric Company
and subsidiaries (the “Utility”) as of December 31, 2016 , based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission. The Company ’ s and the Utility ’ s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control
over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting , included in the accompanying Management ’ s Report
on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company ’ s and the Utility ’ s internal control over financial
reporting based on our audits.
 
We conducted our audit s in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit s to obtain reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial re porting was maintained in all material respects. Our
audit s included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the
design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the
circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
 
A company ’ s internal control over financial repor ting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the company ’ s principal executive and principal
financial officers, or persons performing similar functions, and effected by the company ’ s board of directors, management, and other personnel to pr ovide
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles. A company ’ s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transacti ons are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management a nd directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable
assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company ’ s assets that could have a material effect on the
financial statements.
 
Because of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper management override of controls,
material misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. Also , projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of the internal
control over financial reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
 
In our opinion, the Company and the Utility maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2016 , bas ed on
the criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
 
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the consolidated financial statements as
of and for the year ended December 31, 2016 o f the Company and the Utility and our report dated February 16, 2017 expressed an unqualified opinion on those
financial statements.
 
 
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
 
San Francisco, California
 
February 16 , 2017
 
149
 

 
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIR M
 
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company 
San Francisco, California
 
 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of PG&E Cor poration and subsidiaries (the “ Company ” ) and of Pacific Gas and Electric Company
and subsidiaries (the “Utility”) as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , and the Company ’ s related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, equity,
and cash flows and the Utility ’ s related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, shareholders’ equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended December 31, 2016 . These financial statements are the r esponsibility of the Company ’ s and the Utility ’ s management. Our responsibility is to
express an opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
 
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we plan
and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test
basis, evidence supporting th e amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our aud its provide a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
 
In our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of PG&E Corporation and subsidiaries and of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company and subsid iaries as of December 31, 2016 and 2015 , and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the t hree
years in the period ended December 31, 2016 , in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
 
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the P ublic Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the Company ’ s and the Utility’s
internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2016 , based on the criteria established in Internal Cont rol—Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated February 16 , 2017 expressed an unqualified opinion on the Company ’ s
and the Utility ’ s internal control over financial reporting.
 
 
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
 
San Francisco, California
 
February 16, 2017
150
 

 
 
 
ITEM   9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
 
Not applicable.
 
ITEM   9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
 
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
 
Based on an evaluation of PG& E Corporation’s and the Utility’s disclosure controls and procedures as of December   31, 2016 , PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s respective principal executive officers and principal financial officers hav e concluded that such controls and procedures are effective to ensure that
information required to be disclosed by PG&E Corporation and the Utility in reports that the companies file or submit under the 1934 Act is (i) recorded, processed,
summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms, and (ii) accumulated and communicated to PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s management, including PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s respective principal executive officers and prin cipal financial officers, or persons performing
similar functions, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
 
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
Management of PG&E Corporation and the Util ity have prepared an annual report on internal control over financial reporting.     Management’s report, together with
the report of the independent registered public accounting firm, appears in Item 8 of this 2016 Form 10-K under the heading “Management’s R eport on Internal
Control Over Financial Reporting” and “Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.”
 
Registered Public Accounting Firm’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 
Deloitte & Touche LLP, an independent registered pu blic accounting firm, has audited PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s internal control over financial reporting
as of December   31, 2016 , based on criteria established in Internal Control   — Integrated Framew ork (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
of the Treadway Commission.
 
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
 
There were no changes in internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the quarter ended Dece mber   31, 2016 that have materially affected, or are
reasonably likely to materially affect, PG&E Corporation’s or the Utility’s internal control over financial reporting.
 
ITE M 9B. OTHER INFORMATION
 
Not applicable.
 
PART III
 
ITEM 10 . DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
 
Information regarding executive officers of PG&E Corporation and the Utility is set forth under “Executive Officers of the Registrants” at the end of Part I of this
2016 Form 10-K.     Other information regarding directors will be included under the heading “Nominees for Directors of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2017 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by reference.    
Information regarding compliance with Section 16 of the Exchange Act will be included under the heading “Section   16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting
Compliance” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2017 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which infor mation is incorporated herein by reference.
 
151
 

 
Website Availability of Code of Ethics, Corporate Governance and Other Documents
 
The following documents are available both   on the Corporate Governance section of PG&E Corporation’s website ( www.pgecorp.com/ab outus/corp_gov ) and on
the Utility’s website ( www.pge.com/about/company,   under the Corporate Governance tab): (1)   the PG&E Corporation and the Utility’s code of conduct (which
meets the definition of “code of ethics” of Item 406(b) of the SEC Regulation S- K) adopted by PG&E Corporation and the Utility and applicable to their directors and
employees, including their respective Chief Executive Officer and Presidents, as the case may be, Chief Financial Officers, Controllers and other executive officers,
(2)   P G&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s respective corporate governance guidelines, and (3)   key Board committee charters, including charters for the companies’
Audit Committees and the PG&E Corporation Nominating and Governance Committee and Compensation Commi ttee.
 
If any amendments are made to, or any waivers are granted with respect to, provisions of the code of conduct adopted by PG&E Corporation and the Utility and that
apply to their respective Chief Executive Officer and Presidents, as the case may be, C hief Financial Officers, or Controllers, PG&E Corporation and the Utility will
post the amended code of ethics on their websites and will disclose any waivers to the code of conduct in a Current Report on Form   8-K.
 
Procedures for Shareholder Recommendatio ns of Nominees to the Boards of Directors
 
Other than as noted below, there were no material changes to the procedures described in PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Joint Proxy Statement relating to the
2016 Annual Meetings of Shareholders by which security holders may recommend nominees to PG&E Corporation’s or Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Boards
of Directors.
 
On December 16, 2016, the Boards of Directors of PG&E Corporatio n and the Utility each amended the applicable company’s respective Bylaw provisions regarding
a shareholder’s right to (1) notify the company of the shareholder’s intent to introduce director nominees and other matters from the floor of the annual meeting of
shareh ol ders (“floor proposals”) or (2) call a special meeting of shareholders at which directors could be nominated or other business could be transacted.
 
In relevant part, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s amend ed Bylaws (1) require that any “advance noti ce” of floor proposals be received between 90 and 120
days prior to the anniversary of the prior year’s annual meeting ( previously , the deadline was 45 days prior to the mailing date of the proxy materials for the prior
year’s annual meeting) , (2) expand t he information that must be included in a shareholder’s “advance notice” of a floor proposal, including requiring additional
information regarding financial interests and intentions of the shareholder, as well as additional information relating to any dire ctor nominees , and (3) result in other
procedural clarifications.
 
The amendments to PG&E Corporation’s Bylaws also establish deadlines, information requirements, and other processes relating to any PG&E Corporation
shareholder’s request for a special meeting of the shareholders, including meetings at which director nominees will be presented for vote.
 
Audit Committees and Audit Committee Financial Expert
 
Information regarding the Audit Committees of PG&E Corporation and the Utility and the “audit com mittee financial experts” as defined by the SEC will be included
under the headings “Corporate Governance – Board Committee Duties – Audit Committees” and “Corporate Governance – Committee Membership , Independence,
and Qualifications ” in the Joint Proxy St atement relating to the 2017 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
 
ITEM 11 . EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
 
Information responding to Item 11, for each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, will be included under the headings “Compensation Discussion and Analysis,”
“Compensation Committee Report,”     “Summary Compensation Table - 2016 ,” “Grants of P lan-Based Awards in 2016 ,” “Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal
Year End - 2016 ,” “Option Exercises and Stock Vested During 2016 ,” “Pension Benefits – 2016 ,” “Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation – 2016 ,”     “Potential
Payments Upon Resignation, Retirement, Termination, Change in Control, Death, or Disability” and “Compensation of Non-Employee Directors – 2016 Director
Compensation” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2017 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
152
 

 
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND REL ATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
 
Information regarding the beneficial ownership of securities for each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility will be included un der th e headings “Share Ownership
Information – Security Ownership of Management” and “Share Ownership Information – Principal Shareholders” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2017
Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
 
Equity Compensation Plan Information
 
The following table provides information as of December   31, 2016 concerning shares of PG&E Corporation common stock authorized for issuance under PG&E
Corporation's existing equity compensation plans.
 
 
 
(a)
 
 
(b)
 
(c)
Plan Category
 
Number of Securities to
be Issued Upon Exercise
of Outstanding Options,
Warrants and Rights
 
 
Weighted Average
Exercise Price of
Outstanding Options,
Warrants and Rights
 
Number of Securities
Remaining Available for
Future Issuance Under
Equity Compensation
Plans (Excluding
Securities Reflected in
Column ( a))
Equity compensation plans   approved by shareholders
 
6,962,072 (1)  
$
35.53 (2)  
13,826,995 (3)
Equity compensation plans not approved by shareholders
 
-
  
 
-
  
-
 
Total equity compensation plans
 
6,962,072 (1)  
$
35.53 (2)  
13,826,995 (3)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Includes 21,675 phantom stock units, 2,002,357 restricted stock units and 4,933,950 performance shares.  The weighted average exercise price reported in column (b) does not take these awards
into account.  For performance shares, amounts reflected in this table assume payout in shares at 200% of target or, for performance shares granted in 2014, reflects the actual payout percentage
of 160%.  The actual number of shares issued can range from 0% to 200% of target depending on achievement of performan ce objectives.  Also, restricted stock units and performance shares are
generally settled in net shares.  Upon vesting, shares with a value equal to required tax withholding will be withheld and, in lieu of issuing the shares, taxes will be paid on behalf of employees. 
Shares not issued due to share withholding or performance achievement below maximum will be available again for issuance.
(2) This is the weighted average exercise price for the 4,090 options outstanding as of December 31, 2016.
(3) Represen ts the total number of shares available for issuance under all of PG&E Corporation’s equity compensation plans as of December 31, 2016. Stock-based awards granted under these plans
include restricted stock units, performance shares and phantom stock units.   The 2014 LTIP, which became effective on May 12, 2014, authorizes up to 17 million shares to be issued pursuant to
awards granted under the 2014 LTIP, less approximately 2.7 million shares for awards granted under the 2006 LTIP from January 1, 2014 throu gh May 11, 2014.  In addition, if any awards
outstanding under the 2006 LTIP at December 31, 2013 are cancelled, forfeited or expire without being settled in full, shares of stock allocable to the terminated portion of such awards shall
again be available for issuance under the 2014 LTIP.
 
F or more information, see Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidate d Financial Statements in Item 8.
 
ITE M 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
 
Information responding to Item 13, for each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, will be included under the headings “Related Party Transactions” and   “Corporate
Governance – Board and Director General Independence and Qualifications” and “Corporate Governa nce – Committee Membership, Independence, and
Qualifications” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2017 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
 
ITEM 14 . PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
 
Inform ation responding to Item 14, for each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, will be included under the heading “Information Regarding the Independent
Auditor for PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2017 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which
information is incorporated herein by reference.
 
153
 

 
PART IV
 
ITEM   15.   EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
 
A. 
The following documents are filed as a part of this report:
 
1. 
The following consolidated financi al statements, supplemental information and report of independent registered public accounting firm are filed as p art of
this report in Item 8 :
 
Consolidated Statements of Income for the Years Ended December   31, 201 6 , 201 5, and 2014 for each of PG&E Corpor ation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company.
 
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the Years Ended December 31, 201 6 , 201 5, and 2014 for each of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company.
 
Consolidated Bal ance Sheets at December   3 1, 2016 and 201 5 for each of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 201 6 , 201 5, and 2014 for each of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company.
 
Consolidat ed Statements of Equity for the Years Ended December   31, 201 6 , 201 5, and 2014 for PG&E Corporation.
 
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity for the Years Ended December 31, 201 6 , 201 5, and 2014 for Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
Notes to the C onsolidated Financial Statements.
 
Quarterly Consolidated Financial Data (Unaudited).
 
Management’s Report on Internal Controls  
 
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accountin g Firm (Deloitte   & Touche LLP).
 
The following financial statement schedule s are filed as part of this report:
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accountin g Firm (Deloitte   & Touche LLP).
 
I—Condensed Financial Information of Parent as of December   31, 2016 and 201 5 and for the Years Ended December   31, 201 6 , 201 5, and 2014 .
 
II—Consolidated Valuation and Qualifying Accounts for each of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the Years Ended December   31, 201 6
, 201 5, and 2014 .
 
3. 
Exhibits required by Item 601 of Regulation   S-K
154
 

 
Exhibit
Number
 
Exhibit Description
      3.1
 Restated Articles of Incorporation of PG&E Corporation effective as of May 29, 2002 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q
for the quarter ended March 31, 2003 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 3.1)
      3.2
 Certificate of Determination for PG&E Corporation Series A Preferred Stock filed December 22, 2000 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2000 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 3.2)
      3.3
 Bylaws of PG&E Corporation amended as of December 16, 2016
      3.4
 Restated Articles of Incorporation of Pacific Gas and Electric Company effective as of April   12, 2004 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company's Form 8-K dated April   12, 2004 (File No.   1-2348), Exhibit 3)
      3.5
 Bylaws of Pacific Gas and Electric Company amended as of December 16, 2016
      4.1
 
Indenture, dated as of April 22, 2005, supplementing, amending and restating the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of March 11, 2004, as supplemented
by a First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 23, 2004, and a Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 12, 2004, between Pacific Gas
and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Trust Company, N.A. (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q
for the quarter ended March 31, 2005 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit   4.1)
      4.2
 First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 13, 2007, relating to the issuance of $700,000,000 principal amount of Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s 5.80% Senior Notes due March 1, 2037 (incorporated by reference from Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 14,
2007 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.3
 Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of December   4, 2007, relating to the issuance of $500,000,000 principal amount of Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s 5.625% Senior Notes due November   30, 2017 (incorporated by reference from Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March
14, 2007 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.4
 Third Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 3, 2008, relating to the  issuance of $200,000,000 Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 5.625% Senior
Notes due November 30, 2017 and $400,000,000 of its 6.35% Senior Notes due February 15, 2038 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 3, 2008 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.5
 Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of October 21, 2008, relating to the issuance of $600,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 8.25% Senior Notes due October 15, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated
October 21, 2008 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.6
 
Fifth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November   18, 2008, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 6.25% Senior Notes due December   1, 2013 and $200   million principal amount of its 8.25% Se nior Notes due October   15, 2018
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 18, 2008 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.7
 Sixth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March   6, 2009, relating to the issuance of $550,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 6.25% Senior Notes due March   1, 2039 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March
6, 2009 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.8
 
Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June   11, 2009 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June  
11, 2009 (File   No.   1-2348), Exhibit   4.1)
155
 

 
     
4.9
 Eighth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November   18, 2009, relating to the issuance of $550,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Senior Notes due January   15, 2040 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 18,
2009 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.10
 
 
Ninth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 1, 2010, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s Senior Notes due January   15, 2040 and $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its Senior Notes due March 1, 2037 (incorporated by
reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated April 1, 2010 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.11
 Tenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 15, 2010, relating to the issuance of $550,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due October 1, 2020 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated September
15, 2010 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4 .1)
     
4.12
 
Twelfth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 18, 2010, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due October 1, 2020 and $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 5.40% Senior Notes due January 15, 2040
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 18, 2010 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.13
 Thirteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of May 13, 2011, relating to the issuance of $300,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 4.25% Senior Notes due May   15, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated May 13,
2011 (File No. 1 -2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.14
 Fourteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 12, 2011, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company's 3.25% Senior Notes due September 15, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated
September 12, 2011 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.15
 Sixteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of December 1, 2011, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 4.50% Senior Notes due December 15, 2041 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated
December 1, 2011 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.16
 Seventeenth Supplemen tal Indenture, dated as of April 16, 2012, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 4.45% Senior Notes due April 15, 2042   (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated April 16,
2012 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.17
 
Eighteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 16, 2012, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 2.45% Senior Notes due August 15, 2022 and $350,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 3.75% Senior Notes due August 15, 2042
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated August 16, 2012 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.18
 
Ninetee nth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 14, 2013, relating to the issuance of $375,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.25% Senior Notes due June 15, 2023 and $375,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.60% S enior Notes due June 15, 2043  
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 14, 2013 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.19
 
Twentieth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 12, 2013, relating to the issuance of $300,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.85% Senior Notes due November 15, 2023 and $500,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 5.125% Senior Notes due November
15, 2043 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 12, 2013 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
156
 

 
     
4.20
 
Twenty-First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of February 21, 2014, relating to the issuance of $450,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.75% Senior Notes due February 15, 2024 and $450,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.75% Senior Notes due February 15,
2044 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated February 21, 2014 (File No.1 2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.21
 
Twenty-Third Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 18, 2014, relating to the issuance of $350,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.40% Senior Notes due August 15, 2024 and $225,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.75% Senior Notes due February 15,
2044 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated August 18, 2014 (File No. 1 - 2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.2
2
 
Twenty-Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 6, 2014, relating to the issuance of $500,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s 4.30% Senior Notes due March 15, 2045 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8 -K dated
November 6, 2014 (File No. 1 - 2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.23
 
Twenty-Fifth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 12, 2015, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due June 15, 2025 and $100,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.30% Senior Notes due March 15, 2045
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 12, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.24
 
Twenty-Sixth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 5, 2015, relating to the issuance of $200,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due June 15, 2025 and $450,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.25% Senior Notes due March 15,
2046 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 5, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.25
 Twenty-Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 1, 2016, relating to the issuance of $600,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 2.95% Senior Notes due March 1, 2026 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 1,
2016 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.26
 
Twenty-Eighth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of December 1, 2016, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s Floating Rate Senior Notes due November 30, 2017 and $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.00% Senior Notes due
December 1, 2046 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated December 1, 2016 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.27
 Senior Note Indenture, dated as of February 10, 2014, between PG&E Corporation and U.S. Bank National Association (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form S-3 (File No. 333-193880), Exhibit 4.1)
4.28
 First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of February 27, 2014, relating to the issuance of $350,000,000 aggregate principal amount of PG&E Corporation’s
2.40% Senior Notes due March 1, 2019 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated February 27, 2014 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit
4.1)
10.1
 
Second Amended and R estated C redit A greement , dated as of April 27, 2015, among (1) PG&E Corporation , as borrower, (2) Bank of America, N.A., as
administrative agent and a lender, (3) Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, Citigroup Global Markets Inc., J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, and
Wells Fargo Securities LLC , as joint lead arrangers and joint bookrunners, (4) Citibank N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as co-syndication agents and
lenders, (5) Wells Fargo Bank, National Association , as documentation agent and lender, and (6) the following other lenders: Barclays Bank PLC, BNP
Paribas, Goldman Sachs Bank USA, Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A., Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., The Bank of New York Mellon, N.A., Mizuho
Corporate Bank, Ltd., Royal Bank of Canada, U.S. Bank , National Association, MUFG Union Bank, N.A., TD Bank, N.A., Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce, New York Branch, and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10- Q for the quarter
ended March 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
157
 

 
10.2
 
Second Amended and R estated C redit A greement dated as of April 27, 2015, among (1) Pacific Gas and Electric Company , as borrower, (2) Citibank
N.A., as administrative agent and a lender, (3) Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, Citigroup Global Markets Inc., J.P. Morgan Securities
LLC, and Wells Fargo Securities LLC , as joint lead arrangers and joint book runners, (4) Bank of America, N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. , as co-
syndication agents and lenders, (5) Wells Fargo Bank, National Association , as documentation agent and lender, and (6) the following other lenders:
Barclays Bank PLC, BNP Paribas, Gold man Sachs Bank USA, Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A., Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., The Bank of New
York Mellon, N.A., Mizuho Corporate Bank, Ltd., Royal Bank of Canada, U.S. Bank National Association, MUFG Union Bank, N.A., TD Bank, N.A.,
Canadian Imperia l Bank of Commerce, New York Branch, and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.2)
10.3
 
Term Loan Agreement, dated as of March 2, 2016, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd. (incorporated
by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 2, 2016 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.1)
10.4
 
Settlement Agreement among the California Public Utilities Commission, Pacific Gas and Electric Company and PG&E Corporation, dated as of
December 19, 2003, together with appendices (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's and Pacific Gas and Electric Company 's Form 8-K dated
December 22, 2003 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 99) 
10.5
 
Transmission Control Agreement among the California Independent System Operator (CAISO) and the Participating Transmission Owners, including
Pacific Gas and El ectric Company, effective as of March   31, 1998, as amended (CAISO, FERC Electric Tariff No.   7) (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348),
Exhibit 10.8)
10.6
* Letter regarding Compensation Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Anthony F. Earley, Jr. dated August 8, 2011 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2011 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
10.7
* Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, J r. and PG&E Corporation for 2016 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan
10.8
* Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, J r. and PG&E Corporation for 2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.7 ) 
10.9
* Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, J r. and PG&E Corporation for 2014 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 (File No. 1-126 09), Exhibit 10.4 ) 
10.10 * Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2013 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.5)
10.11 * Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2012 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference t o PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2012 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.3)
10.12 * Performance Share Agreement subject to financial goals between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2016 grant under the PG&E Corporat
ion 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
10.13 *
Performance Share Agreement subject to financial goals between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2015 grant under the PG&E
Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG& E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015 (File
No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.8 ) 
158
 

 
10.14 * Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and custom er affordability goals between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2016 grant
un der the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
10.15 *
Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and custom er affordability goals between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2015 grant
under the PG& E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March
31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.9 ) 
10.16 * Performance Share Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, J r. and PG&E Cor poration for 2014 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.5 )
10.17 * Performance Share Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2013 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.6)
10.18 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Nickolas Stavropoulos and PG&E Corporation for additional 2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014
Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Fo rm 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2015 (File No. 1-2609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.16)
10.19 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Geisha J. Williams and PG&E Corporation for additional 2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-
Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2015 (File No. 1-2609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.17)
10.20 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between John R. Simon and PG&E Corporation for additional 2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2015 (File No. 1-2609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.18)
10.21 * Letter regarding Compensation Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Julie M. Kane dated March 11, 2015 for employment starting May 18, 2015
(incorporated b y reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.4)
10.22 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Julie M. Kane and PG&E Corporation dated May 29, 2015 for 2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014
Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit
10.5)
10.23 * Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Julie M. Kane and PG&E Cor poration dated May 29, 2015 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.6)
10.24 *
Performance Share Agreement subject to financial goals between Julie M. Kane and PG&E Corpo ration dated May 29, 2015 for 2015 grant under the
PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015
(File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.7)
10.25 *
Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and customer affordability goals between Julie M. Kane and PG&E Corporation dated May 29, 2015 for
2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q fo r the quarter
ended June 30, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.8)
10.26 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Dinyar Mistry and PG&E Corporation dated February 23, 2016 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit  
10.2)
10.27 *
Separation agreement between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Greg Kiraly dated February 18, 2016 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit  
10.3)
159
 

 
10.28 *
Letter regarding Compensation Agreement between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and David Tho mason dated May 24, 2016 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-
2348), Exhibit   10.2)
10.29 *
Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and David S. Thomason dated August 8, 2016 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File
No. 1-23 48), Exhibit   10.1)
10.30 *
Performance Share Award Agreement subject to financial goals between David S. Thomason and PG&E Corporation dated August 8, 2016 (incorporated
by reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and
File No. 1-2348), Exhibit   10.2)
10.31 *
Performance Share Award Agreement subject to safety and customer affordability goals between David S. Thomason and PG&E Corporation dated
August 8, 2016 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30,
2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit   10.3)
10.32 * Non-Annual Restricted S tock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Edward D. Halpin dated November 28, 2016
10.33 * Letter regarding Compensation Agreement between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Jesus Soto, Jr. dated April 4, 2012 (incorporated by reference
to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2012 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.2)
10.34 *
Letter regarding Compensation Agreement between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Edward D. Halpin dated February 3, 2012 for empl oyment
starting April 1, 2012 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2012 (File No. 1-2348),
Exhibit 10.21)
10.35 * PG&E Corporation Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan amended effective as of September 19, 2001, and frozen after December 31, 2004
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004) (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.10)
10.36 * PG&E Corporation 2005 Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan, as amended effective September 15, 2015 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.3)
10.37 *
PG&E Corporation 2005 Deferred Compensation Plan for Non-Employee D irectors, effective as of January 1, 2005 (as amended to comply with Internal
Revenue Code Section 409A regulations effective as of January 1, 2009) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008 (File No.   1 -12609), Exhibit   10.24)
10.38 * PG&E Corporation Deferred Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors, as amended and restated effective as of July 22, 1998 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 1998 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.2)
10.39 * Description of Short-Term Incentive Plan for Officers of PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries, effective January 1, 2016 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated February 16, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348)
10.40 * Description of Short-Term Incentive Plan for Officers of PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries, effective January 1, 2015     (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.3)
10.41 *
Amendment to PG&E Corporation Short-Term Incentive Programs and Other Bonus Programs, effective January 1, 2009 (amendment to comply with
Internal Revenue Code Section 409A regulations) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008
(File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.27)
160
 

 
10.42 *
Amendment to Pacific Gas and Electric Company Short-Term Incentive Programs and Other Bonus Programs, effective January 1, 2009 (amendment to
comply with Internal Revenue Code Section 409A regulations) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year
ende d December 31, 2008 (File No.   1-2348), Exhibit   10.28)
10.43 * PG&E Corporation Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan, as amended effective as of January 1, 2013 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2012 (File No. 1-12609, Exhibit 10.31)
10.44 * PG&E Corporation Defined Contribution Executive Supplemental Retirement Plan, as amended effective September 17, 2013 (incorporated by reference
to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2013 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.2)
10.45 * Pacific Gas and Electric Company Relocation Assistance Program for Officers (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and El
ectric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.38)
10.46 *
Amendment to the Postretirement Life Insurance Plan of the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, effective February 16, 2016 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348),
Exhibit   10.4)
10.47 * Amendment to the Postretirement Life Insurance Plan of the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, effective February 6 , 2015 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014) (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 37 )
10.
48
* Postretirement Life Insurance Plan of the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, as amended and restated on February 14, 2012 (incorporated by reference to
Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2012 (File No.   1-2348), Exhibit   10.7)
10.49 *
PG&E Corporation Non-Employee Director Stock Incentive Plan (a component of the PG&E Corporation Long-Term Incentive Program) as amended
effective as of July 1, 2004     (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2004 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.27)
10.50 *
PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan effective May 12, 2014 and amended effective January 1, 2016 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit
10.42)
10.51 * PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended effective January 1, 2013 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2012     (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.40)
10.52 * PG&E Corporation Long-Term Incentive Program (including the PG&E Corporation Stock Option Plan and Performance Unit Plan), as amended May 16,
2001, (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2001 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10)
10.53 *
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2016 grants to non-employee directors under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2016 (File No. 1-
12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit   10.1)
10.54 * Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2015 grants to non-employee directors under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 (File No. 1-12 609), Exhibit 10.3)
10.55 * Form of Restrict ed Stock Unit Agreement for 2016 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
10.56 * Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2015 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 201 5 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 4 )
10.57 * Form of Restrict ed Stock Unit Agreement for 2014 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Inc entive Plan  (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 (File No.   1-12609), Ex hibit   10.2 )
161
 

 
10.58 * Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2013 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan     (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.3)
10.59 * Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2012 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Inc entive Plan (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2012 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.1)
10.60 * Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement under the PG&E Corporation Long-Term Incentive Program (inco rporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 8-K dated January   6, 2005 (File No.   1-12609 and File No.   1-2348), Exhibit   99.1)
10.61 * Form of Performance Share Agreement sub ject to financial goals for 2016 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan  
10.62 * Form of Performance Share Agreement subject to financial goals for 2015 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 201 5 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 5 )
10.63 * Form of Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and custo mer affordability goals for 2016 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incenti ve Plan  
10.64 * Form of Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and customer affordability goals for 2015 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter en ded March 31, 201 5 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 6 )
10.65 * Form of Perf ormance Share Agreement for 2014 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.3 )
10.66 * Form of Performance Share Agreement for 2013 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan   (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31 , 2013 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.4)
10.67 * PG&E Corporation 2010 Executive Stock Ownership Guidelines as adopted September 14, 2010, effective January 1, 2011 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2010 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.3)
10.68 * PG&E Corporation Executive Stock Ownership Program Guidelines as amended effective September 15, 2010 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2010 ( File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.2)
10.69 * PG&E Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy, as amended effective as of May 12, 2014 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-
Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2014 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.2)
10.70 * PG&E Corporation Golden Parachute Restriction Policy effective as of February 15, 2006 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2005 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.49)
10.71 *
Amendm ent to PG&E Corporation Golden Parachute Restriction Policy dated December 31, 2008 (amendment to comply with Internal Revenue Code
Section 409A Regulations) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 (F ile No.   1-12609),
Exhibit   10.58)
10.72 * Amended and Restated PG&E Corporation Director Grantor Trust Agreement dated October 1, 2015 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's
Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), E xhibit 10.1)
10.73 * Amended and Restated PG&E Corporation Officer Grantor Trust Agreement dated October 1, 2015 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's
Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 2 )
10.74 * PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company Executive Incentive Compensation Recoupment Policy effective as of February 17, 2010
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2009 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.54)
162
 

 
10.75
*
Resolution of the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation regarding indemnification of officers and directors dated December 18, 1996
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.40)
10.76
*
Resolution of the Board of Directors of Pacific Gas and Electric Company regarding indemnification of officers and directors dated July 19, 1995
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Fo rm 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 (File No.   1-2348), Exhibit  
10.41)
12.1    
 
Computation of Ratios of Earnings to Fixed Charges for Pacific Gas and Electric Company
12.2    
 
Computation of Ratios of Earnings to Combined Fixed Charges and Preferred Stock Dividends for Pacific Gas and Electric Company
12.3    
 
Computation of Ratios of Earnings to Fixed Charges for PG&E Corporation
21
 
Subsidiaries of the Registrant
23
 
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (Deloitte & Touche LLP)
24
 
Powers of Attorney
31.1
 
Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of PG&E Corporation required by Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002
31.2
 
Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of Pacific Gas and Electric Company required by Section 302 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
32.1
** Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of PG&E Corporation required by Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002
32.2
** Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of Pacific Gas and Electric Company required by Section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
101.INS
 
XBRL Instance Document
101.SCH  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
101.CAL  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
101.LAB  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Labels Linkbase Document
101.PRE  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
101.DEF  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
 
 
 
 
 
*
 
Management contract or compensatory agreement.
**
 
Pursuant to Item 601(b)(32) of SEC Regulation S-K, these exhibits are furnished rather than filed with this report.
163
 

 
SIGNATURES
 
Pursuant to the requirements of Section   13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrants have duly caused this Annual Report on Form  
10-K for the year ended December   31, 2016 to be signed on their behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
 
 
PG&E CORPORATION
 
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
 
(Registrant)
 
(Registrant)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.
 
NICKOLAS STAVROPOULOS
 
Anthony F. Earley, Jr.
 
Nickolas Stavropoulos
 
 
 
 
By:
Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer, and President
By:
President, Gas
 
 
 
 
Date:
February 16, 2017
Date:
February 16, 2017
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GEISHA J. WILLIAMS
 
 
 
Geisha J. Williams
 
 
 
 
 
 
By:
President, Electric
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date:
February 16, 2017
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the registrants
and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
 
 
Signature
 
Title
 
Date
 
A.     Principal Executive Officers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.
 
Chairman of the Board, Chief Executive Officer, and President
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Anthony F. Earley, Jr.
 
(PG&E Corporation)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NICKOLAS STAVROPOULOS
 
President, Gas
 
February 16, 2017
 
  Nickolas Stavropoulos
 
(Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GEISHA J. WILLIAMS
 
President, Electric
 
February 16, 2017
 
  Geisha  J. Williams
 
(Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
B.     Principal Financial Officers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JASON P. WELLS
 
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
 
February 16, 2017
 
  Jason P. Wells
 
(PG&E Corporation)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DAVID S. THOMASON
 
Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and Controller
 
February 16, 2017
 
  David S. Thomason
 
(Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
164
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Principal Accounting Officer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DAVID S. THOMASON
 
Vice President and Controller (PG&E Corporation)
 
February 16, 2017
 
  David S. Thomason
 
Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and Controller
 
 
 
 
 
(Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.     Directors
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* LEWIS CHEW
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Lewis Chew
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Anthony F. Earley, Jr.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* FRED J. FOWLER
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Fred J. Fowler
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* MARYELLEN C. HERRINGER
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Maryellen C. Herringer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* RICHARD C. KELLY
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
  Richard C. Kelly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* ROGER H. KIMMEL
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Roger H. Kimmel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* RICHARD A. MESERVE
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Richard A. Meserve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* FORREST E. MILLER
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Forrest E. Miller
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* ERIC D. MULLINS
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
  Eric D. Mullins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* ROSENDO G. PARRA
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Rosendo G. Parra
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* BARBARA L. RAMBO
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Barbara L. Rambo
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* ANNE SHEN SMITH
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Anne Shen Smith
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* NICKOLAS STAVROPOULOS
 
Director (Pacific Gas and Electric Company only)
 
February 16, 2017
 
  Nickolas Stavropoulos
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
165
 

 
* BARRY LAWSON WILLIAMS
 
Director
 
February 16, 2017
 
    Barry Lawson Williams
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* GEISHA J.WILLIAMS
 
Director (Pacific Gas and Electric Company only)
 
February 16, 2017
 
  Geisha J. Williams
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*By: HYUN PARK
 
 
 
February 16, 2017
 
  HYUN PARK, Attorney-in-Fact
 
 
 
 
166
 

 
REPO RT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
 
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
San Francisco, California
 
We have audited the consolidated financial statements of PG&E Corporation and subsidiaries (the “Company”) and Pacific Gas and Electric Company and
subsidiaries (the “U tility”) as of December 31, 2016 and 201 5 , and for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 201 6 , and the Company's and the
Utility’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 201 6 , and have issued our reports thereon dated February 1 6 , 201 7; such consolidated
financial statements and reports are included elsewhere in this Form 10 -K .   Our audits also included the consolidated financial statement schedules of the Company
and the Utility listed in Item 15.  These consolidated financial statement schedules are the responsibility of the Company's and the Utility’s management.   Our resp
onsibility is to express an opinion based on our audits.  In our opinion, such consolidated financial statement schedules, when considered in relation to the basic
consolidated financial statements taken as a whole, present fairly, in all material respects , the information set forth therein.
 
 
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
 
San Francisco, California
February 1 6 , 201
167
 

 
PG&E CORPORATION
SCHEDULE I — CONDENSED FINANCIAL INFORMATION OF PARENT
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF INCOME AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
 
 
  
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions, except per share amounts)
 
2016
 
 
2015
 
 
2014
Administrative service revenue
$
70   
$
51   
$
51  
Operating expenses
 
(73) 
 
(53) 
 
(53)
Interest income
 
1   
 
1   
 
1  
Interest expense
 
(10) 
 
(10) 
 
(14)
Other income (expense)
 
2   
 
30   
 
(1)
Equity in earnings of subsidiaries
 
1,388   
 
852   
 
1,413  
Income before income taxes
 
1,378   
 
871   
 
1,397  
Income tax benefit
 
15   
 
3   
 
39  
Net income
$
1,393   
$
874   
$
1,436  
Other Comprehensive Income
 
  
 
  
 
 
   Pension and other postretirement benefit plans obligations (net of taxes of $1,
 
  
 
  
 
 
   $0, and $10, at respective dates)
$
(2) 
$
(1) 
$
(14)
   Net change in investments (net of taxes of $0, $12, and $17, at respective dates)
 
-   
 
(17) 
 
(25)
   Total other comprehensive income (loss)
 
(2) 
 
(18) 
 
(39)
Comp rehensive Income
$
1,391   
$
856   
$
1,397  
Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding, Basic
 
499   
 
484   
 
468  
Weig hted Average Common Shares Outstanding, Diluted
 
501   
 
487   
 
470  
Net earnings per common share, basic
$
2.79   
$
1.81   
$
3.07  
Net earnings per common share, diluted
$
2.78   
$
1.79   
$
3.06  
168
 

 
PG&E CORPORATION
SCHEDULE I — CONDENSED FINANCIAL INFORMATION OF PARENT – (Continued)
CONDENSED BALANCE SHEETS
 
 
Balance at December   31,
(in millions)
2016
 
2015
ASSETS
 
 
 
 
 
Current Assets
 
 
 
 
 
   Cash and cash equivalents
$
106  
 
$
64  
   Advances to affiliates
 
24  
  
22  
   Income taxes receivable
 
25  
  
24  
   Other
 
-  
  
1  
      Total current assets
 
155  
 
 
111  
Noncurrent Assets
 
 
  
 
   Equipment
 
2  
  
2  
   Accumulated depreciation
 
(2)
  
(2)
      Net equipment
 
-  
  
-  
   Investments in subsidiaries
 
18,172  
  
16,837  
   Other investments
 
133  
  
130  
   Deferred income taxes
 
267  
  
250  
      Total noncurrent assets
 
18,572  
  
17,217  
Total Assets
$
18,727  
 
$
17,328  
 
 
 
  
 
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
 
  
 
Current Liabilities
 
 
  
 
   Accounts payable – other
 
7  
 
 
3  
   Other
 
274  
 
 
246  
      Total current liabilities
 
281  
  
249  
Noncurrent Liabilities
 
 
  
 
   Long-term debt
 
348  
  
348  
   Other
 
158  
  
155  
      Total noncurrent liabilities
 
506  
  
503  
Common Shareholders’ Equity
 
 
  
 
   Common stock
 
12,198  
  
11,282  
   Reinvested earnings
 
5,751  
  
5,301  
   Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
 
(9)
  
(7)
      Total common shareholders’ equity
 
17,940  
  
16,576  
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
$
18,727  
 
$
17,328  
169
 

 
PG&E CORPORATION
SCHEDULE I – CONDENSED FINANCIAL INFORMATION OF PARENT – (Continued)
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in millions)
 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2016
 
2015
 
2014
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
 
  
 
  
 
 
   Net income
$
1,393   
$  
874   
$
1,436  
   Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
 
  
 
  
 
 
      operating activities:
 
  
 
  
 
 
      Stock-based compensation amortization
 
74   
 
66   
 
65  
      Equity in earnings of subsidiaries
 
(1,388)  
 
(852)  
 
(1,413)
      Deferred income taxes and tax credits-net
 
11   
 
10   
 
(72)
      Noncurrent income taxes receivable/payable
 
-   
 
-   
 
5  
      Current income taxes receivable/payable
 
(1)  
 
5   
 
(16)
      Other
 
(24)  
 
(70)   
43  
Net cash provided by operating activities
 
65   
 
33   
 
48  
Cash F lows From Investing Activities:
 
  
 
  
 
 
   Investment in subsidiaries
 
(835)  
 
(705)  
 
(978)
   Dividends received from subsidiaries 
(1)
 
911   
 
716   
 
716  
   Proceeds from tax equity investments
 
-   
 
-   
 
368  
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
 
76   
 
11   
 
106  
Cash Flows From Financing Activities:
 
  
 
  
 
 
   Borrowings (repayments) under revolving credit facilities
 
-   
 
-   
 
(260)
   Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, net of discount and
 
  
 
  
 
 
      issuance costs of $3
 
-   
 
-   
 
347  
   Repayments of long-term debt
 
-   
 
-   
 
(350)
   Common stock issued
 
822   
 
780   
 
802  
   Common stock dividends paid   
(2)
 
(921)  
 
(856)  
 
(828)
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
 
(99)  
 
(76)  
 
(289)
Net ch ange in cash and cash equivalents
 
42   
 
(32)  
 
(135)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1
 
64   
 
96    
231  
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
$
106   
$  
64   
$
96  
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information
 
  
 
  
 
 
   Cash received (paid) for:
 
  
 
  
 
 
      Interest, net of amounts capitalized
$
(9)  
$  
(9)  
$
(15)
      Income taxes, net
 
(13)  
 
-   
 
1  
Supplemental disclosure of noncash investing and financing activities
 
  
 
  
 
 
   Noncash common stock issuances
$
20   
$  
21   
$
21  
   Common stock dividends declared but not yet paid
 
248   
 
224   
 
217  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
(1) Because of its nature as a holding company, PG&E Corporation classifies dividends received from subsidiaries as an investing cash flow.
(2) In January of 2016, PG&E Corporation paid a quarterly common stock dividend of $0.455 per share. 
In April, July and October of 2016, respectively, PG&E Corporation paid quarterly common stock dividends of $0.49 per share. 
In January, A pril, July, and October of 2015 and 2014, respectively, PG&E Corporation paid quarterly common stock d ividends of $0.455 per share.
170
 

 
PG&E Corporation
 
SCHEDULE II – CONSOLIDATED VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 201 6, 2015 , and 201 4
 
(in millions)
 
 
 
Additions
 
 
 
  
 
Description
 
Balance at
Beginning of
Period
  
Charged to Costs
and Expenses
  
Charged to
Other Accounts
  
Deductions   (2)
  
Balance at
End of Period
Valuation and qualifying accounts
deducted from assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   2016:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
            Allowance for uncollectible
accounts (1)
$
54    
$
50    
$
-    
$
46    $
58  
   2015:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
            Allowance for uncollectible
accounts (1)
$
66    
$
43    
$
-    
$
55    $
54  
   2014:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
            Allowance for uncollectible
accounts (1)
$
80    
$
41    
$
-    
$
55    $
66  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(1) Allowance for uncollectible accounts is deducted from “Accounts receivable - Customers.”
(2) Deductions consist principally of write-offs, net of collections of receivables previously written off.
171
 

 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
 
SCHEDULE II – CONSOLIDATED VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 201 6 , 201 5 , and 201 4
 
(in millions)
 
 
 
Additions
 
 
 
 
 
 
Description
 
Balance at
Beginning of
Period
 
 
Charged to
Costs and
Expenses
 
 
Charged to
Other Accounts
 
 
Deductions   (2)
 
 
Balance at End
of Period
Valuation and qualifying
accounts deducted from assets:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   2016:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            Allowance for uncollectible
accounts (1)
$
54    
$
50    
$
-    
$
46    
$
58
   2015:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            Allowance for uncollectible
accounts (1)
$
66    
$
43    
$
-    
$
55    
$
54
   2014:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            Allowance for uncollectible
accounts (1)
$
80    
$
41    
$
-    
$
55    
$
66
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) Allowance for uncollectible accounts is deducted from “Accounts receivable - Customers.”
(2) Deductions consist principally of write-offs, net of collections of receivables previously written off.
172
 

 
EXHIBIT INDEX
 
Exhibit
Number
 
Exhibit Description
      3.1
 Restated Articles of Incorporation of PG&E Corporation effective as of May 29, 2002 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q
for the quarter ended March 31, 2003 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 3.1)
      3.2
 Certificate of Determination for PG&E Corporation Series A Preferred Stock filed December 22, 2000 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 200 0 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 3.2)
      3.3
 Bylaws of PG&E Corporation amended as of December 16, 2016
      3.4
 Restated Articles of Incorporation of Pacific Gas and Electric Company effective as of April   12, 2004 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company's Form 8-K dated April   12, 2004 (File No.   1-2348), Exhibit 3)
      3.5
 Bylaws of Pacific Gas and Electric Company amended as of December 16, 2016
      4.1
 
Indenture, dated as of April 22, 2005, supplementing, amending and restating the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of March 11, 2004, as supplemented
by a First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 23, 2004, and a Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 12, 2004, between Pacific Gas
and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Trust Company, N.A. (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q
for the quarter ended March 31, 2005 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit   4.1)
      4.2
 First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 13, 2007, relating to the issuance of $700,000,000 principal amount of Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s 5.80% Senior Notes due March 1, 2037 (incorporated by reference from Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 14,
2007 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.3
 Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of December   4, 2007, relating to the issuance of $500,000,000 principal amount of Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s 5.625% Senior Notes due November   30, 2017 (incorporated by reference from Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March
14, 2007 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.4
 Third Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 3, 2008, relating to the  issuance of $200,000,000 Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 5.625% Senior
Notes due November 30, 2017 and $400,000,000 of its 6.35% Senior Notes due February 15, 2038 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 3, 2008 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.5
 Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of October 21, 2008, relating to the issuance of $600,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 8.25% Senior Notes due October 15, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated
October 21, 2008 (File N o. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.6
 
Fifth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November   18, 2008, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 6.25% Senior Notes due December   1, 2013 and $200   million principal amount of its 8.25% Senior Notes due October   15, 2018
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 18, 2008 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
      4.7
 Sixth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March   6, 2009, relating to the issuance of $550,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 6.25% Senior Notes due March   1, 2039 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March
6, 2009 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.8
 
Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June   11, 2009 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June  
11, 2009 (File   No.   1-2348), Exhibit   4.1)
173
 

 
     
4.9
 Eighth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November   18, 2009, relating to the issuance of $550,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Senior Notes due January   15, 2040 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 18,
2009 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.10
 
 
Ninth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 1, 2010, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s Senior Notes due January   15, 2040 and $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its Senior Notes due March 1, 2037 (incorporated by
reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated April 1, 2010 (File No. 1 -2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.11
 Tenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 15, 2010, relating to the issuance of $550,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due October 1, 2020 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated September
15, 2010 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.12
 
Twelfth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 18, 2010, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due October 1, 2020 and $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 5.40% Senior Notes due January 15, 2040
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 18, 2010 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.13
 Thirteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of May 13, 2011, relating to the issuance of $300,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 4.25% Senior Notes due May   15, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated May 13,
2011 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.14
 Fourteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 12, 2011, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company's 3.25% Senior Notes due September 15, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated
September 12, 2011 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.15
 Sixteenth Suppleme ntal Indenture, dated as of December 1, 2011, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 4.50% Senior Notes due December 15, 2041 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’ s Form 8-K dated
December 1, 2011 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.16
 Seventeenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 16, 2012, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 4.45% Seni or Notes due April 15, 2042   (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated April 16,
2012 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.17
 
Eighteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 16, 2012, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 2.45% Senior Notes due August 15, 2022 and $350,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 3.75% Senior Notes due August 15, 2042
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and El ectric Company’s Form 8-K dated August 16, 2012 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.18
 
Nineteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 14, 2013, relating to the issuance of $375,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’ s 3.25% Senior Notes due June 15, 2023 and $375,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.60% Senior Notes due June 15, 2043  
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 14, 2013 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
     
4.19
 
Twentieth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 12, 2013, relating to the issuance of $300,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.85% Senior Notes due November 15, 2023 and $500,000,000 aggregate principa l amount of its 5.125% Senior Notes due November
15, 2043 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 12, 2013 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
174
 

 
     
4.20
 
Twenty-First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of February 21, 2014, relating to the issuance of $450,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.75% Senior Notes due February 15, 2024 and $450,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.75% Senior Notes due February 15,
2044 (incorp orated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated February 21, 2014 (File No.1 2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.21
 
Twenty-Third Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 18, 2014, relating to the issuance of $350,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.40% Senior Notes due August 15, 2024 and $225,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.75% Senior Notes due February 15,
2044 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated August 18, 2014 (File No. 1 - 2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.2
2
 
Twenty-Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 6, 2014, relating to the issuance of $500,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s 4.30% Senior Notes due March 15, 2045 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated
November 6, 2014 (File No. 1 - 234 8), Exhibit 4.1)
4.23
 
Twenty-Fifth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 12, 2015, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due June 15, 2025 and $100,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.30% Senior Notes due March 15, 2045
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 12, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.24
 
Twenty-Sixth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 5, 2015, relating to the issuance of $200,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due June 15, 2025 and $450,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.25% Senior Notes due March 15,
2046 (incor porated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 5, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.25
 Twenty-Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 1, 2016, relating to the issuance of $600,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s 2.95% Senior Notes due March 1, 2026 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 1,
2016 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1 )
4.26
 
Twenty-Eighth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of December 1, 2016, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s Floating Rate Senior Notes due November 30, 2017 and $400,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 4.00% Senior Notes due
December 1, 2046 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated December 1, 2016 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.27
 Senior Note Indenture, dated as of February 10, 2014, between PG&E Corporation and U.S. Bank National Association (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form S-3 (File No. 333-193880), Exhibit 4.1)
4.28
 First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of February 27, 2014, relating to the issuance of $350,000,000 aggregate principal amount of PG&E Corporation’s
2.40% Senior Notes due March 1, 2019 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated February 27, 2014 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit
4.1)
10.1
 
Second Amended and R estated C redit A greement , dated as of April 27, 2015, among (1) PG&E Corporation , as borrower, (2) Bank of America, N.A., as
administrative agent and a lender, (3) Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, Citigroup Global Markets Inc., J.P. Morgan Securi ties LLC, and
Wells Fargo Securities LLC , as joint lead arrangers and joint bookrunners, (4) Citibank N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as co-syndication agents and
lenders, (5) Wells Fargo Bank, National Association , as documentation agent and lender, a nd (6) the following other lenders: Barclays Bank PLC, BNP
Paribas, Goldman Sachs Bank USA, Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A., Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., The Bank of New York Mellon, N.A., Mizuho
Corporate Bank, Ltd., Royal Bank of Canada, U.S. Bank , Nat ional Association, MUFG Union Bank, N.A., TD Bank, N.A., Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce, New York Branch, and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended March 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
175
 

 
10.2
 
Second Amended and R estated C redit A greement dated as of April 27, 2015, among (1) Pacific Gas and Electric Company , as borrower, (2) Citibank
N.A., as administrative agent and a lender, (3) Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, Citigroup Global Markets Inc., J.P. Morgan Securities
LLC, and Wells Fargo Securities LLC , as joint lead arrangers and joint bookrunners, (4) Bank of America, N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. , as co-
syndication agents and lenders, (5 ) Wells Fargo Bank, National Association , as documentation agent and lender, and (6) the following other lenders:
Barclays Bank PLC, BNP Paribas, Goldman Sachs Bank USA, Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A., Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., The Bank of New York
M ellon, N.A., Mizuho Corporate Bank, Ltd., Royal Bank of Canada, U.S. Bank National Association, MUFG Union Bank, N.A., TD Bank, N.A.,
Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, New York Branch, and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.2)
10.3
 
Term Loan Agreement, dated as of March 2, 2016, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd. (incorporated
by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 2, 2016 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.1)
10.4
 
Settlement Agreement among the California Public Utilities Commission, Pacific Gas and Electric Company and PG& E Corporation, dated as of
December 19, 2003, together with appendices (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 8-K dated
December 22, 2003 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 99) 
10.5
 
Tra nsmission Control Agreement among the California Independent System Operator (CAISO) and the Participating Transmission Owners, including
Pacific Gas and Electric Company, effective as of March   31, 1998, as amended (CAISO, FERC Electric Tariff No.   7) (inco rporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348),
Exhibit 10.8)
10.6
* Letter regarding Compensation Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Anthony F. Earley, Jr. dated August 8, 2011 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2011 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
10.7
* Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, J r. and PG&E Corporation for 2016 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan
10.8
* Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, J r. and PG&E Corporation for 2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Pla n (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.7 ) 
10.9
* Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, J r. and PG&E Corporation for 2014 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.4 ) 
10.10 * Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2013 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.5)
10.11 * Restricted Stock Unit Agreement b etween Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2012 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2012 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.3)
10
.12
* Performance Share Agreement subject to financial goals between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2016 grant under the PG&E
Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
10.13 *
Performance Share Agreement subject to financial goals between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2015 grant under the PG&E
Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter en ded March 31, 2015 (File
No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.8 ) 
176
 

 
10.14 * Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and custom er affordability goals between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2016 grant
under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Ince ntive Plan
10.15 *
Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and custom er affordability goals between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2015 grant
under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG& E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March
31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.9 ) 
10.16 * Performance Share Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, J r. and PG&E Corporation for 2014 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive P lan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.5 )
10.17 * Performance Share Agreement between Anthony F. Earley, Jr. and PG&E Corporation for 2013 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.6)
10.18 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Nickolas Stavropoulos and PG&E Corp oration for additional 2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014
Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2015 (File No. 1-2609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.16)
10.19 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Geisha J. Williams and PG&E Corporation for additional 2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-
Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2015 (File No. 1-2609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.17)
10.20 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between John R. Simon and PG&E Corporation for additional 2015 grant under the PG& E Corporation 2014 Long-
Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2015 (File No. 1-2609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.18)
10.21 * Letter regardi ng Compensation Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Julie M. Kane dated March 11, 2015 for employment starting May 18, 2015
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.4)
10.22 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Julie M. Kane and PG&E Corporation dated May 29, 2015 for 2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014
Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended J une 30, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit
10.5)
10.23 * Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Julie M. Kane and PG&E Corporation dated May 29, 2015 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 ( File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.6)
10.24 *
Performance Share Agreement subject to financial goals between Julie M. Kane and PG&E Corporation dated May 29, 2015 for 2015 grant under the
PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015
(File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.7)
10.25 *
Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and customer affordability goals between Julie M. Kane and PG&E Corporation dated May 29, 2015 for
2015 grant under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended June 30, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.8)
10.26 *
Restricted Stock Unit Agreement between Dinyar Mistry and PG&E Corporation dated February 23, 2016 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit  
10.2)
10.27 *
Separation agreement between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Greg Kiraly dated February 18, 2016 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit  
10.3)
177
 

 
10.28 *
Letter regarding Compensation Agreement between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and David Thomason dated May 24, 2016 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-
2348), Exhibit   10.2)
10.29 *
Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and David S. Thomason dated August 8, 2016 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File
No. 1-2348), Exhibit   10.1)
10.30 *
Performance Share Award Agreement subject to financial goals between David S. Thomason and PG&E Corporation dated August 8, 2016 (incorporated
by reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and
File No. 1-2348), Exhibit   10.2)
10.31 *
Performance Share Award Agreement subject to safety and customer affordability goals between David S. Thomason and PG&E Corporation dated
August 8, 2016 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30,
2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit   10.3)
10.32 * Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Edward D. Halpin dated November 28, 2016
10.33 * Letter regarding Compensation Agreement between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Jesus Soto, Jr. dated April 4, 2012 (incorporated by reference
to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2012 (File No. 1-2348 ), Exhibit 10.2)
10.34 *
Letter regarding Compensation Agreement between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Edward D. Halpin dated February 3, 2012 for employment
starting April 1, 2012 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Fo rm 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2012 (File No. 1-
2348), Exhibit 10.21)
10.35 * PG&E Corporation Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan amended effective as of September 19, 2001, and frozen after December 31, 2004
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004) (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.10)
10.36 * PG&E Corporation 2005 Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan, as amended effective September 15, 2015 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.3)
10.37 *
PG&E Corporation 2005 Deferred Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors, effective as of January 1, 2005 (as amended to comply with Internal
Revenue Code Sect ion 409A regulations effective as of January 1, 2009) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2008 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.24)
10.38 * PG&E Corporation Deferred Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors, as amended and restated effective as of July 22, 1998 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 1998 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.2)
10.39 * Description of Short-Term Incentive Plan for Officers of PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries, effective January 1, 2016 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated February 16, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348)
10.40 * Description of Short-Term Incentive Plan for Officers of PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries, effective January 1, 2015     (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.3)
10.41 *
Amendm ent to PG&E Corporation Short-Term Incentive Programs and Other Bonus Programs, effective January 1, 2009 (amendment to comply with
Internal Revenue Code Section 409A regulations) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ende d December 31, 2008
(File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.27)
178
 

 
10.42 *
Amendment to Pacific Gas and Electric Company Short-Term Incentive Programs and Other Bonus Programs, effective January 1, 2009 (amendment to
comply with Internal Revenue Code Section 409A regulations) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2008 (File No.   1-2348), Exhibit   10.28)
10.43 * PG&E Corporation Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan, as amended effective as of January 1, 2013 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2012 (File No. 1-12609, Exhibit 10.31)
10.44 * PG&E Corporation Defined Contribution Executive Supplemental Retirement Plan, as amended effective September 17, 2013 (incorporated by reference
to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2013 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.2)
10.45 * Pacific Gas and Electric Company Relocation Assistance Program for Officers (incorporated by r eference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.38)
10.46 *
Amendment to the Postretirement Life Insurance Plan of the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, effective February 16, 2016 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2016 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348),
Exhibit   10.4)
10.47 * Amendment to the Postretirement Life Insurance Plan of the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, effective February 6 , 2015 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014) (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 37 )
10.
48
* Postretirement Life Insurance Plan of the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, as amended and restated on February 14, 2012 (incorporated by reference to
Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2012 (File No.   1-2348), Exhibit   10.7)
10.49 *
PG&E Corporation Non-Employee Director Stock Incentive Plan (a component of the PG&E Corporation Long-Term Incentive Program) as amended
effective as of July 1, 2004     (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2004 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.27)
10.50 *
PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan effective May 12, 2014 and amended effective January 1, 2016 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit
10.42)
10.51 * PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended effective January 1, 2013 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2012     (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.40)
10.52 * PG&E Corporation Long-Term Incentive Program (including the PG&E Corporation Stock Option Plan and Performance Unit Plan), as amended May 16,
2001, (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2001 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10)
10.53 *
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2016 grants to non-employee directors under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2016 (File No. 1-
12609 and File No. 1-2348), Exhibit   10.1)
10.54 * Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2015 grants to non-employee directors under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015 (File No. 1-12 609), Exhibit 10.3)
10.55 * Form of Restrict ed Stock Unit Agreement for 2016 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
10.56 * Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2015 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 201 5 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 4 )
10.57 * Form of Restrict ed Stock Unit Agreement for 2014 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Inc entive Plan  (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 (File No.   1-12609), Ex hibit   10.2 )
179
 

 
10.58 * Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2013 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan     (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2013 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.3)
10.59 * Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2012 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Inc entive Plan (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2012 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.1)
10.60 * Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Agreement under the PG&E Corporation Long-Term Incentive Program (inco rporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Form 8-K dated January   6, 2005 (File No.   1-12609 and File No.   1-2348), Exhibit   99.1)
10.61 * Form of Performance Share Agreement sub ject to financial goals for 2016 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan  
10.62 * Form of Performance Share Agreement subject to financial goals for 2015 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 201 5 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 5 )
10.63 * Form of Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and custo mer affordability goals for 2016 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incenti ve Plan  
10.64 * Form of Performance Share Agreement subject to safety and customer affordability goals for 2015 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter en ded March 31, 201 5 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 6 )
10.65 * Form of Perf ormance Share Agreement for 2014 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2014 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.3 )
10.66 * Form of Performance Share Agreement for 2013 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan   (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31 , 2013 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.4)
10.67 * PG&E Corporation 2010 Executive Stock Ownership Guidelines as adopted September 14, 2010, effective January 1, 2011 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2010 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.3)
10.68 * PG&E Corporation Executive Stock Ownership Program Guidelines as amended effective September 15, 2010 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation's Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2010 ( File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.2)
10.69 * PG&E Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy, as amended effective as of May 12, 2014 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-
Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2014 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.2)
10.70 * PG&E Corporation Golden Parachute Restriction Policy effective as of February 15, 2006 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2005 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.49)
10.71 *
Amendm ent to PG&E Corporation Golden Parachute Restriction Policy dated December 31, 2008 (amendment to comply with Internal Revenue Code
Section 409A Regulations) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 (F ile No.   1-12609),
Exhibit   10.58)
10.72 * Amended and Restated PG&E Corporation Director Grantor Trust Agreement dated October 1, 2015 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's
Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), E xhibit 10.1)
10.73 * Amended and Restated PG&E Corporation Officer Grantor Trust Agreement dated October 1, 2015 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's
Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10. 2 )
10.74 * PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company Executive Incentive Compensation Recoupment Policy effective as of February 17, 2010
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2009 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.54)
180
 

 
10.75
*
Resolution of the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation regarding indemnification of officers and directors dated December 18, 1996
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 (File No.   1-12609), Exhibit   10.40)
10.76
*
Resolution of the Board of Directors of Pacific Gas and Electric Company regarding indemnification of officers and directors dated July 19, 1995
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Fo rm 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 (File No.   1-2348), Exhibit  
10.41)
12.1    
 
Computation of Ratios of Earnings to Fixed Charges for Pacific Gas and Electric Company
12.2    
 
Computation of Ratios of Earnings to Combined Fixed Charges and Preferred Stock Dividends for Pacific Gas and Electric Company
12.3    
 
Computation of Ratios of Earnings to Fixed Charges for PG&E Corporation
21
 
Subsidiaries of the Registrant
23
 
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (Deloitte & Touche LLP)
24
 
Powers of Attorney
31.1
 
Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of PG&E Corporation required by Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002
31.2
 
Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of Pacific Gas and Electric Company required by Section 302 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
32.1
** Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of PG&E Corporation required by Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley
Act of 2002
32.2
** Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of Pacific Gas and Electric Company required by Section 906 of the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
101.INS
 
XBRL Instance Document
101.SCH  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
101.CAL  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
101.LAB  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Labels Linkbase Document
101.PRE  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
101.DEF  
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
 
 
 
 
 
*
 
Management contract or compensatory agreement.
**
 
Pursuant to Item 601(b)(32) of SEC Regulation S-K, these exhibits are furnished rather than filed with this report.
181
 

 
 
 

EXHIBIT 3.3 
Bylaws
of
PG&E Corporation
amended as of December 16, 2016
Article I. 
SHAREHOLDERS.
1. 
  Place of Meeting .  All meetings of the shareholders shall be held at the office of the Corporation in the City and County of San Francisco, State
of California, or at such other place, within or without the State of California, as may be designated by the Board of Directors.
A meeting of the shareholders may be conducted, in whole or in part, by electronic transmission by and to the Corporation or by electronic video screen
communication if: (a) the Corporation implements reasonable measures to provide shareholders (in person or by proxy) a reasonable opportunity to participate in the
meeting and to vote on matters submitted to the shareholders, and (b) the Corporation maintains a record of the vote or action and any shareholder votes or other
shareholder actions taken at the meeting by means of electronic transmission to the Corporation or electronic video screen communication.
Any request by the Corporation to a shareholder under Section 20(b) of the California Corporations Code for consent to conduct a meeting of shareholders by
electronic transmission must include a notice that, absent consent of the shareholder, the meeting will be held at a physical location.
2. 
  Annual Meetings .  The annual meeting of shareholders shall be held each year on a date and at a time designated by the Board of Directors.
Written notice of the annual meeting shall be given not less than ten (or, if sent by third-class mail, thirty) nor more than sixty days prior to the date of the
meeting to each shareholder entitled to vote thereat.  The notice shall state the place (if any), date, and hour of such meeting, the means of electronic transmission by
and to the Corporation or electronic video screen communication (if any) by which shareholders may participate in that meeting, and those matters which the Board, at
the time of mailing, intends to present for action by the shareholders.
Notice of any meeting of the shareholders shall be given by mail, electronic transmission, or other written communication to each holder of record of the
stock entitled to vote thereat, at his address, as it appears on the books of the Corporation.
For purposes of this Section 2 only, "electronic transmission" from the Corporation means a communication (a) delivered by (i) facsimile telecommunication
or electronic mail when directed to the facsimile number or electronic mail address, respectively, for that shareholder on record with the Corporation, (ii) posting on
an electronic message board or network which the Corporation has designated for those communications, together with a separate notice to the recipient of the
posting, which transmission shall be validly delivered upon the later of the posting or delivery of the separate notice thereof, or (iii) other means of electronic
communication, (b) to a shareholder who has provided an unrevoked consent to the use of those means of transmission for such communications, and (c) that creates a
record that is capable of retention, retrieval, and review, and that may thereafter be rendered into clearly legible tangible form.  In addition, the consent to an electronic
transmission by the Corporation to an individual shareholder shall be preceded by or include a clear written statement to the shareholder as to: (a) any right of the
recipient to have the record provided or made available on paper or in non-electronic form, (b) whether the consent applies only to that transmission, to specified
categories of communications, or to all communications from the Corporation, and (c) the procedures the recipient must use to withdraw consent.
At an annual meeting of shareholders, only such business shall be conducted as shall have been properly brought before the annual meeting.  To be properly
brought before an annual meeting, business must be (a) specified in the notice of the annual meeting (or any supplement thereto) given by or at the direction of the
Board, or (b) otherwise properly brought before the annual meeting by a shareholder.  Notwithstanding anything in these Bylaws to the contrary, no business shall be
conducted at an annual meeting except in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section 2 and Article I, Section 3 of these Bylaws.
For business to be properly brought before an annual meeting by a shareholder, including the nomination of any person (other than a person nominated by or
at the direction of the Board) for election to the Board, the shareholder must have given timely and proper written notice to the Corporate Secretary of the Corporation
pursuant to this Section 2 or Article I, Section 3 of these Bylaws .
Other than director nominations pursuant to Article I, Section 3 of these Bylaws, to be timely, the shareholder's written notice must be received at the
principal executive office of the Corporation not more than 120 days and not less than ninety days before the anniversary date of the prior year's annual meeting of
shareholders; provided, however, that if the annual meeting to which the shareholder's written notice relates is to be held on a date that differs by more than thirty days
from the date of the last annual meeting of shareholders, the shareholder's written notice to be timely must be so received not later than the close of business on the
tenth day following the date on which public disclosure of the date of the annual meeting is made or given to shareholders.  Any shareholder's written notice that is
delivered after the close of business (5:00 p.m. local time) will be considered received on the following business day.  As used in these Bylaws, "public disclosure"
shall include disclosure in a press release or in a document publicly filed by the Corporation with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
pursuant to Section 13, 14, or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (and its successors) (the "Exchange Act") and the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
To be proper, the shareholder's written notice must set forth as to each matter the shareholder proposes to bring before the annual meeting (a) a brief
description of the business desired to be brought before the annual meeting and the reasons for conducting such business at the annual meeting, (b) the text of the
proposal or business to be brought before the annual meeting (including the text of any resolutions proposed for consideration, and in the event that such business
includes a proposal to amend these Bylaws, the language of the proposed amendment), (c) the name and address of the shareholder as they appear on the Corporation's
books and the name and address of any of its Associated Persons (defined below), (d) the class and number of shares of the Corporation that are beneficially owned or
held of record by the shareholder or any of its Associated Persons, and a description of all Disclosable Interests (defined below) (i) held by the shareholder or any of
its Associated Persons or (ii) to which any of them is a party, (e) a description of all agreements, arrangements, or understandings between or among (i) such
shareholder, (ii) any Associated Person, and/or (iii) any other person or persons (naming such person or persons), in each case relating to the business to be brought

before the annual meeting or pursuant to which such business is to be proposed by such shareholder, (f) any material interest of the shareholder or Associated Parties
in such business, and (g) other such information concerning the shareholder, any of its Associated Persons, and such item of business as would be required under the
rules of the SEC in a proxy statement soliciting proxies in support of the item of business proposed to be brought before the annual meeting; provided, however, that
the disclosures required by this Section 2 shall not include any disclosures with respect to any broker, dealer, commercial bank, trust company, or similar nominee
solely as a result of such entity being the shareholder directed to prepare and submit the notice required by these Bylaws on behalf of a beneficial owner or beneficial
owners.
In addition, other than director nominations pursuant to Article I, Section 3 of these Bylaws, if the shareholder's written notice relates to the nomination at the
annual meeting of any person for election to the Board, such notice to be proper must also set forth (a) the name, age, business address, and residence address of each
person to be so nominated, (b) the principal occupation or employment of each such person, (c) the number of shares of capital stock of the Corporation beneficially
owned by each such person and any and all Disclosable Interests held by each such person to which each such person is a party , (d) a description of all agreements,
arrangements, or understandings (including compensation) between or among (i) such shareholder, (ii) each nominee, (iii) any Associated Person, and/or (iv) any
other person or persons (naming such person or persons), in each case relating to the nomination or pursuant to which the nomination or nominations are to be made
by such shareholder and/or relating to the candidacy or service of the nominee as a director of the Corporation, (e) a representation that the shareholder is a holder of
record of stock of the Corporation entitled to vote at such meeting and intends to appear in person or by proxy at the meeting to propose such nomination, (f) a
representation as to whether the shareholder or the beneficial owner, if any, intends or is part of a group that intends (i) to deliver a proxy statement and/or form of
proxy to holders of at least the percentage of the Corporation's outstanding capital stock required to elect the nominee, or (ii) otherwise to solicit proxies from
shareholders in support of such nomination, (g) such other information concerning each such person as would be required under the rules of the SEC in a proxy
statement soliciting proxies for the election of such person as a director, and accompanied by a consent, signed by each such person, to serve as a director of the
Corporation if elected, and (h) if any such nominee, the shareholder nominating the nominee, or any such Associated Person expresses an intention or
recommendation that the Corporation enter into a strategic transaction, any material interest in such transaction of each such proposed nominee, shareholder, or
Associated Person, including without limitation, any equity interests or any Disclosable Interests held by each such nominee, shareholder, or Associated Person in any
other person, the value of which interests could reasonably be expected to be materially affected by such transaction.  In addition, such notice must contain a written
and signed representation and agreement of each such nominee, pursuant to which such nominee represents and agrees that he or she (a) is not and will not become a
party to any agreement, arrangement, or understanding with, and has not given any commitment or assurance to, any person or entity as to how such nominee, if
elected as a director, will act or vote on any issue or question or that could reasonably be expected to limit or interfere with such nominee's ability to comply with his
or her fiduciary duties under applicable law that has not been disclosed to the Corporation, (b) is not and will not become a party to any agreement, arrangement, or
understanding with any person or entity other than the Corporation with respect to any direct or indirect compensation, reimbursement, or indemnification in
connection with service or action as a director that has not been disclosed to the Corporation, and (c) if elected as a director, will comply with all of the Corporation's
then existing corporate governance, conflict of interest, confidentiality, and stock ownership and trading policies, codes, and guidelines and any other Corporation
policies, codes, and guidelines applicable to directors.  To be proper notice, the shareholder's notice also must include a written questionnaire completed by the
proposed nominee with respect to the background and qualifications of such proposed nominee (which form of questionnaire shall be provided by the Corporate
Secretary upon request).
The Corporation may require any proposed nominee to furnish such other information as it may reasonably require to determine (a) the eligibility of such
proposed nominee to serve as a director of the Corporation, and (b) whether such nominee qualifies as an "independent director" or "audit committee financial expert"
under applicable law, securities exchange rule or regulation, or any publicly disclosed corporate governance guideline or committee charter of the Corporation.
In addition, for a shareholder's written notice to the Corporate Secretary to be proper and timely, a shareholder providing notice of any business (including
the nomination of any person for election to the Board) proposed to be made at any annual meeting shall further update and supplement such notice, if necessary, so
that the information provided or required to be provided in such notice pursuant to this Section 2 shall be true and correct as of the record date for the meeting and as
of the date that is ten business days prior to the meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.  Such update and supplement (or, if applicable, written
confirmation that the information provided in such notice is still true and correct as of the applicable date) shall be delivered to, or mailed to and received by, the
Corporate Secretary at the principal executive office of the Corporation no later than five business days after the record date for the meeting or, if practicable, any
adjournment or postponement thereof and, if not practicable, on the first practicable date prior to the date to which the meeting has been adjourned or postponed (in
the case of the update and supplement required to be made as of ten business days prior to the meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof).  A shareholder,
in his or her initial written notice of any business to the Corporate Secretary, shall confirm his or her intention to update and supplement such notice as required
herein.
Nothing in these Bylaws shall be deemed to affect any rights of a shareholder to request inclusion of proposals in the Corporation's proxy statement pursuant
to Rule 14-8 under the Exchange Act.  Notwithstanding anything in these Bylaws to the contrary, except for proposals properly and timely made in accordance with
Rule 14a-8 under the Exchange Act and included in the notice of annual meeting given by or at the direction of the Board, no business shall be conducted at any
annual meeting except in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section 2 and Article I, Section 3 of these Bylaws .
As used in this Section 2, "Associated Person" shall mean (a) the beneficial owner or beneficial owners on whose behalf the written notice of business
proposed to be brought before the annual meeting is made, if different from the shareholder proposing such business, and (b) each "affiliate" or "associate" (each
within the meaning of Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act for purposes of these Bylaws) of each such shareholder or beneficial owner.
As used in this Section 2, "Disclosable Interest" shall mean any agreement, arrangement, or understanding (including but not limited to any derivatives,
swaps, long or short positions, options, warrants, convertible securities, stock appreciation or similar rights, hedging transactions, and borrowed or loaned shares that
are held or have been entered into, directly or indirectly, by or on behalf of such shareholder, the nominee proposed by such shareholder, as applicable, or any such
Associated Person), the effect or intent of which is to mitigate loss to, manage the risk or benefit of share price changes for, provide the opportunity to profit from
share price changes to, or maintain, increase, or decrease the voting power of, such shareholder, proposed nominee, as applicable, or any such Associated Person, with
respect to shares of stock of the Corporation; provided, however, that Disclosable Interests shall not include any such disclosures with respect to any broker, dealer,
commercial bank, trust company, or similar nominee solely as a result of such entity being the shareholder directed to prepare and submit the notice required by these
Bylaws on behalf of a beneficial owner or beneficial owners.
3. 
  Nominations of Directors Included in the Corporation's Proxy Materials.
(a) 
 
 Inclusion of Shareholder Nominee in Proxy Statement.   Subject to the provisions of this Section 3, if expressly requested in the
relevant Nomination Notice (as defined in Section 3(d) below), the Corporation shall include in its proxy statement for any annual meeting of shareholders (but not at
any special meeting of shareholders): (i) the name of any person nominated for election (the "Shareholder Nominee"), which shall also be included on the

Corporation's form of proxy and ballot, by any Eligible Shareholder (as defined in Section 3(c)(i) below) or group of up to 20 Eligible Shareholders that, as
determined by the Board of Directors or its designee acting in good faith, has (individually and collectively, in the case of a group) satisfied all applicable conditions
and complied with all applicable procedures set forth in this Section 3 (such Eligible Shareholder or group of Eligible Shareholders being a "Nominating
Shareholder"); (ii) disclosure about the Shareholder Nominee and the Nominating Shareholder required under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission or
other applicable law to be included in the proxy statement; (iii) any statement included by the Nominating Shareholder in the Nomination Notice for inclusion in the
proxy statement in support of the Shareholder Nominee's election to the Board of Directors (subject, without limitation, to Section 3(e)(ii), provided that such
statement does not exceed 500 words; and (iv) any other information that the Corporation or the Board of Directors determines, in their discretion, to include in the
proxy statement relating to the nomination of the Shareholder Nominee, including, without limitation, any statement in opposition to the nomination and any of the
information provided pursuant to this Section 3.
(b) 
 
 Maximum Number of Shareholder Nominees.
(i) 
 
 The Corporation shall not be required to include in the proxy statement for an annual meeting of shareholders more
Shareholder Nominees than that number of directors constituting 20 percent of the total number of directors of the Corporation on the last day on which a Nomination
Notice may be submitted pursuant to this Section 3 (rounded down to the nearest whole number), but, in any event, not fewer than two (the "Maximum Number"). 
The Maximum Number for a particular annual meeting shall be reduced by: (1) Shareholder Nominees whose nominations are subsequently withdrawn and
(2) Shareholder Nominees whom the Board of Directors itself decides to nominate for election at such annual meeting. In the event that one or more vacancies for any
reason occurs on the Board of Directors after the deadline set forth in Section 3(d) but before the date of the annual meeting of shareholders and the Board of Directors
resolves to reduce the size of the Board in connection therewith, the Maximum Number shall be calculated based on the number of directors in office as so reduced.
(ii) 
 
 If the number of Shareholder Nominees pursuant to this Section 3 for any annual meeting of shareholders exceeds the
Maximum Number, then, promptly upon notice from the Corporation, each Nominating Shareholder will select one Shareholder Nominee for inclusion in the proxy
statement until the Maximum Number is reached, going in order of the amount (largest to smallest) of shares of the Corporation's common stock that each Nominating
Shareholder disclosed as owned in its Nomination Notice, with the process repeated if the Maximum Number is not reached after each Nominating Shareholder has
selected one Shareholder Nominee. If, after the deadline for submitting a Nomination Notice as set forth in Article I, Section 2(d), a Nominating Shareholder becomes
ineligible or withdraws its nomination, or a Shareholder Nominee becomes ineligible or unwilling to serve on the Board of Directors, whether before or after the
mailing of the definitive proxy statement, then the Corporation: (1) shall not be required to include in its proxy statement or on any ballot or form of proxy the
Shareholder Nominee or any successor or replacement nominee proposed by the Nominating Shareholder or by any other Nominating Shareholder and (2) may
otherwise communicate to its shareholders, including without limitation by amending or supplementing its proxy statement or ballot or form of proxy, that the
Shareholder Nominee will not be included as a Shareholder Nominee in the proxy statement or on any ballot or form of proxy and will not be voted on at the annual
meeting of shareholders.
(c) 
 
 Eligibility of Nominating Shareholder.
(i) 
 
 
 
 An "Eligible Shareholder" is a person who has either (1) been a record holder of the shares of common stock of the
Corporation used to satisfy the eligibility requirements in this Section 3(c) continuously for the three-year period specified in subsection (c)(ii) of this Section 3 below
or (2) provides to the Corporate Secretary of the Corporation, within the time period referred to in Section 3(d), evidence of continuous ownership of such shares for
such three-year period from one or more securities intermediaries in a form that the Board of Directors or its designee, acting in good faith, determines acceptable.
(ii) 
 
 
 
 An Eligible Shareholder or group of up to 20 Eligible Shareholders may submit a nomination in accordance with
this Section 3 only if the person or group (in the aggregate) has continuously owned at least the Minimum Number (as defined in Section 3(c)(iii) below) (as adjusted
for any stock splits, reverse stock splits, stock dividends or similar events) of shares of the Corporation's common stock throughout the three-year period preceding
and including the date of submission of the Nomination Notice, and continues to own at least the Minimum Number of shares through the date of the annual meeting
of shareholders. The following shall be treated as one Eligible Shareholder if such Eligible Shareholder shall provide together with the Nomination Notice
documentation satisfactory to the Board of Directors or its designee, acting in good faith, that demonstrates compliance with the following criteria: (1) funds under
common management and investment control; (2) funds under common management and funded primarily by the same employer; or (3) a "family of investment
companies" or a "group of investment companies" (each as defined in the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended). For the avoidance of doubt, in the event of
a nomination by a Nominating Shareholder that includes more than one Eligible Shareholder, any and all requirements and obligations for a given Eligible
Shareholder or, except as the context otherwise makes clear, the Nominating Shareholder that are set forth in this Section 3, including the minimum holding period,
shall apply to each member of such group; provided, however, that the Minimum Number shall apply to the aggregate ownership of the group of Eligible Shareholders
constituting the Nominating Shareholder.  Should any Eligible Shareholder withdraw from a group of Eligible Shareholders constituting a Nominating Shareholder at
any time prior to the annual meeting of shareholders, the Nominating Shareholder shall be deemed to own only the shares held by the remaining Eligible Shareholders.
As used in this Section 3, any reference to a "group" or "group of Eligible Shareholders" refers to any Nominating Shareholder that consists of more than one Eligible
Shareholder and to all the Eligible Shareholders that make up such Nominating Shareholder.
(iii) 
 
 
 
 The "Minimum Number" of shares of the Corporation's common stock means 3 percent of the number of
outstanding shares of common stock of the Corporation as of the most recent date for which such amount is given in any filing by the Corporation with the Securities
and Exchange Commission prior to the submission of the Nomination Notice.
(iv) 
 
 
 
 For purposes of this Section 3, an Eligible Shareholder "owns" only those outstanding shares of the Corporation's
common stock as to which such Eligible Shareholder possesses both: (1) the full voting and investment rights pertaining to such shares and (2) the full economic
interest in (including the opportunity for profit from and the risk of loss on) such shares; provided that the number of shares calculated in accordance with clauses (1)
and (2) shall not include any shares (x) sold by such Eligible Shareholder or any of its affiliates in any transaction that has not been settled or closed, (y) borrowed by
such Eligible Shareholder or any of its affiliates for any purpose or purchased by such Eligible Shareholder or any of its affiliates pursuant to an agreement to resell, or
(z) subject to any option, warrant, forward contract, swap, contract of sale, or other derivative or similar agreement entered into by such Eligible Shareholder or any of
its affiliates, whether any such instrument or agreement is to be settled with shares or with cash based on the notional amount or value of outstanding capital stock of
the Corporation, in any such case which instrument or agreement has, or is intended to have, the purpose or effect of: (A) reducing in any manner, to any extent or at
any time in the future, such Eligible Shareholder's or any of its affiliates' full right to vote or direct the voting of any such shares, and/or (B) hedging, offsetting, or
altering to any degree any gain or loss arising from the full economic ownership of such shares by such Eligible Shareholder or any of its affiliates. An Eligible
Shareholder "owns" shares held in the name of a nominee or other intermediary so long as the Eligible Shareholder retains the right to instruct how the shares are
voted with respect to the election of directors and possesses the full economic interest in the shares. An Eligible Shareholder's ownership of shares shall be deemed to

continue during any period in which the Eligible Shareholder has delegated any voting power by means of a proxy, power of attorney, or other similar instrument or
arrangement that is revocable at any time by the Eligible Shareholder.  An Eligible Shareholder's ownership of shares shall be deemed to continue during any period in
which the Eligible Shareholder has loaned such shares, provided that the Eligible Shareholder has the power to recall such loaned shares on not more than five
business days' notice. The terms "owned," "owning," and other variations of the word "own" shall have correlative meanings.  Whether outstanding shares of the
Corporation are "owned" for these purposes shall be determined by the Board of Directors or its designee acting in good faith.  For purposes of this Section 3(c)(iv),
the term "affiliate" or "affiliates" shall have the meaning ascribed thereto under the General Rules and Regulations under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended ("Exchange Act").
(v) 
 
 
 
 No Eligible Shareholder shall be permitted to be in more than one group constituting a Nominating Shareholder,
and if any Eligible Shareholder appears as a member of more than one group, such Eligible Shareholder shall be deemed to be a member of only the group that has the
largest ownership position as reflected in the Nomination Notice.
(d) 
 
 Nomination Notice.   To nominate a Shareholder Nominee pursuant to this Section 3, the Nominating Shareholder must submit to the
Corporate Secretary of the Corporation all of the following information and documents in a form that the Board of Directors or its designee, acting in good faith,
determines acceptable (collectively, the "Nomination Notice"), not less than 120 days nor more than 150 days prior to the anniversary of the date that the Corporation
mailed its proxy statement for the prior year's annual meeting of shareholders; provided, however, that if (and only if) the annual meeting of shareholders is not
scheduled to be held within a period that commences 30 days before the first anniversary date of the preceding year's annual meeting of shareholders and ends 30 days
after the first anniversary date of the preceding year's annual meeting of shareholders (an annual meeting date outside such period being referred to herein as an "Other
Meeting Date"), the Nomination Notice shall be given in the manner provided herein by the later of the close of business on the date that is 180 days prior to such
Other Meeting Date or the tenth day following the date such Other Meeting Date is first publicly announced or disclosed (in no event shall the adjournment or
postponement of an annual meeting, or the announcement thereof, commence a new time period (or extend any time period) for the giving of the Nomination Notice):
(i) 
 
 one or more written statements from the record holder of the shares (and from each intermediary through which the shares are
or have been held during the requisite three-year holding period) verifying that, as of a date within seven (7) calendar days prior to the date of the Nomination Notice,
the Nominating Shareholder owns, and has continuously owned for the preceding three (3) years, the Minimum Number of shares, and the Nominating Shareholder's
agreement to provide, within five (5) business days after the record date for the annual meeting, written statements from the record holder and intermediaries verifying
the Nominating Shareholder's continuous ownership of the Minimum Number of shares through the record date;
(ii) 
 
 an agreement to provide immediate notice if the Nominating Shareholder ceases to own the Minimum Number of shares at
any time prior to the date of the annual meeting;
(iii) 
 
 a copy of the Schedule 14N (or any successor form) relating to the Shareholder Nominee, completed and filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission by the Nominating Shareholder as applicable, in accordance with Securities and Exchange Commission rules;
(iv) 
 
 the written consent of each Shareholder Nominee to being named in the Corporation's proxy statement, form of
proxy, and ballot as a nominee and to serving as a director if elected;
(v) 
 
 a written notice of the nomination of such Shareholder Nominee that includes the following additional information,
agreements, representations, and warranties by the Nominating Shareholder (including, for the avoidance of doubt, each group member in the case of a Nominating
Shareholder consisting of a group of Eligible Shareholders): (1) the information that would be required to be set forth in a shareholder's notice of nomination pursuant
to Article I, Section 2 of these Bylaws; (2) the details of any relationship that existed within the past three years and that would have been described pursuant to Item
6(e) of Schedule 14N (or any successor item) if it existed on the date of submission of the Schedule 14N; (3) a representation and warranty that the Nominating
Shareholder did not acquire, and is not holding, securities of the Corporation for the purpose or with the effect of influencing or changing control of the Corporation;
(4) a representation and warranty that the Nominating Shareholder has not nominated and will not nominate for election to the Board of Directors at the annual
meeting any person other than such Nominating Shareholder's Shareholder Nominee(s); (5) a representation and warranty that the Nominating Shareholder has not
engaged in and will not engage in a "solicitation" within the meaning of Rule 14a-1(l) under the Exchange Act (without reference to the exception in Section 14a-1(l)
(2)(iv)) with respect to the annual meeting, other than with respect to such Nominating Shareholder's Shareholder Nominee(s) or any nominee of the Board of
Directors); (6) a representation and warranty that the Nominating Shareholder will not use any proxy card other than the Corporation's proxy card in soliciting
shareholders in connection with the election of a Shareholder Nominee at the annual meeting; (7) a representation and warranty that the Shareholder Nominee's
candidacy or, if elected, Board membership would not violate applicable state or federal law or the rules of any stock exchange on which the Corporation's securities
are traded (the "Stock Exchange Rules"); (8) a representation and warranty that the Shareholder Nominee: (A) does not have any direct or indirect relationship with
the Corporation that will cause the Shareholder Nominee to be deemed not independent pursuant to the Corporation's Corporate Governance Guidelines and director
independence standards and otherwise qualifies as independent under the Corporation's Corporate Governance Guidelines, director independence standards, and the
Stock Exchange Rules; (B) meets the audit committee and compensation committee independence requirements under the Stock Exchange Rules; (C) is a "non-
employee director" for the purposes of Rule 16b-3 under the Exchange Act (or any successor rule); (D) is an "outside director" for the purposes of Section 162(m) of
the Internal Revenue Code (or any successor provision); (E) is not and has not been subject to any event specified in Rule 506(d)(1) of Regulation D (or any successor
rule) under the Securities Act of 1933 or Item 401(f) of Regulation S-K (or any successor rule) under the Exchange Act, without reference to whether the event is
material to an evaluation of the ability or integrity of the Shareholder Nominee; and (F) meets the director qualifications set forth in the Corporation's Corporate
Governance Guidelines; (9) a representation and warranty that the Nominating Shareholder satisfies the eligibility requirements set forth in Section 3(c); (10) a
representation and warranty that the Nominating Shareholder will continue to satisfy the eligibility requirements described in Section 3(c) through the date of the
annual meeting; (11) details of any position of the Shareholder Nominee as an officer or director of any competitor (that is, any entity that produces products or
provides services that compete with or are alternatives to the principal products produced or services provided by the Corporation or its affiliates) of the Corporation,
within the three years preceding the submission of the Nomination Notice; (12) if desired, a statement for inclusion in the proxy statement in support of the
Shareholder Nominee's election to the Board of Directors, provided that such statement shall not exceed 500 words and shall fully comply with Section 14 of the
Exchange Act and the rules and regulations thereunder; and (13) in the case of a nomination by a Nominating Shareholder comprised of a group, the designation by all
Eligible Shareholders in such group of one Eligible Shareholder that is authorized to act on behalf of the Nominating Shareholder with respect to matters relating to
the nomination, including withdrawal of the nomination;
(vi) 
 
 an executed agreement pursuant to which the Nominating Shareholder (including in the case of a group, each
Eligible Shareholder in that group) agrees: (1) to comply with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations in connection with the nomination, solicitation, and election;
(2) to file any written solicitation or other communication with the Corporation's shareholders relating to one or more of the Corporation's directors or director

nominees or any Shareholder Nominee with the Securities and Exchange Commission, regardless of whether any such filing is required under any rule or regulation or
whether any exemption from filing is available for such materials under any rule or regulation; (3) to assume all liability stemming from an action, suit, or proceeding
concerning any actual or alleged legal or regulatory violation arising out of any communication by the Nominating Shareholder or the Shareholder Nominee
nominated by such Nominating Shareholder with the Corporation, its shareholders, or any other person in connection with the nomination or election of directors,
including, without limitation, the Nomination Notice; (4) to indemnify and hold harmless (jointly and severally with all other Eligible Shareholders, in the case of a
group of Eligible Shareholders) the Corporation and each of its directors, officers, and employees individually against any liability, loss, damages, expenses, or other
costs (including attorneys' fees) incurred in connection with any threatened or pending action, suit, or proceeding, whether legal, administrative, or investigative,
against the Corporation or any of its directors, officers, or employees arising out of or relating to a failure or alleged failure of the Nominating Shareholder or
Shareholder Nominee to comply with, or any breach or alleged breach of, its, or his or her, as applicable, obligations, agreements, or representations under this
Section 3; (5) in the event that any information included in the Nomination Notice, or any other communication by the Nominating Shareholder (including with
respect to any Eligible Shareholder included in a group) with the Corporation, its shareholders, or any other person in connection with the nomination or election
ceases to be true and accurate in all material respects (or due to a subsequent development omits a material fact necessary to make the statements made not
misleading), to promptly (and in any event within 48 hours of discovering such misstatement or omission) notify the Corporation and any other recipient of such
communication of the misstatement or omission in such previously provided information and of the information that is required to correct the misstatement or
omission; and (6) in the event that the Nominating Shareholder (including any Eligible Shareholder included in a group) has failed to continue to satisfy the eligibility
requirements described in Section 3(c), to promptly notify the Corporation; and
(vii) 
 
 an executed agreement by the Shareholder Nominee: (1) to provide to the Corporation such other information,
including completion of the Corporation's director nominee questionnaire, as the Board of Directors or its designee, acting in good faith, may request; (2) that the
Shareholder Nominee has read and agrees, if elected to serve as a member of the Board of Directors, to adhere to the Corporation's Corporate Governance Guidelines,
Code of Business Conduct and Ethics for Directors, and any other Corporation policies and guidelines applicable to directors; and (3) that the Shareholder Nominee is
not and will not become a party to (A) any compensatory, payment or other financial agreement, arrangement, or understanding with any person or entity in
connection with such person's nomination, candidacy, service, or action as director of the Corporation that has not been fully disclosed to the Corporation prior to or
concurrently with the Nominating Shareholder's submission of the Nomination Notice, (B) any agreement, arrangement, or understanding with any person or entity as
to how the Shareholder Nominee would vote or act on any issue or question as a director (a "Voting Commitment") that has not been fully disclosed to the
Corporation prior to or concurrently with the Nominating Shareholder's submission of the Nomination Notice, or (C) any Voting Commitment that could limit or
interfere with the Shareholder Nominee's ability to comply, if elected as a director of the Corporation, with his or her fiduciary duties under applicable law.
The information and documents required by this Section 3(d) shall be (i) provided with respect to and executed by each Eligible Shareholder in the group in
the case of a Nominating Shareholder comprised of a group of Eligible Shareholders; and (ii) provided with respect to the persons specified in Instructions 1 and 2 to
Items 6(c) and (d) of Schedule 14N (or any successor item) (x) in the case of a Nominating Shareholder that is an entity and (y) in the case of a Nominating
Shareholder that is a group that includes one or more Eligible Shareholders that are entities.  The Nomination Notice shall be deemed submitted on the date on which
all of the information and documents referred to in this Section 3(d) (other than such information and documents contemplated to be provided after the date the
Nomination Notice is provided) have been delivered to or, if sent by mail, received by the Corporate Secretary of the Corporation.
(e) 
 Exceptions.
(i) 
 
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Section 3, the Corporation may omit from its proxy statement any
Shareholder Nominee and any information concerning such Shareholder Nominee (including a Nominating Shareholder's statement in support) and no vote on such
Shareholder Nominee will occur (notwithstanding that proxies in respect of such vote may have been received by the Corporation), and the Nominating Shareholder
may not, after the last day on which a Nomination Notice would be timely, cure in any way any defect preventing the nomination of the Shareholder Nominee, if:
(1) the Corporation receives a notice that a shareholder intends to nominate a candidate for director at the annual meeting pursuant to the advance notice requirements
set forth in Article I, Section 2 of these Bylaws; (2) the Nominating Shareholder (or, in the case of a Nominating Shareholder consisting of a group of Eligible
Shareholders, the Eligible Shareholder that is authorized to act on behalf of the Nominating Shareholder), or any qualified representative thereof, does not appear at
the annual meeting to present the nomination submitted pursuant to this Section 3 or the Nominating Shareholder withdraws its nomination; (3) the Board of Directors
or its designee, acting in good faith, determines that such Shareholder Nominee's nomination or election to the Board of Directors would result in the Corporation
violating or failing to be in compliance with these Bylaws or the Corporation's Articles of Incorporation or any applicable law, rule, or regulation to which the
Corporation is subject, including the Stock Exchange Rules; (4) the Shareholder Nominee has been, within the past three years, an officer or director of a competitor,
as defined for purposes of Section 8 of the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, as amended; or (5) the Corporation is notified, or the Board of Directors or its designee
acting in good faith determines, that a Nominating Shareholder has failed to continue to satisfy the eligibility requirements described in Section 3(c), any of the
representations and warranties made in the Nomination Notice ceases to be true and accurate in all material respects (or omits a material fact necessary to make the
statement made not misleading), the Shareholder Nominee becomes unwilling or unable to serve on the Board of Directors or any material violation or breach occurs
of any of the obligations, agreements, representations, or warranties of the Nominating Shareholder or the Shareholder Nominee under this Section 3.
(ii) 
 
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Section 3, the Corporation may omit from its proxy statement, or
may supplement or correct, any information, including all or any portion of the statement in support of the Shareholder Nominee included in the Nomination Notice, if
the Board of Directors or its designee in good faith determines that: (1) such information is not true in all material respects or omits a material statement necessary to
make the statements made not misleading; (2) such information directly or indirectly impugns the character, integrity, or personal reputation of, or directly or
indirectly makes charges concerning improper, illegal, or immoral conduct or associations, without factual foundation, with respect to, any individual, corporation,
partnership, association, or other entity, organization, or governmental authority; (3) the inclusion of such information in the proxy statement would otherwise violate
the Securities and Exchange Commission proxy rules or any other applicable law, rule, or regulation; or (4) the inclusion of such information in the proxy statement
would impose a material risk of liability upon the Corporation.
The Corporation may solicit against, and include in the proxy statement its own statement relating to, any Shareholder Nominee.
4. 
  Special   Meetings .  Special meetings of the shareholders shall be called by the Corporate Secretary or an Assistant Corporate Secretary at any
time on order of the Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the Board, the Chairman of the Executive Committee, the Chief Executive
Officer, or the President.  Special meetings of the shareholders shall also be called by the Corporate Secretary or an Assistant Corporate Secretary upon the written
request of holders of shares entitled to cast not less than ten percent of the votes at the meeting measured as of the record date established pursuant to Article IV,
Section 1 of these Bylaws.

Any such request shall be in writing, shall be delivered to the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the Board, the Chairman of the Executive
Committee, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, or the Corporate Secretary , and shall state (a) the purposes of the meeting, (b) the business proposed to be
transacted at such meeting and the reasons for conducting such business at the meeting, and (c) if such request is made by a shareholder, the text of the proposal or
business to be brought before the meeting (including the text of any resolutions proposed for consideration, and in the event that such business includes a proposal to
amend these Bylaws, the language of the proposed amendment).  In connection with any special meeting of the shareholders called in accordance with the provisions
of this Section 4, upon written request in proper form sent pursuant to Section 601(c) of the California Corporations Code (or any successor provision) by the person
or persons (other than the Board) calling such meeting, it shall be the duty of the Corporate Secretary, subject to the immediately succeeding sentence, to cause notice
of such meeting to be given in accordance with Article I, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of these Bylaws as promptly as reasonably practicable and, in connection therewith,
to establish the place and, subject to Section 601(c) of the California Corporations Code (or any successor provision), the date and hour of such meeting.
To be in proper form, any such shareholder request shall include the information required in Article I, Section 2 of these Bylaws.  Within five business days
after receiving such a shareholder request, the Board shall determine whether such shareholder or shareholders have satisfied the requirements for calling a special
meeting of the shareholders in accordance with the provisions of this Section 4, and shall notify the requesting party or parties of its finding.
In the event that a special meeting of shareholders is called pursuant to this Section 4 for the purpose of electing one or more directors, any shareholder
entitled to vote in such election of directors may nominate a person or persons (as the case may be) for election to such position(s) as specified in the Corporation's
notice of meeting, but only if the shareholder has given timely and proper written notice to the Corporate Secretary.
To be timely under this Section 4, the shareholder's written notice must be received by the close of business at the principal executive office of the
Corporation not more than 120 days in advance of the date of such special meeting and not less than ninety days prior to the date of such special meeting or the tenth
day following the date on which public disclosure of the date of the special meeting and of the nominees proposed by the Board to be elected at such meeting is first
made or given to shareholders.  To be proper, the notice shall include the information required by the seventh through eleventh paragraphs of Article I, Section 2 of
these Bylaws, as applied to the special meeting.  In no event shall any adjournment, recess, or postponement of a special meeting of shareholders or the public
disclosure thereof commence a new time period (or extend any time period) for the giving of timely written notice for business to be properly brought before the
special meeting by a shareholder as described in this Section 4.  Nominations of persons for election to the Board may be made at a special meeting of shareholders at
which directors are to be elected pursuant to the Corporation's notice of meeting (a) by or at the direction of the Board or any duly authorized committee thereof, or (b)
provided that the Board or any duly authorized committee thereof has determined that directors shall be elected at such meeting, by any shareholder of the Corporation
who is a shareholder of record at the time the notice provided for in this Section 4 is delivered to the Corporate Secretary, who is entitled to vote at the meeting and
upon such election, and who complies with the notice procedures set forth and referenced in this Section 4.
5. 
  Determination of Proper Business.   Each of the Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board, the lead director, and the presiding officer of
any annual or special meeting of shareholders shall have the power to determine whether business was properly and timely proposed in accordance with the provisions
of this Article I, and if any of them should determine that such business is not in compliance with Article I, the presiding officer of the annual or special meeting of
shareholders shall have the authority to declare at the meeting that any such business was not properly and timely brought before the meeting and shall not be
transacted.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article I, unless otherwise required by law, if the shareholder (or a qualified representative of the
shareholder) does not appear at the annual or special meeting of shareholders to present a nomination or other proposed business (including any proposal included in
the Corporation's proxy materials pursuant to and in compliance with Rule 14a-8 under the Exchange Act), such nomination shall be disregarded or such proposed
business shall not be transacted, as the case may be, notwithstanding that proxies in respect of such vote may have been received by the Corporation.
6. 
  Voting at Meetings .  At any meeting of the shareholders, each holder of record of stock shall be entitled to vote in person or by proxy.  The
authority of proxies must be evidenced by a written document signed by the shareholder and must be delivered to the Corporate Secretary of the Corporation prior to
the commencement of the meeting.
7. 
  Shareholder Action by Written Consent .  Subject to Section 603 of the California Corporations Code, any action which, under any provision
of the California Corporations Code, may be taken at any annual or special meeting of shareholders may be taken without a meeting and without prior notice if a
consent in writing, setting forth the action so taken, shall be signed by the holders of outstanding shares having not less than the minimum number of votes that would
be necessary to authorize or take such action at a meeting at which all shares entitled to vote thereon were present and voted.
Any party seeking to solicit written consent from shareholders to take corporate action must deliver a notice to the Corporate Secretary of the Corporation
which requests the Board of Directors to set a record date for determining shareholders entitled to give such consent.  Such written request must set forth as to each
matter the party proposes for shareholder action by written consents (a) a brief description of the matter and (b) the class and number of shares of the Corporation that
are beneficially owned by the requesting party.  Within ten days of receiving the request in the proper form, the Board shall set a record date for the taking of such
action by written consent in accordance with California Corporations Code Section 701 and Article IV, Section 1 of these Bylaws.  If the Board fails to set a record
date within such ten-day period, the record date for determining shareholders entitled to give the written consent for the matters specified in the notice shall be the day
on which the first written consent is given in accordance with California Corporations Code Section 701(b)(2) .
Each written consent delivered to the Corporation must set forth (a) the action sought to be taken, (b) the name and address of the shareholder as they appear
on the Corporation's books, (c) the class and number of shares of the Corporation that are beneficially owned by the shareholder, (d) the name and address of the
proxyholder authorized by the shareholder to give such written consent, if applicable, and (e) any material interest of the shareholder or proxyholder in the action
sought to be taken.
Consents to corporate action shall be valid for a maximum of sixty days after the date of the earliest dated consent delivered to the Corporation.  Consents
may be revoked by written notice (a) to the Corporation, (b) to the shareholder or shareholders soliciting consents or soliciting revocations in opposition to action by
consent proposed by the Corporation (the "Soliciting Shareholders"), or (c) to a proxy solicitor or other agent designated by the Corporation or the Soliciting
Shareholders.
Within three business days after receipt of the earliest dated consent solicited by the Soliciting Shareholders and delivered to the Corporation in the manner
provided in California Corporations Code Section 603 or the determination by the Board that the Corporation should seek corporate action by written consent, as the
case may be, the Corporate Secretary shall engage nationally recognized independent inspectors of elections for the purpose of performing a ministerial review of the
validity of the consents and revocations.  The cost of retaining inspectors of election shall be borne by the Corporation.

Consents and revocations shall be delivered to the inspectors upon receipt by the Corporation, the Soliciting Shareholders or their proxy solicitors, or other
designated agents.  As soon as consents and revocations are received, the inspectors shall review the consents and revocations and shall maintain a count of the
number of valid and unrevoked consents.  The inspectors shall keep such count confidential and shall not reveal the count to the Corporation, the Soliciting
Shareholder or their representatives, or any other entity.  As soon as practicable after the earlier of (a) sixty days after the date of the earliest dated consent delivered to
the Corporation in the manner provided in California Corporations Code Section 603, or (b) a written request therefor by the Corporation or the Soliciting
Shareholders (whichever is soliciting consents), notice of which request shall be given to the party opposing the solicitation of consents, if any, which request shall
state that the Corporation or Soliciting Shareholders, as the case may be, have a good faith belief that the requisite number of valid and unrevoked consents to
authorize or take the action specified in the consents has been received in accordance with these Bylaws, the inspectors shall issue a preliminary report to the
Corporation and the Soliciting Shareholders stating:  (a) the number of valid consents, (b) the number of valid revocations, (c) the number of valid and unrevoked
consents, (d) the number of invalid consents, (e) the number of invalid revocations, and (f) whether, based on their preliminary count, the requisite number of valid
and unrevoked consents has been obtained to authorize or take the action specified in the consents.
Unless the Corporation and the Soliciting Shareholders shall agree to a shorter or longer period, the Corporation and the Soliciting Shareholders shall have
forty-eight hours to review the consents and revocations and to advise the inspectors and the opposing party in writing as to whether they intend to challenge the
preliminary report of the inspectors.  If no written notice of an intention to challenge the preliminary report is received within forty-eight hours after the inspectors'
issuance of the preliminary report, the inspectors shall issue to the Corporation and the Soliciting Shareholders their final report containing the information from the
inspectors' determination with respect to whether the requisite number of valid and unrevoked consents was obtained to authorize and take the action specified in the
consents.  If the Corporation or the Soliciting Shareholders issue written notice of an intention to challenge the inspectors' preliminary report within forty-eight hours
after the issuance of that report, a challenge session shall be scheduled by the inspectors as promptly as practicable.  A transcript of the challenge session shall be
recorded by a certified court reporter.  Following completion of the challenge session, the inspectors shall as promptly as practicable issue their final report to the
Soliciting Shareholders and the Corporation, which report shall contain the information included in the preliminary report, plus all changes in the vote totals as a result
of the challenge and a certification of whether the requisite number of valid and unrevoked consents was obtained to authorize or take the action specified in the
consents.  A copy of the final report of the inspectors shall be included in the book in which the proceedings of meetings of shareholders are recorded.
Unless the consent of all shareholders entitled to vote have been solicited in writing, the Corporation shall give prompt notice to the shareholders in
accordance with California Corporations Code Section 603 of the results of any consent solicitation or the taking of the corporate action without a meeting and by less
than unanimous written consent.
8. 
  Qualified Representatives .  For purposes of this Article I, to be a "qualified representative" of the shareholder, a person must be a duly
authorized officer, manager, or partner of such shareholder or must be authorized by a writing executed by such shareholder or an electronic transmission delivered by
such shareholder to act for such shareholder as proxy at the applicable annual or special meeting of shareholders and such person must produce such writing or
electronic transmission, or a reliable reproduction of the writing or electronic transmission, along with personal identification demonstrating the representative's
identity, and in a format acceptable to the Corporation, at the applicable annual or special meeting.
Article II. 
DIRECTORS.
1. 
  Number .  As stated in paragraph I of Article Third of this Corporation's Articles of Incorporation, the Board of Directors of this Corporation
shall consist of such number of directors, not less than seven (7) nor more than thirteen (13).  The exact number of directors shall be thirteen (13) until changed, within
the limits specified above, by an amendment to this Bylaw duly adopted by the Board or the shareholders.
2. 
  Powers .  In accordance with California Corporations Code Section 300, the Board of Directors shall exercise all the powers of the Corporation
except those which are conferred upon or reserved to the shareholders by law, the Articles of Incorporation, or these Bylaws .
3. 
  Committees .  The Board of Directors may, by resolution adopted by a majority of the authorized number of directors, designate and appoint one
or more committees as the Board deems appropriate, each consisting of two or more directors, to serve at the pleasure of the Board; provided, however, that, as
required by this Corporation's Articles of Incorporation, the members of the Executive Committee (should the Board designate an Executive Committee) must be
appointed by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the authorized number of directors.  Any such committee, including the Executive Committee, shall have the
authority to act in the manner and to the extent provided in the resolution of the Board designating such committee and may have all the authority of the Board, except
with respect to the matters set forth in California Corporations Code Section 311.
4. 
  Time and Place of Directors' Meetings .  Regular meetings of the Board of Directors shall be held on such days and at such times and at such
locations as shall be fixed by resolution of the Board, or designated by the Chairman of the Board or, in his absence, the Vice Chairman of the Board, the Chief
Executive Officer, or the President of the Corporation and contained in the notice of any such meeting.  Notice of meetings shall be delivered personally or sent by
mail or electronic transmission at least seven days in advance unless otherwise authorized .
5. 
  Special Meetings .  The Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the Board, the Chairman of the Executive Committee, the Chief
Executive Officer, the President, or any five directors may call a special meeting of the Board of Directors at any time.  Notice of the time and place of special
meetings shall be given to each director by the Corporate Secretary.  Such notice shall be delivered personally or by telephone (or other system or technology designed
to record and communicate messages, including facsimile, electronic mail, or other such means) to each director at least forty-eight hours in advance of such meeting,
or sent by first-class mail or electronic transmission, postage prepaid, at least four days in advance of such meeting.
6. 
  Quorum .  A quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the Board of Directors or any committee thereof shall consist of one-third
of the authorized number of directors or committee members, or two, whichever is larger.
7. 
  Action by Consent .  Any action required or permitted to be taken by the Board of Directors may be taken without a meeting if all directors
individually or collectively consent in writing to such action and if the number of members of the Board serving at the time constitutes a quorum.  Such written
consent or consents shall be filed with the minutes of the proceedings of the Board.

8. 
  Meetings by Conference Telephone .  Any meeting, regular or special, of the Board of Directors or of any committee of the Board, may be held
by conference telephone or similar communication equipment, provided that all directors participating in the meeting can hear one another.
9. 
  Majority Voting .  In any uncontested election, nominees receiving the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares represented and voting at a
duly held meeting at which a quorum is present (which shares voting affirmatively also constitute at least a majority of the required quorum) shall be elected.  In any
election that is not an uncontested election, the nominees receiving the highest number of affirmative votes of the shares entitled to be voted for them, up to the
number of directors to be elected by those shares, shall be elected; votes against a director and votes withheld shall have no legal effect.
For purposes of these Bylaws, "uncontested election" means an election of directors of the Corporation in which, at the expiration of the times fixed under
Article I, Section 2 and Article I, Section 3 of these Bylaws requiring advance notification of director nominees, or for special meetings, at the time notice is given of
the meeting at which the election is to occur, the number of nominees for election does not exceed the number of directors to be elected by the shareholders at that
election.
If an incumbent director fails, in an uncontested election, to receive the vote required to be elected in accordance with this Section 9, then, unless the
incumbent director has earlier resigned, the term of such incumbent director shall end on the date that is the earlier of (a) ninety (90) days after the date on which the
voting results are determined pursuant to Section 707 of the California Corporations Code, or (b) the date on which the Board of Directors selects a person to fill the
office held by that director in accordance with the procedures set forth in these Bylaws and Section 305 of the California Corporations Code.
Article III. 
OFFICERS.
1. 
  Officers .  The officers of the Corporation shall be elected by the Board of Directors and include a President, a Corporate Secretary, a Treasurer,
or other such officers as required by law.  The Board also may elect one or more Vice Presidents, Assistant Secretaries, Assistant Treasurers, and other such officers as
may be appropriate, including the offices described below.  Any number of offices may be held by the same person.
2. 
  Chairman (or Chair) of the Board .  The Chairman of the Board shall be a member of the Board of Directors and preside at all meetings of the
shareholders, of the directors, and of the Executive Committee in the absence of the Chairman of that Committee.  The Chairman of the Board shall have such duties
and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board or these Bylaws.  The Chairman of the Board shall have authority to sign on behalf of the Corporation
agreements and instruments of every character, and, in the absence or disability of the Chief Executive Officer, shall exercise the Chief Executive Officer's duties and
responsibilities.
3. 
  Vice Chairman (or Vice Chair) of the Board .  The Vice Chairman of the Board shall be a member of the Board of Directors and have such
duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, or these Bylaws.  In the absence of the Chairman of the Board, the Vice
Chairman of the Board shall preside at all meetings of the Board and of the shareholders; and, in the absence of the Chairman of the Executive Committee and the
Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the Board shall preside at all meetings of the Executive Committee.  The Vice Chairman of the Board shall have
authority to sign on behalf of the Corporation agreements and instruments of every character.
4. 
  Chairman (or Chair) of the Executive Committee .  The Chairman of the Executive Committee shall be a member of the Board of Directors
and preside at all meetings of the Executive Committee.  The Chairman of the Executive Committee shall aid and assist the other officers in the performance of their
duties and shall have such other duties as may be prescribed by the Board or these Bylaws.
5. 
  Chief Executive Officer .  The Chief Executive Officer shall have such duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board of
Directors, the Chairman of the Board, or these Bylaws.  If there be no Chairman of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer shall also exercise the duties and
responsibilities of that office.  The Chief Executive Officer shall have authority to sign on behalf of the Corporation agreements and instruments of every character.  In
the absence or disability of the President, the Chief Executive Officer shall exercise the President's duties and responsibilities.
6. 
  President .  The President shall have such duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board,
the Chief Executive Officer, or these Bylaws.  If there be no Chief Executive Officer, the President shall also exercise the duties and responsibilities of that office. 
The President shall have authority to sign on behalf of the Corporation agreements and instruments of every character.
7. 
  Chief Financial Officer .  The Chief Financial Officer shall be responsible for the overall management of the financial affairs of the
Corporation.  The Chief Financial Officer shall render a statement of the Corporation's financial condition and an account of all transactions whenever requested by
the Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, or the President.
The Chief Financial Officer shall have such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman
of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, or these Bylaws.
8. 
  General Counsel .  The General Counsel shall be responsible for handling on behalf of the Corporation all proceedings and matters of a legal
nature.  The General Counsel shall render advice and legal counsel to the Board of Directors, officers, and employees of the Corporation, as necessary to the proper
conduct of the business.  The General Counsel shall keep the management of the Corporation informed of all significant developments of a legal nature affecting the
interests of the Corporation.
The General Counsel shall have such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the
Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, or these Bylaws.
9. 
  Vice Presidents .  Each Vice President shall have such duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board of Directors, the Chairman
of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, or these Bylaws.  Each Vice President's authority to sign agreements and
instruments on behalf of the Corporation shall be as prescribed by the Board.  The Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the Board, the Chief
Executive Officer, or the President may confer a special title upon any Vice President.

10. 
  Corporate Secretary .  The Corporate Secretary shall attend all meetings of the Board of Directors and the Executive Committee, and all
meetings of the shareholders, and the Corporate Secretary shall record the minutes of all proceedings in books to be kept for that purpose.  The Corporate Secretary
shall be responsible for maintaining a proper share register and stock transfer books for all classes of shares issued by the Corporation.  The Corporate Secretary shall
give, or cause to be given, all notices required either by law or these Bylaws.  The Corporate Secretary shall keep the seal of the Corporation in safe custody, and shall
affix the seal of the Corporation to any instrument requiring it and shall attest the same by the Corporate Secretary's signature.
The Corporate Secretary shall have such other duties as may be prescribed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the Board, the
Chief Executive Officer, the President, or these Bylaws.
The Assistant Corporate Secretaries shall perform such duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice
Chairman of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, or the Corporate Secretary.  In the absence or disability of the Corporate Secretary, the Corporate
Secretary's duties shall be performed by an Assistant Corporate Secretary.
11. 
  Treasurer .  The Treasurer shall have custody of all moneys and funds of the Corporation, and shall cause to be kept full and accurate records
of receipts and disbursements of the Corporation.  The Treasurer shall deposit all moneys and other valuables of the Corporation in the name and to the credit of the
Corporation in such depositaries as may be designated by the Board of Directors or any employee of the Corporation designated by the Board.  The Treasurer shall
disburse such funds of the Corporation as have been duly approved for disbursement.
The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the
Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, the Chief Financial Officer, or these Bylaws.
The Assistant Treasurers shall perform such duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the
Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, the Chief Financial Officer, or the Treasurer.  In the absence or disability of the Treasurer, the Treasurer's duties
shall be performed by an Assistant Treasurer.
12. 
  Controller .  The Controller shall be responsible for maintaining the accounting records of the Corporation and for preparing necessary
financial reports and statements, and the Controller shall properly account for all moneys and obligations due the Corporation and all properties, assets, and liabilities
of the Corporation.  The Controller shall render to the officers such periodic reports covering the result of operations of the Corporation as may be required by them or
any one of them.
The Controller shall have such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman
of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, the Chief Financial Officer, or these Bylaws.  The Controller shall be the principal accounting officer of the
Corporation, unless another individual shall be so designated by the Board.
Article IV. 
MISCELLANEOUS.
1. 
  Record Date .  The Board of Directors may fix a time in the future as a record date for the determination of the shareholders entitled to notice of
and to vote at any meeting of shareholders, or entitled to receive any dividend or distribution, or allotment of rights, or to exercise rights in respect to any change,
conversion, or exchange of shares.  The record date so fixed shall be not more than sixty nor less than ten days prior to the date of such meeting nor more than sixty
days prior to any other action for the purposes for which it is so fixed.  When a record date is so fixed, only shareholders of record on that date are entitled to notice of
and to vote at the meeting, or entitled to receive any dividend or distribution, or allotment of rights, or to exercise the rights, as the case may be.
2. 
  Certificates; Direct Registration System .  Shares of the Corporation's capital stock may be certificated or uncertificated, as provided under
California law.  Any certificates that are issued shall be signed in the name of the Corporation by the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman of the Board, the
President, or a Vice President and by the Chief Financial Officer, an Assistant Treasurer, the Corporate Secretary, or an Assistant Secretary, certifying the number of
shares and the class or series of shares owned by the shareholder.  Any or all of the signatures on the certificate may be a facsimile.  In case any officer, Transfer
Agent, or Registrar who has signed or whose facsimile signature has been placed upon a certificate shall have ceased to be such officer, Transfer Agent, or Registrar
before such certificate is issued, it may be issued by the Corporation with the same effect as if such person were an officer, Transfer Agent, or Registrar at the date of
issue.  Shares of the Corporation's capital stock may also be evidenced by registration in the holder's name in uncertificated, book-entry form on the books of the
Corporation in accordance with a direct registration system approved by the SEC and authorized by statute or by any securities exchange on which the stock of the
Corporation may from time to time be traded.
Transfers of shares of stock of the Corporation shall be made by the Transfer Agent and Registrar on the books of the Corporation after receipt of a request
with proper evidence of succession, assignment, or authority to transfer by the record holder of such stock, or by an attorney lawfully constituted in writing, and in the
case of stock represented by a certificate, upon surrender of the certificate.  Subject to the foregoing, the Board of Directors shall have power and authority to make
such rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary or appropriate concerning the issue, transfer, and registration of shares of stock of the Corporation, and to appoint
and remove Transfer Agents and Registrars of transfers.
3. 
  Lost Certificates .  Any person claiming a certificate of stock to be lost, stolen, mislaid, or destroyed shall make an affidavit or affirmation of
that fact and verify the same in such manner as the Board of Directors may require, and shall, if the Board so requires, give the Corporation, its Transfer Agents,
Registrars, and/or other agents a bond of indemnity in form approved by counsel, and in amount and with such sureties as may be satisfactory to the Corporate
Secretary of the Corporation, before a new certificate (or uncertificated shares in lieu of a new certificate) may be issued of the same tenor and for the same number of
shares as the one alleged to have been lost, stolen, mislaid, or destroyed.
Article V. 
AMENDMENTS.

1. 
  Amendment by Shareholders .  Except as otherwise provided by law, these Bylaws, or any of them, may be amended or repealed or new
Bylaws adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the outstanding shares entitled to vote at any regular or special meeting of the shareholders.
2. 
  Amendment by Directors .  To the extent provided by law, these Bylaws, or any of them, may be amended or repealed or new Bylaws adopted
by resolution adopted by a majority of the members of the Board of Directors; provided, however, that amendments to Article II, Section 9 of these Bylaws, and any
other Bylaw provision that implements a majority voting standard for director elections (excepting any amendments intended to conform those Bylaw provisions to
changes in applicable laws) shall be amended by the shareholders of the Corporation as provided in Section 1 of this Article V.

EXHIBIT 3.5
Bylaws
of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
amended as of December 16, 2016
Article I.
SHAREHOLDERS.
1. 
 
 Place of Meeting.   All meetings of the shareholders shall be held at the office of the Company in the City and County of San Francisco, State of
California, or at such other place, within or without the State of California, as may be designated by the Board of Directors.
A meeting of the shareholders may be conducted, in whole or in part, by electronic transmission by and to the Company or by electronic video screen
communication if: (a) the Company implements reasonable measures to provide shareholders (in person or by proxy) a reasonable opportunity to participate in the
meeting and to vote on matters submitted to the shareholders, and (b) the Company maintains a record of the vote or action and any shareholder votes or other
shareholder actions taken at the meeting by means of electronic transmission to the Company or electronic video screen communication.
Any request by the Company to a shareholder under Section 20(b) of the California Corporations Code for consent to conduct a meeting of shareholders by
electronic transmission must include a notice that, absent consent of the shareholder, the meeting will be held at a physical location.
2. 
 
 Annual Meetings.   The annual meeting of shareholders shall be held each year on a date and at a time designated by the Board of Directors.
Written notice of the annual meeting shall be given not less than ten (or, if sent by third‑class mail, thirty) nor more than sixty days prior to the date of the
meeting to each shareholder entitled to vote thereat.  The notice shall state the place (if any), date, and hour of such meeting, the means of electronic transmission by
and to the Company or electronic video screen communication (if any) by which shareholders may participate in that meeting, and those matters which the Board, at
the time of mailing, intends to present for action by the shareholders.
Notice of any meeting of the shareholders shall be given by mail, electronic transmission, or other written communication to each holder of record of the stock
entitled to vote thereat, at his address, as it appears on the books of the Company.
For purposes of this Section 2 only, "electronic transmission" from the Company means a communication (a) delivered by (i) facsimile telecommunication or
electronic mail when directed to the facsimile number or electronic mail address, respectively, for that shareholder on record with the Company, (ii) posting on an
electronic message board or network which the Company has designated for those communications, together with a separate notice to the recipient of the posting,
which transmission shall be validly delivered upon the later of the posting or delivery of the separate notice thereof, or (iii) other means of electronic communication,
(b) to a shareholder who has provided an unrevoked consent to the use of those means of transmission for such communications, and (c) that creates a record that is
capable of retention, retrieval, and review, and that may thereafter be rendered into clearly legible tangible form.  In addition, the consent to an electronic transmission
by the Company to an individual shareholder shall be preceded by or include a clear written statement to the shareholder as to: (a) any right of the recipient to have the
record provided or made available on paper or in non-electronic form, (b) whether the consent applies only to that transmission, to specified categories of
communications, or to all communications from the Company, and (c) the procedures the recipient must use to withdraw consent.
At an annual meeting of shareholders, only such business shall be conducted as shall have been properly brought before the annual meeting.  To be properly
brought before an annual meeting, business must be (a) specified in the notice of the annual meeting (or any supplement thereto) given by or at the direction of the
Board, or (b) otherwise properly brought before the annual meeting by a shareholder.  Notwithstanding anything in these Bylaws to the contrary, no business shall be
conducted at an annual meeting except in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section 2.
For business to be properly brought before an annual meeting by a shareholder, including the nomination of any person (other than a person nominated by or
at the direction of the Board) for election to the Board, the shareholder must have given timely and proper written notice to the Corporate Secretary of the Company
pursuant to this Section 2.
To be timely, the shareholder's written notice must be received at the principal executive office of the Company not more than 120 days and not less than
ninety days before the anniversary date of the prior year's annual meeting of shareholders; provided, however, that if the annual meeting to which the shareholder's
written notice relates is to be held on a date that differs by more than thirty days from the date of the last annual meeting of shareholders, the shareholder's written
notice to be timely must be so received not later than the close of business on the tenth day following the date on which public disclosure of the date of the annual
meeting is made or given to shareholders.  Any shareholder's written notice that is delivered after the close of business (5:00 p.m. local time) will be considered
received on the following business day.  As used in these Bylaws, "public disclosure" shall include disclosure in a press release or in a document publicly filed by the
Company with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) pursuant to Section 13, 14, or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (and its
successors) (the "Exchange Act") and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
To be proper, the shareholder's written notice must set forth as to each matter the shareholder proposes to bring before the annual meeting (a) a brief
description of the business desired to be brought before the annual meeting and the reasons for conducting such business at the annual meeting, (b) the text of the
proposal or business to be brought before the annual meeting (including the text of any resolutions proposed for consideration, and in the event that such business
includes a proposal to amend these Bylaws, the language of the proposed amendment), (c) the name and address of the shareholder as they appear on the Company's
books, and the name and address of any of its Associated Persons (defined below), (d) the class and number of shares of the Company that are beneficially owned or
held of record by the shareholder or any of its Associated Persons, and a description of all Disclosable Interests (defined below) (i) held by the shareholder or any of
its Associated Persons or (ii) to which any of them is a party, (e) a description of all agreements, arrangements, or understandings between or among (i) such
shareholder, (ii) any Associated Person, and/or (iii) any other person or persons (naming such person or persons), in each case relating to the business to be brought
before the annual meeting or pursuant to which such business is to be proposed by such shareholder, (f) any material interest of the shareholder or Associated Parties

in such business, and (g) other such information concerning the shareholder, any of its Associated Persons, and such item of business as would be required under the
rules of the SEC in a proxy statement soliciting proxies in support of the item of business proposed to be brought before the annual meeting; provided, however, that
the disclosures required by this Section 2 shall not include any disclosures with respect to any broker, dealer, commercial bank, trust company, or similar nominee
solely as a result of such entity being the shareholder directed to prepare and submit the notice required by these Bylaws on behalf of a beneficial owner or beneficial
owners.
In addition, if the shareholder's written notice relates to the nomination at the annual meeting of any person for election to the Board, such notice to be proper
must also set forth (a) the name, age, business address, and residence address of each person to be so nominated, (b) the principal occupation or employment of each
such person, (c) the number of shares of capital stock of the Company beneficially owned by each such person and any and all Disclosable Interests held by each such
person to which each such person is a party ,   (d) a description of all agreements, arrangements, or understandings (including compensation) between or among (i)
such shareholder, (ii) each nominee, (iii) any Associated Person, and/or (iv) any other person or persons (naming such person or persons), in each case relating to the
nomination or pursuant to which the nomination or nominations are to be made by such shareholder and/or relating to the candidacy or service of the nominee as a
director of the Company, (e) a representation that the shareholder is a holder of record of stock of the Company entitled to vote at such meeting and intends to appear
in person or by proxy at the meeting to propose such nomination, (f) a representation as to whether the shareholder or the beneficial owner, if any, intends or is part of
a group that intends (i) to deliver a proxy statement and/or form of proxy to holders of at least the percentage of the Company's outstanding capital stock required to
elect the nominee, or (ii) otherwise to solicit proxies from shareholders in support of such nomination, (g) such other information concerning each such person as
would be required under the rules of the SEC in a proxy statement soliciting proxies for the election of such person as a director, and accompanied by a consent,
signed by each such person, to serve as a director of the Company if elected, and (h) if any such nominee, the shareholder nominating the nominee, or any such
Associated Person expresses an intention or recommendation that the Company enter into a strategic transaction, any material interest in such transaction of each such
proposed nominee, shareholder, or Associated Person, including without limitation, any equity interests or any Disclosable Interests held by each such nominee,
shareholder, or Associated Person in any other person, the value of which interests could reasonably be expected to be materially affected by such transaction.  In
addition, such notice must contain a written and signed representation and agreement of each such nominee, pursuant to which such nominee represents and agrees
that he or she (a) is not and will not become a party to any agreement, arrangement or understanding with, and has not given any commitment or assurance to, any
person or entity as to how such nominee, if elected as a director, will act or vote on any issue or question or that could reasonably be expected to limit or interfere with
such nominee's ability to comply with his or her fiduciary duties under applicable law that has not been disclosed to the Company, (b) is not and will not become a
party to any agreement, arrangement, or understanding with any person or entity other than the Company with respect to any direct or indirect compensation,
reimbursement, or indemnification in connection with service or action as a director that has not been disclosed to the Company, and (c) if elected as a director, will
comply with all of the Company's then existing corporate governance, conflict of interest, confidentiality, and stock ownership and trading policies, codes, and
guidelines and any other Company policies, codes, and guidelines applicable to directors.  To be proper notice, the shareholder's notice also must include a written
questionnaire completed by the proposed nominee with respect to the background and qualifications of such proposed nominee (which form of questionnaire shall be
provided by the Corporate Secretary upon request).
The Company may require any proposed nominee to furnish such other information as it may reasonably require to determine (a) the eligibility of such
proposed nominee to serve as a director of the Company, and (b) whether such nominee qualifies as an "independent director" or "audit committee financial expert"
under applicable law, securities exchange rule or regulation, or any publicly disclosed corporate governance guideline or committee charter of the Company.
In addition, for a shareholder's written notice to the Corporate Secretary to be proper and timely, a shareholder providing notice of any business (including
the nomination of any person for election to the Board) proposed to be made at any annual meeting shall further update and supplement such notice, if necessary, so
that the information provided or required to be provided in such notice pursuant to this Section 2 shall be true and correct as of the record date for the meeting and as
of the date that is ten business days prior to the meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof.  Such update and supplement (or, if applicable, written
confirmation that the information provided in such notice is still true and correct as of the applicable date) shall be delivered to, or mailed to and received by, the
Corporate Secretary at the principal executive office of the Company no later than five business days after the record date for the meeting or, if practicable, any
adjournment or postponement thereof and, if not practicable, on the first practicable date prior to the date to which the meeting has been adjourned or postponed (in
the case of the update and supplement required to be made as of ten business days prior to the meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof).  A shareholder,
in his or her initial written notice of any business to the Corporate Secretary, shall confirm his or her intention to update and supplement such notice as required
herein.
Nothing in these Bylaws shall be deemed to affect any rights of a shareholder to request inclusion of proposals in the Company's proxy statement pursuant to
Rule 14-8 under the Exchange Act.  Notwithstanding anything in these Bylaws to the contrary, except for proposals properly and timely made in accordance with Rule
14a-8 under the Exchange Act and included in the notice of annual meeting given by or at the direction of the Board, no business shall be conducted at any annual
meeting except in accordance with the procedures set forth in this   Section 2.
As used in this Section 2, "Associated Person" shall mean (a) the beneficial owner or beneficial owners on whose behalf the written notice of business
proposed to be brought before the annual meeting is made, if different from the shareholder proposing such business, and (b) each "affiliate" or "associate" (each
within the meaning of Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act for purposes of these Bylaws) of each such shareholder or beneficial owner.
As used in this Section 2, "Disclosable Interest" shall mean any agreement, arrangement, or understanding (including but not limited to any derivatives,
swaps, long or short positions, options, warrants, convertible securities, stock appreciation or similar rights, hedging transactions, and borrowed or loaned shares that
are held or have been entered into, directly or indirectly, by or on behalf of such shareholder, the nominee proposed by such shareholder, as applicable, or any such
Associated Person), the effect or intent of which is to mitigate loss to, manage the risk or benefit of share price changes for, provide the opportunity to profit from
share price changes to, or maintain, increase, or decrease the voting power of, such shareholder, proposed nominee, as applicable, or any such Associated Person, with
respect to shares of stock of the Company; provided, however, that Disclosable Interests shall not include any such disclosures with respect to any broker, dealer,
commercial bank, trust company, or similar nominee solely as a result of such entity being the shareholder directed to prepare and submit the notice required by these
Bylaws on behalf of a beneficial owner or beneficial owners.
3. 
  Special Meetings.   Special meetings of the shareholders shall be called by the Corporate Secretary or an Assistant Corporate Secretary at any
time on order of the Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman, the Chairman of the Executive Committee, the Chief Executive Officer, or the
President.  Special meetings of the shareholders shall also be called by the Corporate Secretary or an Assistant Corporate Secretary upon the written request of holders
of shares entitled to cast not less than ten percent of the votes at the meeting.  Such request shall state the purposes of the meeting, and shall be delivered to the
Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman, the Chairman of the Executive Committee, the Chief Executive Officer, the President or the Corporate Secretary.

A special meeting so requested shall be held on the date requested, but not less than thirty-five nor more than sixty days after the date of the original request. 
Written notice of each special meeting of shareholders, stating the place, day, and hour of such meeting and the business proposed to be transacted thereat, shall be
given in the manner stipulated in Article I, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of these Bylaws within twenty days after receipt of the written request.
4. 
  Determination of Proper Business.  Each of the Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board, the lead director, and the presiding officer of
any annual or special meeting of shareholders shall have the power to determine whether business was properly and timely proposed in accordance with the provisions
of this Article I, and if any of them should determine that such business is not in compliance with Article I, the presiding officer of the annual or special meeting of
shareholders shall have the authority to declare at the meeting that any such business was not properly and timely brought before the meeting and shall not be
transacted.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Article I, unless otherwise required by law, if the shareholder (or a qualified representative of the
shareholder) does not appear at the annual or special meeting of shareholders to present a nomination or other proposed business (including any proposal included in
the Company's proxy materials pursuant to and in compliance with Rule 14a-8 under the Exchange Act), such nomination shall be disregarded or such proposed
business shall not be transacted, as the case may be, notwithstanding that proxies in respect of such vote may have been received by the Company.
5. 
 
 Voting at Meetings.  At any meeting of the shareholders, each holder of record of stock shall be entitled to vote in person or by proxy.  The authority
of proxies must be evidenced by a written document signed by the shareholder and must be delivered to the Corporate Secretary of the Company prior to the
commencement of the meeting.
6 . 
 
 No Cumulative Voting.   No shareholder of the Company shall be entitled to cumulate his or her voting power.
7. 
  Qualified Representatives.   For purposes of this Article I, to be a "qualified representative" of the shareholder, a person must be a duly authorized
officer, manager, or partner of such shareholder or must be authorized by a writing executed by such shareholder or an electronic transmission delivered by such
shareholder to act for such shareholder as proxy at the applicable annual or special meeting of shareholders and such person must produce such writing or electronic
transmission, or a reliable reproduction of the writing or electronic transmission, along with personal identification demonstrating the representative's identity, and in a
format acceptable to the Company, at the applicable annual or special meeting.
Article II.
DIRECTORS.
1. 
 
 Number.   The Board of Directors of this Company shall consist of such number of directors, not less than nine (9) nor more than seventeen (17). 
The exact number of directors shall be fifteen (15) until changed, within the limits specified above, by an amendment to this Bylaw duly adopted by the Board or the
shareholders.
2. 
 
 Powers.   In accordance with California Corporations Code Section 300, the Board of Directors shall exercise all the powers of the Company except
those which are conferred upon or reserved to the shareholders by law, the Articles of Incorporation, or these Bylaws.
3. 
 
 Committees.   The Board of Directors may, by resolution adopted by a majority of the authorized number of directors, designate and appoint one or
more committees as the Board deems appropriate, each consisting of two or more directors, to serve at the pleasure of the Board; provided, however, that, as required
by this Company's Articles of Incorporation, the members of the Executive Committee (should the Board designate an Executive Committee) must be appointed by
the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the authorized number of directors.  Any such committee, including the Executive Committee, shall have the authority to act in
the manner and to the extent provided in the resolution of the Board designating such committee and may have all the authority of the Board, except with respect to
the matters set forth in California Corporations Code Section 311.
4. 
 
 Time and Place of Directors' Meetings.   Regular meetings of the Board of Directors shall be held on such days and at such times and at such
locations as shall be fixed by resolution of the Board, or designated by the Chairman of the Board or, in his absence, the Vice Chairman, the Chief Executive Officer,
or the President of the Company and contained in the notice of any such meeting.  Notice of meetings shall be delivered personally or sent by mail or electronic
transmission at least seven days in advance unless otherwise authorized.
5. 
 
 Special Meetings.   The Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman, the Chairman of the Executive Committee, the Chief Executive Officer, the
President, or any five directors may call a special meeting of the Board of Directors at any time.  Notice of the time and place of special meetings shall be given to
each director by the Corporate Secretary.  Such notice shall be delivered personally or by telephone (or other system or technology designed to record and
communicate messages, including facsimile, electronic mail, or other such means) to each director at least forty-eight hours in advance of such meeting, or sent by
first-class mail or electronic transmission, postage prepaid, at least four days in advance of such meeting.
6. 
 
 Quorum.   A quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the Board of Directors or any committee thereof shall consist of one-third of
the authorized number of directors or committee members, or two, whichever is larger.
7. 
 
 Action by Consent.   Any action required or permitted to be taken by the Board of Directors may be taken without a meeting if all directors
individually or collectively consent in writing to such action and if the number of members of the Board serving at the time constitutes a quorum.  Such written
consent or consents shall be filed with the minutes of the proceedings of the Board.
8. 
 
 Meetings by Conference Telephone.   Any meeting, regular or special, of the Board of Directors or of any committee of the Board, may be held by
conference telephone or similar communication equipment, provided that all directors participating in the meeting can hear one another.
9. 
 
 Majority Voting.   In any uncontested election, nominees receiving the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares represented and voting at a duly
held meeting at which a quorum is present (which shares voting affirmatively also constitute at least a majority of the required quorum) shall be elected.  In any
election that is not an uncontested election, the nominees receiving the highest number of affirmative votes of the shares entitled to be voted for them, up to the
number of directors to be elected by those shares, shall be elected; votes against a director and votes withheld shall have no legal effect.
For purposes of these Bylaws, "uncontested election" means an election of directors of the Company in which, at the expiration of the times fixed under
Article I, Section 2 of these Bylaws requiring advance notification of director nominees, or for special meetings, at the time notice is given of the meeting at which the

election is to occur, the number of nominees for election does not exceed the number of directors to be elected by the shareholders at that election.
If an incumbent director fails, in an uncontested election, to receive the vote required to be elected in accordance with this Section 9, then, unless the
incumbent director has earlier resigned, the term of such incumbent director shall end on the date that is the earlier of (a) ninety (90) days after the date on which the
voting results are determined pursuant to Section 707 of the California Corporations Code, or (b) the date on which the Board of Directors selects a person to fill the
office held by that director in accordance with the procedures set forth in these Bylaws and Section 305 of the California Corporations Code.
10. 
 
 Certain Powers Reserved to the Shareholders.   So long as PG&E Corporation shall hold the majority of the outstanding shares of the Company,
PG&E Corporation may require the written consent of the PG&E Corporation Chairman of the Board or the PG&E Corporation Chief Executive Officer to enter into
and execute any transaction or type of transaction identified by the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation as a "Designated Transaction."  For purposes of this
Section 10, a Designated Transaction shall be any transaction or type of transaction identified in a duly adopted resolution of the Board of PG&E Corporation as
requiring the written consent of the PG&E Corporation Chairman of the Board or the PG&E Corporation Chief Executive Officer pursuant to this Section 10. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this Section 10 shall limit the power of the Company to enter into or execute any transaction or type of transaction prior to
the receipt by the Corporate Secretary of the Company of the resolution designating such transaction or type of transaction as a Designated Transaction pursuant to
this Section 10.
Article III.
OFFICERS.
1. 
 
 Officers.   The officers of the Company shall be elected by the Board of Directors and include a President, a Corporate Secretary, a Treasurer , or
other such officers as required by law.  The Board also may elect one or more Vice Presidents, Assistant Secretaries, Assistant Treasurers, and such other officers as
may be appropriate, including the offices described below.  Any number of offices may be held by the same person.
2. 
 
 Chairman (or Chair) of the Board.   The Chairman of the Board shall be a member of the Board of Directors and preside at all meetings of the
shareholders, of the directors, and of the Executive Committee in the absence of the Chairman of that Committee.  The Chairman of the Board shall have such duties
and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board or these Bylaws.  The Chairman of the Board shall have authority to sign on behalf of the Company agreements
and instruments of every character, and in the absence or disability of the Chief Executive Officer, shall exercise the Chief Executive Officer's duties and
responsibilities.
3. 
 
 Vice Chairman (or Vice Chair) .   The Vice Chairman may be, but is not required to be, a member of the Board of Directors and shall have such
duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, or these Bylaws.  If the Vice Chairman is a member of the Board, then (a) in
the absence of the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board and of the shareholders; and (b) in the absence of the
Chairman of the Executive Committee and the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Executive Committee.  The Vice
Chairman shall have authority to sign on behalf of the Company agreements and instruments of every character.
4. 
 
 Chairman (or Chair) of the Executive Committee.   The Chairman of the Executive Committee shall be a member of the Board of Directors and
preside at all meetings of the Executive Committee.  The Chairman of the Executive Committee shall aid and assist the other officers in the performance of their
duties and shall have such other duties as may be prescribed by the Board or these Bylaws.
5. 
 
 Chief Executive Officer.   The Chief Executive Officer shall have such duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board of Directors,
the Chairman of the Board, or these Bylaws.  If there be no Chairman of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer shall also exercise the duties, responsibilities,
authority, and powers of that office, including the authority to further delegate such duties, responsibilities, authority, and powers (subject to any specific delegation
limitations established by the Board).  The Chief Executive Officer shall have authority to sign on behalf of the Company agreements and instruments of every
character.  In the absence or disability of the President, the Chief Executive Officer shall exercise the President's duties and responsibilities.
6. 
 
 President.   The President shall have such duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board, the
Chief Executive Officer, or these Bylaws.  If there be no Chief Executive Officer, the President shall also exercise the duties, responsibilities, authority, and powers of
that office, including the authority to further delegate such duties, responsibilities, authority, and powers (subject to any specific delegation limitations established by
the Board).  The President shall have authority to sign on behalf of the Company agreements and instruments of every character.
If the Board elects more than one individual to simultaneously serve with the title of President, then all authority granted to the office of the President by these
Bylaws (including the exercise of the duties, responsibilities, authority, and power of the Chief Executive Officer in the absence of such an officer) must be exercised
and approved jointly by all individuals with the title of President, except if specified otherwise by the Board.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if more than one
individual simultaneously holds the title of President, then in the absence or disability of any individual President, the remaining President or Presidents may jointly
exercise the powers granted by these Bylaws to the office of the President.  All other authority granted to the office of President by the Board (by resolution or
otherwise, but not including authority granted pursuant to these Bylaws) may be exercised separately by each individual elected to the title of President, unless
otherwise noted or otherwise required by law, regulation, or binding obligation of the Company.
7. 
 
 Vice Presidents.   Each Vice President shall have such duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by the Board of Directors, the Chairman of
the Board, the Vice Chairman, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, or these Bylaws.  Each Vice President's authority to sign agreements and instruments on
behalf of the Company shall be as prescribed by the Board.  The Board of this Company, the Chairman of the Board of this Company, the Vice Chairman of this
Company, or the Chief Executive Officer of PG&E Corporation may confer a special title upon any Vice President.
8. 
 
 Corporate Secretary.   The Corporate Secretary shall attend all meetings of the Board of Directors and the Executive Committee, and all meetings
of the shareholders, and the Corporate Secretary shall record the minutes of all proceedings in books to be kept for that purpose.  The Corporate Secretary shall be
responsible for maintaining a proper share register and stock transfer books for all classes of shares issued by the Company.  The Corporate Secretary shall give, or
cause to be given, all notices required either by law or these Bylaws.  The Corporate Secretary shall keep the seal of the Company in safe custody, and shall affix the
seal of the Company to any instrument requiring it and shall attest the same by the Corporate Secretary's signature.
The Corporate Secretary shall have such other duties as may be prescribed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman, the Chief Executive

Officer, the President, or these Bylaws.
The Assistant Corporate Secretaries shall perform such duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice
Chairman, the Chief Executive Officer, the President, or the Corporate Secretary.  In the absence or disability of the Corporate Secretary, the Corporate Secretary's
duties shall be performed by an Assistant Corporate Secretary.
9. 
 
 Treasurer.   The Treasurer shall have custody of all moneys and funds of the Company, and shall cause to be kept full and accurate records of receipts
and disbursements of the Company.  The Treasurer shall deposit all moneys and other valuables of the Company in the name and to the credit of the Company in such
depositaries as may be designated by the Board of Directors or any employee of the Company designated by the Board.  The Treasurer shall disburse such funds of the
Company as have been duly approved for disbursement.
The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman, the Chief
Executive Officer, the President, or these Bylaws.
The Assistant Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman, the
Chief Executive Officer, the President, or the Treasurer.  In the absence or disability of the Treasurer, the Treasurer's duties shall be performed by an Assistant
Treasurer.
10. 
  General Counsel.   The General Counsel shall be responsible for handling on behalf of the Company all proceedings and matters of a legal
nature.  The General Counsel shall render advice and legal counsel to the Board of Directors, officers, and employees of the Company, as necessary to the proper
conduct of the business.  The General Counsel shall keep the management of the Company informed of all significant developments of a legal nature affecting the
interests of the Company.
The General Counsel shall have such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the Board, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman, the
Chief Executive Officer, the President, or these Bylaws.
11. 
 
 Controller.   The Controller shall be responsible for maintaining the accounting records of the Company and for preparing necessary financial
reports and statements, and the Controller shall properly account for all moneys and obligations due the Company and all properties, assets, and liabilities of the
Company.  The Controller shall render to the officers such periodic reports covering the result of operations of the Company as may be required by them or any one of
them.
The Controller shall have such other duties as may from time to time be prescribed by the Board of Directors, the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman,
the Chief Executive Officer, the President, or these Bylaws.  The Controller shall be the principal accounting officer of the Company, unless another individual shall
be so designated by the Board.
Article IV.
MISCELLANEOUS.
1. 
 
 Record Date.   The Board of Directors may fix a time in the future as a record date for the determination of the shareholders entitled to notice of and
to vote at any meeting of shareholders, or entitled to receive any dividend or distribution, or allotment of rights, or to exercise rights in respect to any change,
conversion, or exchange of shares.  The record date so fixed shall be not more than sixty nor less than ten days prior to the date of such meeting nor more than sixty
days prior to any other action for the purposes for which it is so fixed.  When a record date is so fixed, only shareholders of record on that date are entitled to notice of
and to vote at the meeting, or entitled to receive any dividend or distribution, or allotment of rights, or to exercise the rights, as the case may be.
2. 
  Certificates; Direct Registration System.   Shares of the Company's stock may be certificated or uncertificated, as provided under California
law.  Any certificates that are issued shall be signed in the name of the Company by the Chairman of the Board, the Vice Chairman, the President, or a Vice President
and by the Chief Financial Officer, an Assistant Treasurer, the Corporate Secretary, or an Assistant Secretary, certifying the number of shares and the class or series of
shares owned by the shareholder.  Any or all of the signatures on the certificate may be a facsimile.  In case any officer, Transfer Agent, or Registrar who has signed
or whose facsimile signature has been placed upon a certificate shall have ceased to be such officer, Transfer Agent, or Registrar before such certificate is issued, it
may be issued by the Company with the same effect as if such person were an officer, Transfer Agent, or Registrar at the date of issue.  Shares of the Company's
capital stock may also be evidenced by registration in the holder's name in uncertificated, book-entry form on the books of the Company in accordance with a direct
registration system approved by the SEC and authorized by statute or by any securities exchange on which the stock of the Company may from time to time be traded.
Transfers of shares of stock of the Company shall be made by the Transfer Agent and Registrar on the books of the Company only after receipt of a request
with proper evidence of succession, assignment, or authority to transfer by the record holder of such stock, or by an attorney lawfully constituted in writing, and in the
case of stock represented by a certificate, upon surrender of the certificate.  Subject to the foregoing, the Board of Directors shall have power and authority to make
such rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary or appropriate concerning the issue, transfer, and registration of certificates for shares of stock of the Company,
and to appoint and remove Transfer Agents and Registrars of transfers.
3. 
 
 Lost Certificates.   Any person claiming a certificate of stock to be lost, stolen, mislaid, or destroyed shall make an affidavit or affirmation of that
fact and verify the same in such manner as the Board of Directors may require, and shall, if the Board so requires, give the Company, its Transfer Agents, Registrars,
and/or other agents a bond of indemnity in form approved by counsel, and in amount and with such sureties as may be satisfactory to the Corporate Secretary of the
Company, before a new certificate (or uncertificated shares in lieu of a new certificate) may be issued of the same tenor and for the same number of shares as the one
alleged to have been lost, stolen, mislaid, or destroyed.
Article V.
AMENDMENTS.
1. 
 
 Amendment by Shareholders.   Except as otherwise provided by law, these Bylaws, or any of them, may be amended or repealed or new Bylaws
adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the outstanding shares entitled to vote at any regular or special meeting of the shareholders.

2. 
 
 Amendment by Directors.   To the extent provided by law, these Bylaws, or any of them, may be amended or repealed or new Bylaws adopted by
resolution adopted by a majority of the members of the Board of Directors; provided, however, that amendments to Article II, Sections 9 and 10 of these Bylaws, and
any other Bylaw provision that implements a majority voting standard for director elections (excepting any amendments intended to conform those Bylaw provisions
to changes in applicable laws) shall be amended by the shareholders of the Company as provided in Section 1 of this Article V.

EXHIBIT 10.7
PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AWARD
PG&E CORPORATION , a California corporation, hereby grants Restricted Stock Units to the Recipient named below.  The Restricted Stock
Units have been granted under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the "LTIP").  The terms and conditions of the Restricted Stock
Units are set forth in this cover sheet and in the attached Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (the "Agreement").
Date of Grant:  
 March 1, 2016
Name of Recipient:  
 ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.
Recipient's Participant ID:  
 XXXXXXXX
Number of Restricted Stock Units:  
 53,372
By accepting this award, you agree to all of the terms and conditions described in the attached Agreement. You and PG&E
Corporation agree to execute such further instruments and to take such further action as may reasonably be necessary to carry
out the intent of the attached Agreement.  You are also acknowledging receipt of this award, the attached Agreement, and a copy
of  the  prospectus  describing  the  LTIP  and  the  Restricted  Stock  Units  dated  March  1,  2016,  and  any  supplements  to  that
prospectus.
If, for any reason, you wish to not accept this award, please notify PG&E Corporation in writing within 30 calendar days of the
date of this award at ATTN: LTIP Administrator, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco,
94105.
Attachment

PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AGREEMENT
The LTIP and Other Agreements This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding between you and PG&E Corporation regarding the Restricted Stock Units,
subject  to  the  terms  of the  LTIP.  Any prior  agreements,  commitments,  or negotiations  are  superseded.   In  the  event  of any
conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement and the LTIP, the LTIP will govern.  Capitalized terms that
are not defined in this Agreement are defined in the LTIP.  In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Agreement
and  the  PG&E  Corporation  2012  Officer  Severance  Policy,  this  Agreement  will  govern.  For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,
employment with PG&E Corporation means employment with any member of the Participating Company Group.
 
Grant of Restricted Stock Units
PG&E Corporation grants you the number of Restricted Stock Units shown on the cover sheet of this Agreement.  The Restricted
Stock Units are subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the LTIP.
 
Vesting of Restricted Stock Units As long as you remain employed with PG&E Corporation, the total number of Restricted Stock Units originally subject to this
Agreement,  as  shown  on  the  cover  sheet,  will  vest  in  accordance  with  the  below  vesting  schedule  (the  "Normal  Vesting
Schedule").
 
       March 1, 2017 – one-third of the Restricted Stock Units
       March 1, 2018 – one-third of the Restricted Stock Units
       March 1, 2019 – one third of the Restricted Stock Units
 
The  amounts  payable  upon  each  vesting  date  are  hereby  designated  separate  payments  for  purposes  of  Code  Section  409A. 
Except as described below, all Restricted Stock Units subject to this Agreement which have not vested upon termination of your
employment will then be cancelled. As set forth below, the Restricted Stock Units may vest earlier upon the occurrence of certain
events.
 
Dividends
Restricted Stock Units will accrue Dividend Equivalents in the event cash dividends are paid with respect to PG&E Corporation
common stock having a record date prior to the date on which the Restricted Stock Units are settled.  Such Dividend Equivalents
will be converted into cash and paid, if at all, upon settlement of the underlying Restricted Stock Units.
 
Settlement
Vested Restricted Stock Units will be settled in an equal number of shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, subject to the
satisfaction  of Withholding  Taxes,  as described  below.   PG&E Corporation  will  issue  shares  as  soon as  practicable  after  the
Restricted  Stock  Units  vest  in  accordance  with  the  Normal  Vesting  Schedule  (but  not  later  than  sixty  (60)  days  after  the
applicable vesting date); provided, however, that such issuance will, if earlier, be made with respect to all of your outstanding
vested Restricted Stock Units (after giving effect to the vesting provisions described below) as soon as practicable after (but not
later than sixty (60) days after) the earliest to occur of your (1) Disability (as defined under Code Section 409A), (2) death, or (3)
"separation from service," within the meaning of Code Section 409A within 2 years following a Change in Control.
 
Voluntary Termination
In the event of your voluntary termination (other than Retirement), all unvested Restricted Stock Units will be cancelled on the
date of termination.
 
Retirement
In the event of your Retirement, unvested Restricted Stock Units will continue to vest and be settled pursuant to the Normal
Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement that you be employed), subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this
Agreement; provided, however that in the event of your Retirement within 2 years following a Change in Control, all of your
Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of such
Retirement.   Your  termination  of  employment  will  be  considered  Retirement  if  you  are  both  age  55  or  older  on  the  date  of
termination (other than termination for cause) and if you were employed by PG&E Corporation for at least five consecutive years
ending on the date of termination of your employment.
 
Termination for Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated at any time by PG&E Corporation for cause, all unvested Restricted
Stock Units will be cancelled on the date of termination.
 
For  these  purposes,  "cause"  means  when  PG&E  Corporation,  acting  in  good  faith  based  upon  information  then  known  to  it,
determines that you have engaged in, committed, or are responsible for, (1) serious misconduct, gross negligence, theft, or fraud
against PG&E Corporation and/or its affiliates, (2) refusal or unwillingness to perform your duties; (3) inappropriate conduct in
violation of PG&E Corporation's equal employment opportunity policy; (4) conduct which reflects adversely upon, or making any
remarks disparaging of, PG&E Corporation, its Board of Directors, Officers, or employees, or its affiliates or subsidiaries; (5)
insubordination; (6) any willful act that is likely to have the effect of injuring the reputation, business, or business relationships of
PG&E Corporation or its subsidiaries or affiliates; (7) violation of any fiduciary duty; or (8) breach of any duty of loyalty.
 
Termination other than for Cause Upon  your  termination  (other  than  termination  for  cause,  voluntary  termination,  Retirement,  termination  due  to  death  or
Disability, or termination in connection with a Change in Control) additional Restricted Stock Units will continue to vest (as if
you continued to be employed by PG&E Corporation) such that the total number of vested Restricted Stock Units (including
Restricted Stock Units, if any, that vested prior to the date of termination) will be equal to the greater of (1) the actual number of
vested Restricted Stock Units or (2) the number determined by multiplying the total number of Restricted Stock Units subject to
this Agreement by the number of your days of service with PG&E Corporation in the Normal Vesting Schedule (through the date
of termination), divided by the potential number of days of service in the Normal Vesting Schedule.  All other unvested Restricted
Stock Units will be cancelled upon such termination.  Vested Restricted Stock Units will continue to be settled and paid on the

same time schedule and at the rate that would be normally applicable (absent your termination of employment) until the pro-rated
amount (if any) is exhausted.
 
Death/Disability
In the event of your death or Disability while you are employed, all of your Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled as soon
as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of such event.  If your death or Disability occurs following
the termination of your employment and your Restricted Stock Units are then outstanding under the terms hereof, then all of your
vested Restricted Stock Units plus any Restricted Stock Units that would have otherwise vested during any continued vesting
period hereunder will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of your death or
Disability.
 
Termination Due to Disposition of
Subsidiary
If  your  employment  is  terminated  (other  than  for  cause,  your  voluntary  termination,  or  your  Retirement)  (1)  by  reason  of  a
divestiture  or change in control of a subsidiary  of PG&E Corporation,  which divestiture  or change in control results in such
subsidiary  no  longer  qualifying  as  a  subsidiary  corporation  under  Section  424(f)  of  the  Internal  Revenue  Code  of  1986,  as
amended (the "Code"), or (2) coincident with the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation,
then  your  Restricted  Stock  Units  will  vest  and  be  settled  in  the  same  manner  as  for  a  "Termination  other  than  for  Cause"
described above.
 
Change in Control
In the event of a Change in Control, the surviving, continuing, successor, or purchasing corporation or other business entity or
parent thereof, as the case may be (the "Acquiror " ), may, without your consent, either assume or continue PG&E Corporation's
rights and obligations under this Agreement or provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Restricted Stock
Units subject to this Agreement.
 
If the Restricted Stock Units are neither assumed nor continued by the Acquiror or if the Acquiror does not provide a substantially
equivalent award in substitution for the Restricted Stock Units, all of your unvested Restricted Stock Units will vest immediately
preceding and contingent on, the Change in Control and be settled in accordance with the Normal Vesting Schedule, subject to the
earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement.
 
Termination In Connection with a
Change in Control
If you separate from service (other than termination for cause, your voluntary termination, or your Retirement) in connection with
a Change in Control within three months before the Change in Control occurs, all of your outstanding Restricted Stock Units
(including Restricted Stock Units that you would have otherwise forfeited after the end of the continued vesting period) will vest
on the date of the Change in Control and will be settled in accordance with the Normal Vesting Schedule (without regard to the
requirement that you be employed) subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement.
 
In the event of such a separation in connection with a Change in Control within two years following the Change in Control, your
Restricted Stock Units (to the extent they did not previously vest upon, for example, failure of the Acquiror to assume or continue
this award) will vest on the date of such separation and will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60)
days after) the date of such separation.  PG&E Corporation has the sole discretion to determine whether termination of your
employment was made in connection with a Change in Control
 
Delay
PG&E Corporation will delay the issuance of any shares of common stock to the extent it is necessary to comply with Section
409A(a)(2)(B)(i) of the Code (relating to payments made to certain "key employees" of certain publicly-traded companies); in
such event, any shares of common stock to which you would otherwise be entitled during the six (6) month period following the
date of your "separation from service" under Section 409A (or shorter period ending on the date of your death following such
separation) will instead be issued on the first business day following the expiration of the applicable delay period.
 
Withholding Taxes
The  number  of  shares  of  PG&E  Corporation  common  stock  that  you  are  otherwise  entitled  to  receive  upon  settlement  of
Restricted Stock Units will be reduced by a number of shares having an aggregate Fair Market Value, as determined by PG&E
Corporation,  equal to the amount of any Federal,  state,  or local taxes of any kind required  by law to be withheld by PG&E
Corporation in connection with the Restricted Stock Units determined using the applicable minimum statutory withholding rates ,
including social  security  and  Medicare  taxes  due  under  the  Federal  Insurance  Contributions  Act  and  the  California  State
Disability Insurance tax (" Withholding Taxes").  If the withheld shares were not sufficient to satisfy your minimum Withholding
Taxes, you will be required to pay, as soon as practicable, including through additional payroll withholding, any amount of the
Withholding Taxes that is not satisfied by the withholding of shares described above .
 
Leaves of Absence
For purposes of this Agreement, if you are on an approved leave of absence from PG&E Corporation, or a recipient of PG&E
Corporation  sponsored  disability  benefits,  you  will  continue  to  be  considered  as  employed.   If  you  do  not  return  to  active
employment  upon  the  expiration  of  your  leave  of  absence  or  the  expiration  of  your  PG&E  Corporation  sponsored  disability
benefits, you will be considered to have voluntarily terminated your employment.  See above under "Voluntary Termination."
 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the leave of absence exceeds six (6) months, and a return to service upon expiration of such
leave is not guaranteed by statute or contract, then you will be deemed to have had a "separation from service" for purposes of
any Restricted Stock Units that are settled hereunder upon such separation.  To the extent an authorized leave of absence is due to
a medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or to last for a continuous period
of at least six (6) months and such impairment causes you to be unable to perform the duties of your position of employment or
any substantially similar position of employment, the six (6) month period in the prior sentence will be twenty-nine (29) months.
 
PG&E Corporation reserves the right to determine which leaves of absence will be considered as continuing employment and
when your employment terminates for all purposes under this Agreement.
 
Voting and Other Rights
You will not have voting rights with respect to the Restricted Stock Units until the date the underlying shares are issued (as
evidenced by appropriate entry on the books of PG&E Corporation or its duly authorized transfer agent).

 
No Retention Rights
This Agreement is not an employment agreement and does not give you the right to be retained by PG&E Corporation.  Except as
otherwise provided in an applicable employment agreement, PG&E Corporation reserves the right to terminate your employment
at any time and for any reason.
 
Recoupment of Awards
Awards are subject to recoupment in accordance with any applicable law and any recoupment policy adopted by the Corporation
from time to time.
 
Applicable Law
This Agreement will be interpreted and enforced under the laws of the State of California.

EXHIBIT 10.12
PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
PERFORMANCE SHARE AWARD - FINANCIAL
PG&E CORPORATION , a California corporation, hereby grants Performance Shares to the Recipient named below.  The Performance Shares
have been granted under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the "LTIP").  The terms and conditions of the Performance Shares are
set forth in this cover sheet and the attached Performance Share Agreement (the "Agreement").
Date of Grant:  
 March 1, 2016
Name of Recipient:  
 ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.
Recipient's Participant ID:  
 XXXXXXXX
Number of Performance Shares:  
 70,582
By accepting this award, you agree to all of the terms and conditions described in the attached Agreement.  You and PG&E
Corporation agree to execute such further instruments and to take such further action as may reasonably be necessary to carry
out the intent of the attached Agreement.  You are also acknowledging receipt of this award, the attached Agreement, and a copy
of  the  prospectus  describing  the  LTIP  and  the  Performance  Shares  dated  March  1,  2016,  and  any  supplements  to  that
Prospectus.
If, for any reason, you wish to not accept this award, please notify PG&E Corporation in writing within 30 calendar days of the
date of this award at ATTN: LTIP Administrator, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco,
94105.
Attachment

PG&E CORPORATION 2014
 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
PERFORMANCE SHARE AGREEMENT- FINANCIAL
The LTIP and Other
Agreements
This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding between you and PG&E Corporation regarding the Performance Shares, subject
to  the  terms  of  the  LTIP.   Any  prior  agreements,  commitments  or  negotiations  are  superseded.   In  the  event  of  any  conflict  or
inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement and the LTIP, the LTIP will govern.  Capitalized terms that are not defined
in this Agreement are defined in the LTIP. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Agreement and the PG&E
Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy, this Agreement will govern.  The LTIP provides the Committee with discretion to adjust
the performance award formula.
 
For purposes of this Agreement, employment with PG&E Corporation means employment with any member of the Participating
Company Group.
 
Grant of
Performance Shares
PG&E Corporation grants you the number of Performance Shares shown on the cover sheet of this Agreement (the "Performance
Shares").  The Performance Shares are subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the LTIP.
 
Vesting of Performance Shares
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Settlement in Shares/
Performance Goals
As  long  as  you  remain  employed  with  PG&E  Corporation,  the  Performance  Shares  will  vest  upon,  and  to  the  extent  of,  the
Committee's certification of the extent to which performance goals have been attained for this award, which certification will occur
on or after January 1 but before March 15 of the third year following the calendar year of grant specified in the cover sheet (the
"Vesting Date").  Except as described below, all Performance Shares that have not vested will be cancelled upon termination of your
employment.
 
Vested Performance Shares will be settled in shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, subject to the satisfaction of Withholding
Taxes, as described below. The number of shares you are entitled to receive will be calculated by multiplying the number of vested
Performance Shares by the "rounded payout percentage" determined as follows (except as set forth elsewhere in this Agreement),
rounded to the nearest whole number:
 
Upon the Vesting Date, PG&E Corporation's total shareholder return ("TSR") will be compared to the TSR of the fourteen other
companies in PG&E Corporation's comparator group 1 for the prior three calendar years, consisting of 2016, 2017, and 2018 (the
"Performance Period"). 1   Subject to rounding considerations, if PG&E Corporation's TSR falls below the 25 th percentile of the
comparator group the payout percentage will be 0%; if PG&E Corporation's TSR is at the 25 th percentile, the payout percentage will
be 25%; if PG&E Corporation's TSR is at the 60 th percentile, the payout percentage will be 100%; and if PG&E Corporation's TSR
is in the 90 th percentile or higher, the payout percentage will be 200%.  If PG&E Corporation's TSR performance is between the 25
th percentile and the target, or between the target and the 90 th percentile, the rounded payout percentage is determined by straight-
line  interpolation  between  the  performance  percentile  associated  with  each  comparator  rank  and  between  the  rounded  payouts
associated with each performance percentile (including the 25 th , 60 th , and 90 th percentiles) as shown in above table, rounded
down to the nearest whole number.  The following table sets forth the rounded payout percentages for the TSR rankings that could be
achieved by companies within the comparator group:
 
Number of Companies in 
Total (Excluding PG&E Corporation)   - 14
                                                       Performance                  Rounded 
                                 Rank                Percentile                        Payout 
                                  1                        100%                             200% 
                                  2                          93%                             200%
                                                              90%                             200%
                                  3                          86%                             186% 
                                  4                          79%                             162% 
                                  5                          71%                             138% 
                                  6                          64%                             114% 
                                                              60%                             100%
                                  7                          57%                              94% 
                                  8                          50%                              79% 
                                  9                          43%                              63% 
                                10                          36%                              48% 
                                11                          29%                              33% 
                                                              25%                              25%
                                12                          21%                                0% 
                                13                          14%                                0%
                                14                           7%                                 0%
 
The payout percentage, if any, will be determined as soon as practicable following the date that the Committee (or a subcommittee of
that  Committee)  or  an  equivalent  body  certifies  the  extent  to  which  performance  goals  have  been  attained,  pursuant  to  Section
10.5(a) of the LTIP.  PG&E Corporation will issue shares as soon as practicable after such determination, but no earlier than the
Vesting Date, and not later than March 15 of the calendar year following completion of the Performance Period.
 
 
 
(1) The current Performance Comparator Group consists of the following companies:  Ameren Corporation, American Electric

Power, CMS Energy, Consolidated Edison, Inc., DTE Energy, Duke Energy, Edison International, Eversource Energy, NiSource,
Inc., Pinnacle West Capital, SCANA Corp., Southern Company, Wisconsin Energy Corporation, and Xcel Energy, Inc.  PG&E
Corporation reserves the right to change the companies comprising the comparator group and the resulting payout percentage table in
accordance with the rules established by PG&E Corporation in connection with this award.
 
(2) PG&E Corporation's TSR performance is measured by the value of stock price appreciation and dividends paid and reinvested,
relative to companies in the Performance Comparator Group.  For these purposes, average share price will be measured by
comparing the average per share closing price of PG&E Corporation common stock during the 20 trading days before the beginning
and the end of the Performance Period.
 
Dividends
Each time that PG&E Corporation declares a dividend on its shares of common stock, an amount equal to the dividend multiplied by
the number of Performance Shares granted to you by this Agreement will be accrued on your behalf.  If you receive a Performance
Share settlement in accordance with the preceding paragraph, at that same time you also will receive a cash payment equal to the
amount of any dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares over the Performance Period multiplied by the same
payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
Voluntary Termination
If you terminate your employment with PG&E Corporation voluntarily before the Vesting Date (other than for Retirement), all of the
Performance Shares will be cancelled as of the date of such termination and any dividends accrued with respect to your Performance
Shares will be forfeited.
 
Termination for Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated at any time by PG&E Corporation for cause before the Vesting Date, all
of the  Performance  Shares  will  be  cancelled  as  of the  date  of  such termination  and  any  dividends  accrued  with  respect  to your
Performance Shares will be forfeited.
 
For  these  purposes,  "cause"  means  when  PG&E  Corporation,  acting  in  good  faith  based  upon  information  then  known  to  it,
determines that you have engaged in, committed, or are responsible for, (1) serious misconduct, gross negligence, theft, or fraud
against PG&E Corporation and/or its affiliates, (2) refusal or unwillingness to perform your duties; (3) inappropriate conduct in
violation of PG&E Corporation's equal employment opportunity policy; (4) conduct which reflects adversely upon, or making any
remarks  disparaging  of,  PG&E  Corporation,  its  Board  of  Directors,  Officers,  or  employees,  or  its  affiliates  or  subsidiaries;  (5)
insubordination; (6) any willful act that is likely to have the effect of injuring the reputation, business, or business relationships of
PG&E Corporation or its subsidiaries or affiliates; (7) violation of any fiduciary duty; or (8) breach of any duty of loyalty.
Termination other than for
Cause
Upon your termination (other than termination for cause, voluntary termination, Retirement, termination due to death or Disability,
or  termination  in  connection  with  a  Change  in  Control)  the  number  of  vested  Performance  Shares  will  equal  the  number  of
Performance Shares subject to this Agreement, multiplied by the number of your days of service with PG&E Corporation in the
vesting period (through the date of termination), divided by the potential number of days of service in the vesting period.  All other
outstanding Performance Shares  will be cancelled, and any associated accrued dividends forfeited, upon such termination. Your
vested Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the
year following completion of the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applied to active employees. At that time
you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to
your vested Performance Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to
receive, if any.
 
Retirement
If you retire before the Vesting Date, your outstanding Performance Shares will continue to vest as though your employment had
continued and will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year
following completion of the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applicable to active employees.  At that time
you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to
your  Performance  Shares  multiplied  by  the  same  payout  percentage  used  to  determine  the  number  of  shares  you  are  entitled  to
receive,  if  any.    Your  termination  of  employment  will  be  considered  a  Retirement  if  you  are  age  55  or  older  on  the  date  of
termination (other than termination for cause) and if you were employed by PG&E Corporation for at least five consecutive years
ending on the date of termination of your employment.
 
Death/Disability
If your employment terminates due to your death or disability before the Vesting Date, all of your Performance Shares will vest
immediately  and  will  be  settled,  if  at  all,  as  soon  as  practicable  after  the  Vesting  Date  and  no  later  than  March  15  of  the  year
following completion of the Performance Period based on the same payout percentage applied to active employees.  At that time you
also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your
Performance Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if
any.
 
Termination Due to
Disposition of Subsidiary
If your employment is terminated (other than for cause, your voluntary termination, or Retirement) (1) by reason of a divestiture or
change in control of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, which divestiture or change in control results in such subsidiary no longer
qualifying as a subsidiary corporation under Section 424(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or (2) coincident with
the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, then your outstanding Performance Shares will
vest and be settled in the same manner as for a "Termination other than for Cause" described above.
 
Change in Control
In the event of a Change in Control, the surviving, continuing, successor, or purchasing corporation or other business entity or parent
thereof, as the case may be (the "Acquiror " ), may, without your consent, either assume or continue PG&E Corporation's rights and
obligations under this Agreement or provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Performance Shares subject to
this Agreement.
 
If the Acquiror assumes or continues PG&E Corporation's rights and obligations under this Agreement or substitutes a substantially

equivalent award, TSR will be calculated by combining (a) the TSR of PG&E Corporation for the period from January 1 of the year
of grant to the date of the Change in Control, and (b) the TSR of the Acquiror from the date of the Change in Control to the last day
of the Performance Period.   The number of shares, if any, you are entitled to receive upon settlement of the assumed, continued or
substituted Performance Share award will be determined based on the rounded payout percentage reflected in the table set forth
above for the highest percentile TSR performance met or exceeded when calculated on that basis, and considering any adjustments to
the comparator group. Settlement will occur as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year
following completion of the Performance Period.  At that time you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of
dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares over the Performance Period multiplied by the same payout percentage
used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
If the Change in Control of PG&E Corporation occurs before the Vesting Date, and if this award is neither assumed nor continued by
the Acquiror or if the Acquiror does not provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Performance Shares subject
to this Agreement, all of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest and become nonforfeitable on the date of the Change in
Control.  Such vested Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the original Vesting Date and no
later than March 15 of the year following completion of the Performance Period.  The payout percentage, if any, will be based on
TSR for the period from January 1 of the year of grant to the date of the Change in Control compared to the TSR of the other
companies in PG&E Corporation's comparator group for the same period. At that time you also will receive a cash payment, if any,
equal to the amount of dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares to the date of the Change in Control multiplied by
the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
Termination In Connection
with a Change in Control
If your employment is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause in connection with a Change in Control within two
years following the Change in Control, all of your outstanding Performance Shares (to the extent they did not previously vest upon
failure of the Acquiror to assume or continue this award) will vest and become nonforfeitable on the date of termination of your
employment.
 
If your employment is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause in connection with a Change in Control within three
months before the Change in Control occurs, all of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest in full and become nonforfeitable
(including the portion that you would have otherwise forfeited based on the proration of vested Performance Shares through the date
of termination of your employment ) as of the date of the Change in Control.
 
Your vested Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the original Vesting Date and no later than
March  15  of  the  year  following  completion  of  the  Performance  Period,  based  on  the  same  payout  percentage  applied  to  active
employees (determined consistent with the method decribed above under "Change in Control").  At that time you also will receive a
cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your vested Performance
Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any. PG&E
Corporation has the sole discretion to determine whether termination of your employment was made in connection with a Change in
Control.
 
Withholding Taxes
The  number  of  shares  of  PG&E  Corporation  common  stock  that  you  are  otherwise  entitled  to  receive  upon  settlement  of  your
Performance  Shares  will  be  reduced  by  a  number  of  shares  having  an  aggregate  Fair  Market  Value,  as  determined  by  PG&E
Corporation,  equal  to  the amount  of  any  Federal,  state,  or  local  taxes  of  any  kind  required  by  law  to  be  withheld  by  PG&E
Corporation in  connection  with  the  Performance  Shares  determined  using  the  applicable  minimum  statutory  withholding  rates ,
including social security and Medicare taxes due under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act and the California State Disability
Insurance tax (" Withholding Taxes").  If the withheld shares were not sufficient to satisfy your minimum Withholding Taxes, you
will be required to pay, as soon as practicable, including through additional payroll withholding, any amount of the Withholding
Taxes that is not satisfied by the withholding of shares described above .
 
Leaves of Absence
For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  if  you  are  on  an  approved  leave  of  absence  from  PG&E  Corporation,  or  a  recipient  of  PG&E
Corporation  sponsored  disability  benefits,  you  will  continue  to  be  considered  as  employed.   If  you  do  not  return  to  active
employment upon the expiration of your leave of absence or the expiration of your PG&E Corporation sponsored disability benefits,
you will be considered to have voluntarily terminated your employment.  See above under "Voluntary Termination."
 
PG&E Corporation reserves the right to determine which leaves of absence will be considered as continuing employment and when
your employment terminates for all purposes under this Agreement.
No Retention Rights
This Agreement is not an employment agreement and does not give you the right to be retained by PG&E Corporation.  Except as
otherwise provided in an applicable employment agreement, PG&E Corporation reserves the right to terminate your employment at
any time and for any reason.
 
Recoupment of Awards
Awards are subject to recoupment in accordance with any applicable law and any recoupment policy adopted by the Corporation
from time to time.
 
Applicable Law
This Agreement will be interpreted and enforced under the laws of the State of California.

EXHIBIT 10.14
PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
PERFORMANCE SHARE AWARD – SAFETY AND AFFORDABILITY
PG&E CORPORATION , a California corporation, hereby grants Performance Shares to the Recipient named below.  The Performance Shares
have been granted under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the "LTIP").  The terms and conditions of the Performance Shares are
set forth in this cover sheet and the attached Performance Share Agreement (the "Agreement").
Date of Grant:  
 March 1, 2016
Name of Recipient:  
 ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.
Recipient's Participant ID:  
 XXXXXXXX
Number of Performance Shares:  
 13,343
By accepting this award, you agree to all of the terms and conditions described in the attached Agreement.  You and PG&E
Corporation agree to execute such further instruments and to take such further action as may reasonably be necessary to carry
out the intent of the attached Agreement.  You are also acknowledging receipt of this award, the attached Agreement, and a copy
of  the  prospectus  describing  the  LTIP  and  the  Performance  Shares  dated  March  1,  2016,  and  any  supplements  to  that
Prospectus.
If, for any reason, you wish to not accept this award, please notify PG&E Corporation in writing within 30 calendar days of the
date of this award at ATTN: LTIP Administrator, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco,
94105.
Attachment

PG&E CORPORATION 2014
 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
PERFORMANCE SHARE AGREEMENT
SAFETY AND AFFORDABILITY
The LTIP and Other
Agreements
This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding between you and PG&E Corporation regarding the Performance Shares, subject
to  the  terms  of  the  LTIP.   Any  prior  agreements,  commitments  or  negotiations  are  superseded.   In  the  event  of  any  conflict  or
inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement and the LTIP, the LTIP will govern.  Capitalized terms that are not defined
in this Agreement are defined in the LTIP. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Agreement and the PG&E
Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy, this Agreement will govern.  The LTIP provides the Committee with discretion to adjust
the performance award formula.
 
For purposes of this Agreement, employment with PG&E Corporation means employment with any member of the Participating
Company Group.
 
Grant of
Performance Shares
PG&E Corporation grants you the number of Performance Shares shown on the cover sheet of this Agreement (the "Performance
Shares").  The Performance Shares are subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the LTIP.
 
Vesting of Performance Shares
 
 
 
 
 
 
Settlement in Shares/
Performance Goals
As  long  as  you  remain  employed  with  PG&E  Corporation,  the  Performance  Shares  will  vest  upon,  and  to  the  extent  of,  the
Committee's certification of the extent to which performance goals have been attained for this award, which certification will occur
on or after January 1 but before March 15 of the third year following the calendar year of grant specified in the cover sheet (the
"Vesting Date").  Except as described below, all Performance Shares that have not vested will be cancelled upon termination of your
employment.
 
Vested Performance Shares will be settled in shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, subject to the satisfaction of Withholding
Taxes, as described below. The number of shares you are entitled to receive will be calculated by multiplying the number of vested
Performance Shares by the "payout percentage" determined as follows (except as set forth elsewhere in this Agreement), rounded to
the nearest whole number:
 
Fifty percent of the Performance Shares have a safety performance goal and resulting safety payout percentage, and the other fifty
percent of the Performance Shares have an affordability performance goal and resulting affordability payout percentage.  Subject to
rounding considerations, in each case, if performance is below threshold,  the payout percentage will be 0%; if performance is at
threshold, the payout percentage will be 25%; if performance is at target, the payout percentage will be 100%; and if performance is
at or better than maximum, the payout percentage will be 200%.  The actual payout percentage for performance between threshold
and maximum will be determined based on linear interpolation between the payout percentages for threshold and target, or target and
maximum, as appropriate.
The measures and goals are discussed in more detail below:
 
Safety - At the end of 2018, PG&E Corporation's lost workday ("LWD") case rate ("LWD Rate") for that year will be
measured as the number of LWD cases incurred per 200,000 hours worked during 2018. LWD cases will be measured in
the same manner as for the 2016 Short-Term Incentive Plan, will include OSHA recordable incidents that result in loss of at
least one workday, and will exclude fatalities.  Threshold performance is 0.247, target performance is 0.215, and maximum
performance is 0.201.
 
Affordability - PG&E  Corporation's  affordability  performance  will  be  measured  as  the  reduction  in  standard  rate  case
expense for unitized work and support operations and maintenance costs over the three calendar years prior to the normal
Vesting Date (the "Performance Period"), as compared to escalated actual costs in these areas for 2014 escalated by two
years (at 2.75 percent per year), as determined in the sole discretion of the Committee, in accordance with the terms adopted
by the Committee at its February 16, 2016 meeting.  Threshold performance is $75 million, target performance is $100
million, and maximum performance is $200 million.
 
The  final  payout  percentages,  if  any,  will  be  determined  as  soon  as  practicable  following  the  date  that  the  Committee  (or  a
subcommittee  of that Committee)  or an equivalent body certifies  the extent  to which the performance  goals have been attained,
pursuant to Section 10.5(a) of the LTIP.  PG&E Corporation will issue shares as soon as practicable after such determination, but no
earlier than the Vesting Date, and not later than March 15 of the calendar year following completion of the Performance Period.
 
Dividends
Each time that PG&E Corporation declares a dividend on its shares of common stock, an amount equal to the dividend multiplied by
the number of Performance Shares granted to you by this Agreement will be accrued on your behalf.  If you receive a Performance
Share settlement in accordance with the preceding paragraph, at that same time you also will receive a cash payment equal to the
amount of any dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares over the Performance Period multiplied by the same
payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
Voluntary Termination
If you terminate your employment with PG&E Corporation voluntarily before the Vesting Date (other than for Retirement), all of the
Performance Shares will be cancelled as of the date of such termination and any dividends accrued with respect to your Performance
Shares will be forfeited.
 
Termination for Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated at any time by PG&E Corporation for cause before the Vesting Date, all
of the  Performance  Shares  will  be  cancelled  as  of the  date  of  such termination  and  any  dividends  accrued  with  respect  to your
Performance Shares will be forfeited.

 
For  these  purposes,  "cause"  means  when  PG&E  Corporation,  acting  in  good  faith  based  upon  information  then  known  to  it,
determines that you have engaged in, committed, or are responsible for, (1) serious misconduct, gross negligence, theft, or fraud
against PG&E Corporation and/or its affiliates, (2) refusal or unwillingness to perform your duties; (3) inappropriate conduct in
violation of PG&E Corporation's equal employment opportunity policy; (4) conduct which reflects adversely upon, or making any
remarks  disparaging  of,  PG&E  Corporation,  its  Board  of  Directors,  Officers,  or  employees,  or  its  affiliates  or  subsidiaries;  (5)
insubordination; (6) any willful act that is likely to have the effect of injuring the reputation, business, or business relationships of
PG&E Corporation or its subsidiaries or affiliates; (7) violation of any fiduciary duty; or (8) breach of any duty of loyalty.
Termination other than for
Cause
Upon your termination (other than termination for cause, voluntary termination, Retirement, termination due to death or Disability, or
termination in connection with a Change in Control) the number of vested Performance Shares will equal the number of Performance
Shares subject to this Agreement, multiplied by the number of your days of service with PG&E Corporation in the vesting period
(through the date of termination), divided by the potential number of days of service in the vesting period.  All other outstanding
Performance  Shares   will  be  cancelled,  and  associated  accrued  dividends  will  be  forfeited,  upon  such  termination.  Your  vested
Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year
following completion of the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applied to active employees. At that time you
also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your
vested  Performance  Shares  multiplied  by  the  same  payout  percentage  used  to  determine  the  number  of  shares  you  are  entitled  to
receive, if any.
 
Retirement
If you retire before the Vesting Date, your outstanding Performance Shares will continue to vest as though your employment had
continued  and will  be  settled,  if  at  all,  as  soon  as  practicable  following  the  Vesting  Date  and no  later  than  March  15  of the  year
following completion of the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applicable to active employees.  At that time
you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to
your Performance Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive,
if any.   Your termination of employment will be considered a Retirement if you are age 55 or older on the date of termination (other
than termination for cause) and if you were employed by PG&E Corporation for at least five consecutive years ending on the date of
termination of your employment.
 
Death/Disability
If  your  employment  terminates  due  to  your  death  or  disability  before  the  Vesting  Date,  all  of  your  Performance  Shares  will
immediately vest and will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year
following completion of the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applied to active employees.  At that time you
also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your
Performance Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if
any.
 
Termination Due to
Disposition of Subsidiary
If your employment is terminated (other than for cause, your voluntary termination, or Retirement) (1) by reason of a divestiture or
change in control of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, which divestiture or change in control results in such subsidiary no longer
qualifying as a subsidiary corporation under Section 424(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or (2) coincident with
the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, then your outstanding Performance Shares will
vest and be settled in the same manner as for a "Termination other than for Cause" described above.
 
Change in Control
In the event of a Change in Control, the surviving, continuing, successor, or purchasing corporation or other business entity or parent
thereof, as the case may be (the "Acquiror " ), may, without your consent, either assume or continue PG&E Corporation's rights and
obligations under this Agreement or provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Performance Shares subject to this
Agreement.
If the Acquiror assumes or continues PG&E Corporation's rights and obligations under this Agreement or substitutes a substantially
equivalent award, Performance Shares will vest on the Vesting Date and performance will be deemed to have been achieved at target,
resulting in a payout percentage of 100%.  Settlement will occur as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than March
15 of the year following completion of the Performance Period.  At that time you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the
amount of dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares over the Performance Period multiplied by a payout percentage
of 100%.
 
If the Change in Control of PG&E Corporation occurs before the Vesting Date, and if this award is neither assumed nor continued by
the Acquiror or if the Acquiror does not provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Performance Shares subject to
this Agreement, all of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest and become nonforfeitable on the date of the Change in Control. 
Such vested Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the original Vesting Date and no later than
March 15 of the year following completion of the Performance Period.  Performance will be deemed to have been achieved at target
and the payout percentage will be 100%. At that time you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends
accrued with respect to your Performance Shares to the date of the Change in Control multiplied by a payout percentage of 100%.
 
Termination In Connection
with a Change in Control
If your employment is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause in connection with a Change in Control within two years
following the Change in Control, all of your outstanding Performance Shares (to the extent they did not previously vest upon failure of
the Acquiror to assume or continue this award) will vest and become nonforfeitable on the date of termination of your employment.
 
If your employment is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause in connection with a Change in Control within three
months before the Change in Control occurs, all of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest in full and become nonforfeitable
(including the portion that you would have otherwise forfeited based on the proration of vested Performance Shares through the date of
termination of your employment ) as of the date of the Change in Control.
 
Your vested Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the original Vesting Date but no later than

March  15  of  the  year  following  completion  of  the  Performance  Period,  based  on  the  same  payout  percentage  applied  to  active
employees (which in this case will be deemed to be at target, consistent with the "Change in Control" section, above).  At that time you
also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your
vested  Performance  Shares  multiplied  by  the  same  payout  percentage  used  to  determine  the  number  of  shares  you  are  entitled  to
receive,  if  any.  PG&E  Corporation  has  the  sole  discretion  to  determine  whether  termination  of  your  employment  was  made  in
connection with a Change in Control.
 
Withholding Taxes
The  number  of  shares  of  PG&E  Corporation  common  stock  that  you  are  otherwise  entitled  to  receive  upon  settlement  of  your
Performance  Shares  will  be  reduced  by  a  number  of  shares  having  an  aggregate  Fair  Market  Value,  as  determined  by  PG&E
Corporation, equal to the amount of any Federal, state, or local taxes of any kind required by law to be withheld by PG&E Corporation
in connection with the Performance Shares determined using the applicable minimum statutory withholding rates , including social
security and Medicare taxes due under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act and the California State Disability Insurance tax ("
Withholding Taxes").  If the withheld shares were not sufficient to satisfy your minimum Withholding Taxes, you will be required to
pay, as soon as practicable, including through additional payroll withholding, any amount of the Withholding Taxes that is not satisfied
by the withholding of shares described above .
 
Leaves of Absence
For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  if  you  are  on  an  approved  leave  of  absence  from  PG&E  Corporation,  or  a  recipient  of  PG&E
Corporation sponsored disability benefits, you will continue to be considered as employed.  If you do not return to active employment
upon the expiration of your leave of absence or the expiration of your PG&E Corporation sponsored disability benefits, you will be
considered to have voluntarily terminated your employment.  See above under "Voluntary Termination."
 
PG&E Corporation reserves the right to determine which leaves of absence will be considered as continuing employment and when
your employment terminates for all purposes under this Agreement.
No Retention Rights
This Agreement is not an employment agreement and does not give you the right to be retained by PG&E Corporation.  Except as
otherwise provided in an applicable employment agreement, PG&E Corporation reserves the right to terminate your employment at any
time and for any reason.
 
Recoupment of Awards
Awards are subject to recoupment in accordance with any applicable law and any recoupment policy adopted by the Corporation from
time to time.
 
Applicable Law
This Agreement will be interpreted and enforced under the laws of the State of California.

EXHIBIT 10.32
PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
NON-ANNUAL RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AWARD
PG&E CORPORATION , a California corporation, hereby grants Restricted Stock Units to the Recipient named below.  The Restricted Stock
Units have been granted under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the "LTIP").  The terms and conditions of the Restricted Stock
Units are set forth in this cover sheet and in the attached Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (the "Agreement").
Date of Grant:  
 November 28, 2016
Name of Recipient:  
 Ed Halpin
Recipient's Participant ID:  
 XXXXXXXX
Number of Restricted Stock Units:  
 16,464
By accepting this award, you agree to all of the terms and conditions described in the attached Agreement. You and PG&E
Corporation agree to execute such further instruments and to take such further action as may reasonably be necessary to carry
out the intent of the attached Agreement.  You are also acknowledging receipt of this award, the attached Agreement, and a copy
of the prospectus describing the LTIP and the Restricted Stock Units dated March 1, 2016.
If, for any reason, you wish to not accept this award, please notify PG&E Corporation in writing within 30 calendar days of the date of this
award at ATTN: LTIP Administrator at Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco, 94105.
Attachment

PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AGREEMENT
The LTIP and Other Agreements This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding between you and PG&E Corporation regarding the Restricted Stock Units,
subject  to  the  terms  of the  LTIP.  Any prior  agreements,  commitments,  or negotiations  are  superseded.   In  the  event  of any
conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement and the LTIP, the LTIP will govern.  Capitalized terms that
are not defined in this Agreement are defined in the LTIP.  In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Agreement
and  the  PG&E  Corporation  2012  Officer  Severance  Policy,  this  Agreement  will  govern.  For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,
employment with PG&E Corporation means employment with any member of the Participating Company Group.
 
Grant of Restricted Stock Units
PG&E Corporation grants you the number of Restricted Stock Units shown on the cover sheet of this Agreement.  The Restricted
Stock Units are subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the LTIP.
 
Vesting of Restricted Stock Units As long as you remain employed with PG&E Corporation, the total number of Restricted Stock Units originally subject to this
Agreement, as shown above on the cover sheet, will vest in accordance with the below vesting schedule (the "Normal Vesting
Schedule")
<vesting_schedule>
 
The  amounts  payable  upon  each  vesting  date  are  hereby  designated  separate  payments  for  purposes  of  Code  Section  409A. 
Except as described below, all Restricted Stock Units subject to this Agreement which have not vested upon termination of your
employment will then be cancelled. As set forth below, the Restricted Stock Units may vest earlier upon the occurrence of certain
events.
 
Dividends
Restricted Stock Units will accrue Dividend Equivalents in the event cash dividends are paid with respect to PG&E Corporation
common stock having a record date prior to the date on which the Restricted Stock Units are settled.  Such Dividend Equivalents
will be converted into cash and paid, if at all, upon settlement of the underlying Restricted Stock Units.
 
Settlement
Vested Restricted Stock Units will be settled in an equal number of shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, subject to the
satisfaction  of Withholding  Taxes,  as described  below.   PG&E Corporation  will  issue  shares  as  soon as  practicable  after  the
Restricted  Stock  Units  vest  in  accordance  with  the  Normal  Vesting  Schedule  (but  not  later  than  sixty  (60)  days  after  the
applicable vesting date); provided, however, that such issuance will, if earlier, be made with respect to all of your outstanding
vested Restricted Stock Units (after giving effect to the vesting provisions described below) as soon as practicable after (but not
later than sixty (60) days after) the earliest to occur of your (1) Disability (as defined under Code Section 409A), (2) death, or (3)
"separation from service," within the meaning of Code Section 409A within 2 years following a Change in Control.
 
Voluntary Termination
In the event of your voluntary termination, all unvested Restricted Stock Units will be cancelled on the date of termination.
 
Termination for Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated at any time by PG&E Corporation for cause, all unvested Restricted
Stock Units will be cancelled on the date of termination.  In general, termination for "cause" means termination of employment
because of dishonesty, a criminal offense, or violation of a work rule, and will be determined by and in the sole discretion of
PG&E Corporation.
 
Termination other than for Cause If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause, any unvested Restricted
Stock  Units  that  would  have  vested  within  the  12  months  following  such  termination  had  your  employment  continued  will
continue  to  vest  and  be  settled  pursuant  to  the  Normal  Vesting  Schedule  (without  regard  to  the  requirement  that  you  be
employed), subject to the earlier  settlement  provisions of this Agreement.  All other unvested Restricted  Stock Units will be
cancelled unless your termination of employment was in connection with a Change in Control as provided below.
 
Death/Disability
In the event of your death or Disability while you are employed, all of your Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled as soon
as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of such event.  If your death or Disability occurs following
the termination of your employment and your Restricted Stock Units are then outstanding under the terms hereof, then all of your
vested Restricted Stock Units plus any Restricted Stock Units that would have otherwise vested during any continued vesting
period hereunder will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of your death or
Disability.
 
Termination Due to Disposition of
Subsidiary
(If your employment is terminated (other than termination for cause, your voluntary termination) (1) by reason of a divestiture or
change in control of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, which divestiture or change in control results in such subsidiary no
longer  qualifying  as  a  subsidiary  corporation  under  Section  424(f)  of  the  Internal  Revenue  Code  of  1986,  as  amended  (the
"Code"), or (2) coincident with the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, then your
Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled in the same manner as for a "Termination other than for Cause" described above.
 
Change in Control
In the event of a Change in Control, the surviving, continuing, successor, or purchasing corporation or other business entity or
parent thereof, as the case may be (the "Acquiror " ), may, without your consent, either assume or continue PG&E Corporation's
rights and obligations under this Agreement or provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Restricted Stock
Units subject to this Agreement.
 
If the Restricted Stock Units are neither assumed nor continued by the Acquiror or if the Acquiror does not provide a substantially
equivalent award in substitution for the Restricted Stock Units, all of your unvested Restricted Stock Units will vest immediately

preceding and contingent on, the Change in Control and be settled in accordance with the Normal Vesting Schedule, subject to the
earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement.
 
Termination In Connection with a
Change in Control
If  you  separate  from  service  (other  than  termination  for  cause,  your  voluntary  termination)  in  connection  with  a  Change  in
Control  within  three  months  before  the  Change  in  Control  occurs,  all  of  your  outstanding  Restricted  Stock  Units  (including
Restricted Stock Units that you would have otherwise forfeited after the end of the continued vesting period) will vest on the date
of the Change in Control and will be settled in accordance with the Normal Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement
that you be employed) subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement.
 
In the event of such a separation in connection with a Change in Control within two years following the Change in Control, your
Restricted Stock Units (to the extent they did not previously vest upon, for example, failure of the Acquiror to assume or continue
this award) will vest on the date of such separation and will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60)
days after) the date of such separation.  PG&E Corporation has the sole discretion to determine whether termination of your
employment was made in connection with a Change in Control
 
Delay
PG&E Corporation will delay the issuance of any shares of common stock to the extent it is necessary to comply with Section
409A(a)(2)(B)(i) of the Code (relating to payments made to certain "key employees" of certain publicly-traded companies); in
such event, any shares of common stock to which you would otherwise be entitled during the six (6) month period following the
date of your "separation from service" under Section 409A (or shorter period ending on the date of your death following such
separation) will instead be issued on the first business day following the expiration of the applicable delay period.
 
Withholding Taxes
The  number  of  shares  of  PG&E  Corporation  common  stock  that  you  are  otherwise  entitled  to  receive  upon  settlement  of
Restricted Stock Units will be reduced by a number of shares having an aggregate Fair Market Value, as determined by PG&E
Corporation,  equal to the amount of any Federal,  state,  or local taxes of any kind required  by law to be withheld by PG&E
Corporation in connection with the Restricted Stock Units determined using the applicable minimum statutory withholding rates ,
including social  security  and  Medicare  taxes  due  under  the  Federal  Insurance  Contributions  Act  and  the  California  State
Disability Insurance tax (" Withholding Taxes").  If the withheld shares were not sufficient to satisfy your minimum Withholding
Taxes, you will be required to pay, as soon as practicable, including through additional payroll withholding, any amount of the
Withholding Taxes that is not satisfied by the withholding of shares described above .
 
Leaves of Absence
For purposes of this Agreement, if you are on an approved leave of absence from PG&E Corporation, or a recipient of PG&E
Corporation  sponsored  disability  benefits,  you  will  continue  to  be  considered  as  employed.   If  you  do  not  return  to  active
employment  upon  the  expiration  of  your  leave  of  absence  or  the  expiration  of  your  PG&E  Corporation  sponsored  disability
benefits, you will be considered to have voluntarily terminated your employment.  See above under "Voluntary Termination."
 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the leave of absence exceeds six (6) months, and a return to service upon expiration of such
leave is not guaranteed by statute or contract, then you will be deemed to have had a "separation from service" for purposes of
any Restricted Stock Units that are settled hereunder upon such separation.  To the extent an authorized leave of absence is due to
a medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or to last for a continuous period
of at least six (6) months and such impairment causes you to be unable to perform the duties of your position of employment or
any substantially similar position of employment, the six (6) month period in the prior sentence will be twenty-nine (29) months.
 
PG&E Corporation reserves the right to determine which leaves of absence will be considered as continuing employment and
when your employment terminates for all purposes under this Agreement.
 
Voting and Other Rights
You will not have voting rights with respect to the Restricted Stock Units until the date the underlying shares are issued (as
evidenced by appropriate entry on the books of PG&E Corporation or its duly authorized transfer agent).
 
No Retention Rights
This Agreement is not an employment agreement and does not give you the right to be retained by PG&E Corporation.  Except as
otherwise provided in an applicable employment agreement, PG&E Corporation reserves the right to terminate your employment
at any time and for any reason.
 
Recoupment of Awards
Awards are subject to recoupment in accordance with any applicable law and any recoupment policy adopted by the Corporation
from time to time.
 
Applicable Law
This Agreement will be interpreted and enforced under the laws of the State of California.

EXHIBIT 10.55
PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AWARD
PG&E CORPORATION , a California corporation, hereby grants Restricted Stock Units to the Recipient named below.  The Restricted Stock
Units have been granted under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the "LTIP").  The terms and conditions of the Restricted Stock
Units are set forth in this cover sheet and in the attached Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (the "Agreement").
Date of Grant:  
 March 1, 2016
Name of Recipient:  
 <First_Name> <Last_Name>
Recipient's Participant ID:  
 <Emp_Id>
Number of Restricted Stock Units:  
 <shares_awarded>
By accepting this award, you agree to all of the terms and conditions described in the attached Agreement. You and PG&E
Corporation agree to execute such further instruments and to take such further action as may reasonably be necessary to carry
out the intent of the attached Agreement.  You are also acknowledging receipt of this award, the attached Agreement, and a copy
of the prospectus describing the LTIP and the Restricted Stock Units dated March 1, 2016.
If, for any reason, you wish to not accept this award, please notify PG&E Corporation in writing within 30 calendar days of the
date of this award at ATTN: LTIP Administrator, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco,
94105.
Attachment

PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AGREEMENT
The LTIP and Other Agreements This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding between you and PG&E Corporation regarding the Restricted Stock Units,
subject  to  the  terms  of the  LTIP.  Any prior  agreements,  commitments,  or negotiations  are  superseded.   In  the  event  of any
conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement and the LTIP, the LTIP will govern.  Capitalized terms that
are not defined in this Agreement are defined in the LTIP.  In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Agreement
and  the  PG&E  Corporation  2012  Officer  Severance  Policy,  this  Agreement  will  govern.  For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,
employment with PG&E Corporation means employment with any member of the Participating Company Group.
 
Grant of Restricted Stock Units
PG&E Corporation grants you the number of Restricted Stock Units shown on the cover sheet of this Agreement.  The Restricted
Stock Units are subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the LTIP.
 
Vesting of Restricted Stock Units As long as you remain employed with PG&E Corporation, the total number of Restricted Stock Units originally subject to this
Agreement,  as  shown  on  the  cover  sheet,  will  vest  in  accordance  with  the  below  vesting  schedule  (the  "Normal  Vesting
Schedule").
 
          March 1, 2017 – one-third of the Restricted Stock Units
          March 1, 2018 – one-third of the Restricted Stock Units
          March 1, 2019 – one-third of the Restricted Stock Units
 
The  amounts  payable  upon  each  vesting  date  are  hereby  designated  separate  payments  for  purposes  of  Code  Section  409A. 
Except as described below, all Restricted Stock Units subject to this Agreement which have not vested upon termination of your
employment will then be cancelled. As set forth below, the Restricted Stock Units may vest earlier upon the occurrence of certain
events.
 
Dividends
Restricted Stock Units will accrue Dividend Equivalents in the event cash dividends are paid with respect to PG&E Corporation
common stock having a record date prior to the date on which the Restricted Stock Units are settled.  Such Dividend Equivalents
will be converted into cash and paid, if at all, upon settlement of the underlying Restricted Stock Units.
 
Settlement
Vested Restricted Stock Units will be settled in an equal number of shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, subject to the
satisfaction  of Withholding  Taxes,  as described  below.   PG&E Corporation  will  issue  shares  as  soon as  practicable  after  the
Restricted  Stock  Units  vest  in  accordance  with  the  Normal  Vesting  Schedule  (but  not  later  than  sixty  (60)  days  after  the
applicable vesting date); provided, however, that such issuance will, if earlier, be made with respect to all of your outstanding
vested Restricted Stock Units (after giving effect to the vesting provisions described below) as soon as practicable after (but not
later than sixty (60) days after) the earliest to occur of your (1) Disability (as defined under Code Section 409A), (2) death, or (3)
"separation from service," within the meaning of Code Section 409A within 2 years following a Change in Control.
 
Voluntary Termination
In the event of your voluntary termination (other than Retirement), all unvested Restricted Stock Units will be cancelled on the
date of termination.
 
Retirement
In the event of your Retirement, unvested Restricted Stock Units will continue to vest and be settled pursuant to the Normal
Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement that you be employed), subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this
Agreement; provided, however that in the event of your Retirement within 2 years following a Change in Control, all of your
Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of such
Retirement.   Your  termination  of  employment  will  be  considered  Retirement  if  you  are  both  age  55  or  older  on  the  date  of
termination (other than termination for cause) and if you were employed by PG&E Corporation for at least five consecutive years
ending on the date of termination of your employment.
 
Termination for Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated at any time by PG&E Corporation for cause, all unvested Restricted
Stock Units will be cancelled on the date of termination.  In general, termination for "cause" means termination of employment
because of dishonesty, a criminal offense, or violation of a work rule, and will be determined by and in the sole discretion of
PG&E Corporation.
 
Termination other than for Cause If  your  employment  with  PG&E  Corporation  is  terminated  by  PG&E  Corporation  other  than  for  cause  or  Retirement,  any
unvested Restricted Stock Units that would have vested within the 12 months following such termination had your employment
continued will continue to vest and be settled pursuant to the Normal Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement that
you be employed), subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement.  All other unvested Restricted Stock Units will
be cancelled unless your termination of employment was in connection with a Change in Control as provided below.
 
Death/Disability
In the event of your death or Disability while you are employed, all of your Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled as soon
as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of such event.  If your death or Disability occurs following
the termination of your employment and your Restricted Stock Units are then outstanding under the terms hereof, then all of your
vested Restricted Stock Units plus any Restricted Stock Units that would have otherwise vested during any continued vesting
period hereunder will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of your death or
Disability.
 
Termination Due to Disposition ofIf  your  employment  is  terminated  (other  than  for  cause,  your  voluntary  termination,  or  your  Retirement)  (1)  by  reason  of  a

Subsidiary
divestiture  or change in control of a subsidiary  of PG&E Corporation,  which divestiture  or change in control results in such
subsidiary  no  longer  qualifying  as  a  subsidiary  corporation  under  Section  424(f)  of  the  Internal  Revenue  Code  of  1986,  as
amended (the "Code"), or (2) coincident with the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation,
then  your  Restricted  Stock  Units  will  vest  and  be  settled  in  the  same  manner  as  for  a  "Termination  other  than  for  Cause"
described above.
 
Change in Control
In the event of a Change in Control, the surviving, continuing, successor, or purchasing corporation or other business entity or
parent thereof, as the case may be (the "Acquiror " ), may, without your consent, either assume or continue PG&E Corporation's
rights and obligations under this Agreement or provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Restricted Stock
Units subject to this Agreement.
 
If the Restricted Stock Units are neither assumed nor continued by the Acquiror or if the Acquiror does not provide a substantially
equivalent award in substitution for the Restricted Stock Units, all of your unvested Restricted Stock Units will vest immediately
preceding and contingent on, the Change in Control and be settled in accordance with the Normal Vesting Schedule, subject to the
earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement.
 
Termination In Connection with a
Change in Control
If you separate from service (other than termination for cause, your voluntary termination, or your Retirement) in connection with
a Change in Control within three months before the Change in Control occurs, all of your outstanding Restricted Stock Units
(including Restricted Stock Units that you would have otherwise forfeited after the end of the continued vesting period) will vest
on the date of the Change in Control and will be settled in accordance with the Normal Vesting Schedule (without regard to the
requirement that you be employed) subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement.
 
In the event of such a separation in connection with a Change in Control within two years following the Change in Control, your
Restricted Stock Units (to the extent they did not previously vest upon, for example, failure of the Acquiror to assume or continue
this award) will vest on the date of such separation and will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60)
days after) the date of such separation.  PG&E Corporation has the sole discretion to determine whether termination of your
employment was made in connection with a Change in Control.
 
Delay
PG&E Corporation will delay the issuance of any shares of common stock to the extent it is necessary to comply with Section
409A(a)(2)(B)(i) of the Code (relating to payments made to certain "key employees" of certain publicly-traded companies); in
such event, any shares of common stock to which you would otherwise be entitled during the six (6) month period following the
date of your "separation from service" under Section 409A (or shorter period ending on the date of your death following such
separation) will instead be issued on the first business day following the expiration of the applicable delay period.
 
Withholding Taxes
The  number  of  shares  of  PG&E  Corporation  common  stock  that  you  are  otherwise  entitled  to  receive  upon  settlement  of
Restricted Stock Units will be reduced by a number of shares having an aggregate Fair Market Value, as determined by PG&E
Corporation,  equal to the amount of any Federal,  state,  or local taxes of any kind required  by law to be withheld by PG&E
Corporation in connection with the Restricted Stock Units determined using the applicable minimum statutory withholding rates ,
including social  security  and  Medicare  taxes  due  under  the  Federal  Insurance  Contributions  Act  and  the  California  State
Disability Insurance tax (" Withholding Taxes").  If the withheld shares were not sufficient to satisfy your minimum Withholding
Taxes, you will be required to pay, as soon as practicable, including through additional payroll withholding, any amount of the
Withholding Taxes that is not satisfied by the withholding of shares described above .
 
Leaves of Absence
For purposes of this Agreement, if you are on an approved leave of absence from PG&E Corporation, or a recipient of PG&E
Corporation  sponsored  disability  benefits,  you  will  continue  to  be  considered  as  employed.   If  you  do  not  return  to  active
employment  upon  the  expiration  of  your  leave  of  absence  or  the  expiration  of  your  PG&E  Corporation  sponsored  disability
benefits, you will be considered to have voluntarily terminated your employment.  See above under "Voluntary Termination."
 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the leave of absence exceeds six (6) months, and a return to service upon expiration of such
leave is not guaranteed by statute or contract, then you will be deemed to have had a "separation from service" for purposes of
any Restricted Stock Units that are settled hereunder upon such separation.  To the extent an authorized leave of absence is due to
a medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or to last for a continuous period
of at least six (6) months and such impairment causes you to be unable to perform the duties of your position of employment or
any substantially similar position of employment, the six (6) month period in the prior sentence will be twenty-nine (29) months.
 
PG&E Corporation reserves the right to determine which leaves of absence will be considered as continuing employment and
when your employment terminates for all purposes under this Agreement.
 
Voting and Other Rights
You will not have voting rights with respect to the Restricted Stock Units until the date the underlying shares are issued (as
evidenced by appropriate entry on the books of PG&E Corporation or its duly authorized transfer agent).
 
No Retention Rights
This Agreement is not an employment agreement and does not give you the right to be retained by PG&E Corporation.  Except as
otherwise provided in an applicable employment agreement, PG&E Corporation reserves the right to terminate your employment
at any time and for any reason.
 
Recoupment of Awards
Awards are subject to recoupment in accordance with any applicable law and any recoupment policy adopted by the Corporation
from time to time.
 
Applicable Law
This Agreement will be interpreted and enforced under the laws of the State of California.

EXHIBIT 10.61
PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
PERFORMANCE SHARE AWARD – FINANCIAL
PG&E CORPORATION , a California corporation, hereby grants Performance Shares to the Recipient named below.  The Performance Shares
have been granted under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the "LTIP").  The terms and conditions of the Performance Shares are
set forth in this cover sheet and the attached Performance Share Agreement (the "Agreement").
Date of Grant:  
 March 1, 2016
Name of Recipient:  
 <First_Name> <Last_Name>
Recipient's Participant ID:  
 <Emp_Id>
Number of Performance Shares:  
 <shares_awarded>
By accepting this award, you agree to all of the terms and conditions described in the attached Agreement.  You and PG&E
Corporation agree to execute such further instruments and to take such further action as may reasonably be necessary to carry
out the intent of the attached Agreement.  You are also acknowledging receipt of this award, the attached Agreement, and a copy
of the prospectus describing the LTIP and the Performance Shares dated March 1, 2016.
If, for any reason, you wish to not accept this award, please notify PG&E Corporation in writing within 30 calendar days of the
date of this award at ATTN: LTIP Administrator, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco,
94105.
Attachment

PG&E CORPORATION
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
PERFORMANCE SHARE AGREEMENT- FINANCIAL
The LTIP and Other
Agreements
This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding between you and PG&E Corporation regarding the Performance Shares, subject
to  the  terms  of  the  LTIP.   Any  prior  agreements,  commitments  or  negotiations  are  superseded.   In  the  event  of  any  conflict  or
inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement and the LTIP, the LTIP will govern.  Capitalized terms that are not defined in
this  Agreement  are  defined  in  the  LTIP.  In  the  event  of  any  conflict  between  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  and  the  PG&E
Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy, this Agreement will govern.  The LTIP provides the Committee with discretion to adjust
the performance award formula.
 
For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  employment  with  PG&E  Corporation  means  employment  with  any  member  of  the  Participating
Company Group.
 
Grant of
Performance Shares
PG&E Corporation grants you the number of Performance Shares shown on the cover sheet of this Agreement (the "Performance
Shares").  The Performance Shares are subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the LTIP.
 
Vesting of Performance
Shares
 
 
 
 
 
 
Settlement in Shares/
Performance Goals
As  long  as  you  remain  employed  with  PG&E  Corporation,  the  Performance  Shares  will  vest  upon,  and  to  the  extent  of,  the
Committee's certification of the extent to which performance goals have been attained for this award, which certification will occur on
or after January 1 but before March 15 of the third year following the calendar year of grant specified in the cover sheet (the "Vesting
Date").   Except  as  described  below,  all  Performance  Shares  that  have  not  vested  will  be  cancelled  upon  termination  of  your
employment.
 
Vested Performance Shares will be settled in shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, subject to the satisfaction of Withholding
Taxes, as described below. The number of shares you are entitled to receive will be calculated by multiplying the number of vested
Performance Shares by the "rounded payout percentage" determined as follows (except as set forth elsewhere in this Agreement),
rounded to the nearest whole number:
 
 
Upon the Vesting Date, PG&E Corporation's total shareholder return ("TSR") will be compared to the TSR of the fourteen other
companies in PG&E Corporation's comparator group 1 for the prior three calendar years, consisting of 2016, 2017, and 2018 (the
"Performance Period"). 2   Subject to rounding considerations, if PG&E Corporation's TSR falls below the 25 th percentile of the
comparator group the payout percentage will be 0%; if PG&E Corporation's TSR is at the 25 th percentile, the payout percentage will
be 25%; if PG&E Corporation's TSR is at the 60 th percentile, the payout percentage will be 100%; and if PG&E Corporation's TSR is
in the 90 th percentile or higher, the payout percentage will be 200%.  If PG&E Corporation's TSR performance is between the 25 th
percentile and the target, or between the target and the 90 th percentile, the rounded payout percentage is determined by straight-line
interpolation between the performance percentile associated with each comparator rank and between the rounded payouts associated
with each performance percentile (including the 25 th , 60 th , and 90 th percentiles) as shown in above table, rounded down to the
nearest whole number.  The following table sets forth the rounded payout percentages for the TSR rankings that could be achieved by
companies within the comparator group:
 
Number of Companies in 
Total (excluding PG&E Corporation)   - 14
                                                       Performance                  Rounded 
                                 Rank                Percentile                        Payout 
                                  1                        100%                             200% 
                                  2                          93%                             200%
                                                              90%                             200% 
                                  3                          86%                             186% 
                                  4                          79%                             162% 
                                  5                          71%                             138% 
                                  6                          64%                             114%
                                                              60%                             100% 
                                  7                          57%                              94% 
                                  8                          50%                              79% 
                                  9                          43%                              63% 
                                10                          36%                              48% 
                                11                          29%                              33% 
                                                              25%                              25%
                                12                          21%                                0% 
                                13                          14%                                0%
                                14                            7%                                0%
 
The payout percentage, if any, will be determined as soon as practicable following the date that the Committee (or a subcommittee of
that Committee) or an equivalent body certifies the extent to which performance goals have been attained, pursuant to Section 10.5(a)
of the LTIP.  PG&E Corporation will issue shares as soon as practicable after such determination, but no earlier than the Vesting Date,
and not later than March 15 of the calendar year following completion of the Performance Period.
 
 
 

(1) The current Performance Comparator Group consists of the following companies:  Ameren Corporation, American Electric Power,
CMS Energy, Consolidated Edison, Inc., DTE Energy, Duke Energy, Edison International, Eversource Energy, NiSource, Inc.,
Pinnacle West Capital, SCANA Corp., Southern Company, Wisconsin Energy Corporation, and Xcel Energy, Inc.  PG&E Corporation
reserves the right to change the companies comprising the comparator group and the resulting payout percentage table in accordance
with the rules established by PG&E Corporation in connection with this award.
 
(2) PG&E Corporation's TSR performance is measured by the value of stock price appreciation and dividends paid and reinvested,
relative to companies in the Performance Comparator Group.  For these purposes, average share price will be measured by comparing
the average per share closing price of PG&E Corporation common stock during the 20 trading days before the beginning and the end
of the Performance Period.
 
 
Dividends
Each time that PG&E Corporation declares a dividend on its shares of common stock, an amount equal to the dividend multiplied by
the number of Performance Shares granted to you by this Agreement will be accrued on your behalf.  If you receive a Performance
Share settlement in accordance with the preceding paragraph, at that same time you also will receive a cash payment equal to the
amount of any dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares over the Performance Period multiplied by the same payout
percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
Voluntary Termination
If you terminate your employment with PG&E Corporation voluntarily before the Vesting Date (other than for Retirement), all of the
Performance Shares will be cancelled as of the date of such termination and any dividends accrued with respect to your Performance
Shares will be forfeited.
 
Termination for Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated at any time by PG&E Corporation for cause before the Vesting Date, all of
the  Performance  Shares  will  be  cancelled  as  of  the  date  of  such  termination  and  any  dividends  accrued  with  respect  to  your
Performance Shares will be forfeited.  In general, termination for "cause" means termination of employment because of dishonesty, a
criminal offense, or violation of a work rule, and will be determined by and in the sole discretion of PG&E Corporation.
Termination other than for
Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause or Retirement before the
Vesting Date, a portion of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest proportionally based on the number of months during the
Performance  Period  that  you  were  employed  (rounded  down)  divided  by  the  number  of  months  in  the  Performance  Period  (36
months).  All other outstanding Performance Shares will be cancelled, and any associated accrued dividends will be forfeited, unless
your termination of employment was in connection with a Change in Control as provided below. Your vested Performance Shares
will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year following completion of
the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applied to active employees.  At that time you also will receive a cash
payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your vested Performance
Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
Retirement
If you retire before the Vesting Date, your outstanding Performance Shares will continue to vest as though your employment had
continued and will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year
following completion of the Performance Period based on the same payout percentage applicable to active employees.  At that time
you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to
your  Performance  Shares  multiplied  by  the  same  payout  percentage  used  to  determine  the  number  of  shares  you  are  entitled  to
receive,  if  any.   Your  termination  of  employment  will  be  considered  a  Retirement  if  you  are  age  55  or  older  on  the  date  of
termination (other than termination for cause) and if you were employed by PG&E Corporation for at least five consecutive years
ending on the date of termination of your employment.
 
Death/Disability
If your employment terminates due to your death or disability before the Vesting Date, all of your Performance Shares will vest
immediately  and  will  be  settled,  if  at  all,  as  soon  as  practicable  after  the  Vesting  Date  and  no  later  than  March  15  of  the  year
following completion of the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applied to active employees.  At that time you
also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your
Performance Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if
any.
 
Termination Due to
Disposition of Subsidiary
If your employment is terminated (other than for cause, your voluntary termination, or Retirement) (1) by reason of a divestiture or
change in control of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, which divestiture or change in control results in such subsidiary no longer
qualifying as a subsidiary corporation under Section 424(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or (2) coincident with
the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, then your outstanding Performance Shares will
vest and be settled in the same manner as for a "Termination other than for Cause" described above.
 
Change in Control
In the event of a Change in Control, the surviving, continuing, successor, or purchasing corporation or other business entity or parent
thereof, as the case may be (the "Acquiror " ), may, without your consent, either assume or continue PG&E Corporation's rights and
obligations under this Agreement or provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Performance Shares subject to
this Agreement.
 
If the Acquiror assumes or continues PG&E Corporation's rights and obligations under this Agreement or substitutes a substantially
equivalent award, TSR will be calculated by combining (a) the TSR of PG&E Corporation for the period from January 1 of the year
of grant to the date of the Change in Control, and (b) the TSR of the Acquiror from the date of the Change in Control to the last day
of the Performance Period. The number of shares, if any, you are entitled to receive upon settlement of the assumed, continued or
substituted Performance Share award will be  determined based on the rounded payout percentage reflected in the table set forth
above for the highest percentile TSR performance met or exceeded when calculated on that basis, and considering any adjustments to
the comparator group.  Settlement will occur as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year
following completion of the Performance Period.  At that time you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of

dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares over the Performance Period multiplied by the same payout percentage
used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
If the Change in Control of PG&E Corporation occurs before the Vesting Date, and if this award is neither assumed nor continued by
the Acquiror or if the Acquiror does not provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Performance Shares subject
to this Agreement, all of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest and become nonforfeitable on the date of the Change in
Control.  Such vested Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the original Vesting Date and no
later than March 15 of the year following completion of the Performance Period.  The payout percentage, if any, will be based on
TSR for the period from January 1 of the year of grant to the date of the Change in Control compared to the TSR of the other
companies in PG&E Corporation's comparator group for the same period. At that time you also will receive a cash payment, if any,
equal to the amount of dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares to the date of the Change in Control multiplied by
the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
Termination In Connection
with a Change in Control
If your employment is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause in connection with a Change in Control within two
years following the Change in Control, all of your outstanding Performance Shares (to the extent they did not previously vest upon
failure of the Acquiror to assume or continue this award) will vest and become nonforfeitable on the date of termination of your
employment.
 
If your employment is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause in connection with a Change in Control within three
months before the Change in Control occurs, all of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest in full and become nonforfeitable
(including the portion that you would have otherwise forfeited based on the proration of vested Performance Shares through the date
of termination of your employment ) as of the date of the Change in Control.
 
Your vested Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the original Vesting Date and no later than
March  15  of  the  year  following  completion  of  the  Performance  Period,  based  on  the  same  payout  percentage  applied  to  active
employees (determined consistent with the method described above under "Change in Control"). At that time you also will receive a
cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your vested Performance
Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any. PG&E
Corporation has the sole discretion to determine whether termination of your employment was made in connection with a Change in
Control.
 
Withholding Taxes
The  number  of  shares  of  PG&E  Corporation  common  stock  that  you  are  otherwise  entitled  to  receive  upon  settlement  of  your
Performance  Shares  will  be  reduced  by  a  number  of  shares  having  an  aggregate  Fair  Market  Value,  as  determined  by  PG&E
Corporation,  equal  to  the  amount  of  any  Federal,  state,  or  local  taxes  of  any  kind  required  by  law  to  be  withheld  by  PG&E
Corporation in  connection  with  the  Performance  Shares  determined  using  the  applicable  minimum  statutory  withholding  rates ,
including social security and Medicare taxes due under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act and the California State Disability
Insurance tax (" Withholding Taxes").  If the withheld shares were not sufficient to satisfy your minimum Withholding Taxes, you
will be required to pay, as soon as practicable, including through additional payroll withholding, any amount of the Withholding
Taxes that is not satisfied by the withholding of shares described above .
 
Leaves of Absence
For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  if  you  are  on  an  approved  leave  of  absence  from  PG&E  Corporation,  or  a  recipient  of  PG&E
Corporation  sponsored  disability  benefits,  you  will  continue  to  be  considered  as  employed.   If  you  do  not  return  to  active
employment upon the expiration of your leave of absence or the expiration of your PG&E Corporation sponsored disability benefits,
you will be considered to have voluntarily terminated your employment.  See above under "Voluntary Termination."
 
PG&E Corporation reserves the right to determine which leaves of absence will be considered as continuing employment and when
your employment terminates for all purposes under this Agreement.
No Retention Rights
This Agreement is not an employment agreement and does not give you the right to be retained by PG&E Corporation.  Except as
otherwise provided in an applicable employment agreement, PG&E Corporation reserves the right to terminate your employment at
any time and for any reason.
 
Recoupment of Awards
Awards are subject to recoupment in accordance with any applicable law and any recoupment policy adopted by the Corporation
from time to time
 
Applicable Law
This Agreement will be interpreted and enforced under the laws of the State of California.
 

EXHIBIT 10.63
PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
PERFORMANCE SHARE AWARD – SAFETY AND AFFORDABILITY
PG&E CORPORATION , a California corporation, hereby grants Performance Shares to the Recipient named below.  The Performance Shares
have been granted under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the "LTIP").  The terms and conditions of the Performance Shares are
set forth in this cover sheet and the attached Performance Share Agreement (the "Agreement").
Date of Grant:  
 March 1, 2016
Name of Recipient:  
 <First_Name> <Last_Name>
Recipient's Participant ID:  
 <Emp_Id>
Number of Performance Shares:  
 <shares_awarded>
By accepting this award, you agree to all of the terms and conditions described in the attached Agreement.  You and PG&E
Corporation agree to execute such further instruments and to take such further action as may reasonably be necessary to carry
out the intent of the attached Agreement.  You are also acknowledging receipt of this award, the attached Agreement, and a copy
of the prospectus describing the LTIP and the Performance Shares dated March 1, 2016.
If, for any reason, you wish to not accept this award, please notify PG&E Corporation in writing within 30 calendar days of the
date of this award at ATTN: LTIP Administrator, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco,
94105.
Attachment

PG&E CORPORATION
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
PERFORMANCE SHARE AGREEMENT
SAFETY AND AFFORDABILITY
The LTIP and Other
Agreements
This Agreement constitutes the entire understanding between you and PG&E Corporation regarding the Performance Shares, subject
to  the  terms  of  the  LTIP.   Any  prior  agreements,  commitments  or  negotiations  are  superseded.   In  the  event  of  any  conflict  or
inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement and the LTIP, the LTIP will govern.  Capitalized terms that are not defined
in this Agreement are defined in the LTIP. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this Agreement and the PG&E
Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy, this Agreement will govern.  The LTIP provides the Committee with discretion to adjust
the performance award formula.
 
For purposes of this Agreement, employment with PG&E Corporation means employment with any member of the Participating
Company Group.
 
Grant of
Performance Shares
PG&E Corporation grants you the number of Performance Shares shown on the cover sheet of this Agreement (the "Performance
Shares").  The Performance Shares are subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the LTIP.
 
Vesting of Performance Shares
 
 
 
 
 
 
Settlement in Shares/
Performance Goals
As  long  as  you  remain  employed  with  PG&E  Corporation,  the  Performance  Shares  will  vest  upon,  and  to  the  extent  of,  the
Committee's certification of the extent to which performance goals have been attained for this award, which certification will occur
on or after January 1 but before March 15 of the third year following the calendar year of grant specified in the cover sheet (the
"Vesting Date").  Except as described below, all Performance Shares that have not vested will be cancelled upon termination of your
employment.
 
Vested Performance Shares will be settled in shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, subject to the satisfaction of Withholding
Taxes, as described below. The number of shares you are entitled to receive will be calculated by multiplying the number of vested
Performance Shares by the "payout percentage" determined as follows (except as set forth elsewhere in this Agreement), rounded to
the nearest whole number:
 
Fifty percent of the Performance Shares have a safety performance goal and resulting safety payout percentage, and the other fifty
percent of the Performance Shares have an affordability performance goal and resulting affordability payout percentage.  Subject to
rounding considerations, in each case, if performance is below threshold, the payout percentage will be 0%; if performance is at
threshold, the payout percentage will be 25%; if performance is at target, the payout percentage will be 100%; and if performance is
at or better than maximum, the payout percentage will be 200%.  The actual payout percentage for performance between threshold
and maximum will be determined based on linear interpolation between the payout percentages for threshold and target, or target and
maximum, as appropriate.
 
The measures and goals are discussed in more detail below:
 
Safety - At the end of 2018, PG&E Corporation's lost workday ("LWD") case rate ("LWD Rate") for that year will be
measured as the number of LWD cases incurred per 200,000 hours worked during 2018. LWD cases will be measured in
the same manner as for the 2016 Short-Term Incentive Plan, will include OSHA recordable incidents that result in loss of at
least one workday, and will exclude fatalities.  Threshold performance is 0.247, target performance is 0.215, and maximum
performance is 0.201.
 
Affordability -  PG&E  Corporation's  affordability  performance  will  be  measured  as  the  reduction  in  standard  rate  case
expense for unitized work and support operations and maintenance costs over the three calendar years prior to the normal
Vesting Date (the "Performance Period"), as compared to escalated actual costs in these areas for 2014, escalated by two
years (at 2.75 perent per year) , as determined in the sole discretion of the Committee in accordance with the terms adopted
by the Committee at its February 16, 2016 meeting.  Threshold performance is $75 million, target performance is $100
million, and maximum performance is $200 million.
 
The  final  payout  percentages,  if  any,  will  be  determined  as  soon  as  practicable  following  the  date  that  the  Committee  (or  a
subcommittee  of that Committee)  or an equivalent body certifies  the extent  to which the performance  goals have been attained,
pursuant to Section 10.5(a) of the LTIP.  PG&E Corporation will issue shares as soon as practicable after such determination, but no
earlier than the Vesting Date, and not later than March 15 of the calendar year following completion of the Performance Period.
 
Dividends
Each time that PG&E Corporation declares a dividend on its shares of common stock, an amount equal to the dividend multiplied by
the number of Performance Shares granted to you by this Agreement will be accrued on your behalf.  If you receive a Performance
Share settlement in accordance with the preceding paragraph, at that same time you also will receive a cash payment equal to the
amount of any dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares over the Performance Period multiplied by the same
payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
Voluntary Termination
If you terminate your employment with PG&E Corporation voluntarily before the Vesting Date (other than for Retirement), all of the
Performance Shares will be cancelled as of the date of such termination and any dividends accrued with respect to your Performance
Shares will be forfeited.
 
Termination for Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated at any time by PG&E Corporation for cause before the Vesting Date, all
of the  Performance  Shares  will  be  cancelled  as  of the  date  of  such termination  and  any  dividends  accrued  with  respect  to your
Performance Shares will be forfeited.  In general, termination for "cause" means termination of employment because of dishonesty, a

criminal offense, or violation of a work rule, and will be determined by and in the sole discretion of PG&E Corporation.
 
Termination other than for
Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause or Retirement before the
Vesting Date, a portion of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest proportionally based on the number of months during the
Performance  Period  that  you  were  employed  (rounded  down)  divided  by  the  number  of  months  in  the  Performance  Period  (36
months).  All other outstanding Performance Shares will be cancelled, and any associated accrued dividends will be forfeited, unless
your termination of employment was in connection with a Change in Control as provided below. Your vested Performance Shares
will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year following completion of
the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applied to active employees.  At that time you also will receive a cash
payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your vested Performance
Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if any.
 
Retirement
If you retire before the Vesting Date, your outstanding Performance Shares will continue to vest as though your employment had
continued and will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year
following completion of the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applicable to active employees.  At that time
you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to
your  Performance  Shares  multiplied  by  the  same  payout  percentage  used  to  determine  the  number  of  shares  you  are  entitled  to
receive,  if  any.    Your  termination  of  employment  will  be  considered  a  Retirement  if  you  are  age  55  or  older  on  the  date  of
termination (other than termination for cause) and if you were employed by PG&E Corporation for at least five consecutive years
ending on the date of termination of your employment.
 
Death/Disability
If  your  employment  terminates  due  to  your  death  or  disability  before  the  Vesting  Date,  all  of  your  Performance  Shares  will
immediately vest and will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than March 15 of the year
following completion of the Performance Period, based on the same payout percentage applied to active employees.  At that time you
also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to your
Performance Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to receive, if
any.
 
Termination Due to
Disposition of Subsidiary
 If your employment is terminated (other than for cause, your voluntary termination, or Retirement) (1) by reason of a divestiture or
change in control of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, which divestiture or change in control results in such subsidiary no longer
qualifying as a subsidiary corporation under Section 424(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or (2) coincident with
the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, then your outstanding Performance Shares will
vest and be settled in the same manner as for a "Termination other than for Cause" described above.
 
Change in Control
In the event of a Change in Control, the surviving, continuing, successor, or purchasing corporation or other business entity or parent
thereof, as the case may be (the "Acquiror " ), may, without your consent, either assume or continue PG&E Corporation's rights and
obligations under this Agreement or provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Performance Shares subject to
this Agreement.
 
If the Acquiror assumes or continues PG&E Corporation's rights and obligations under this Agreement or substitutes a substantially
equivalent award, Performance Shares will vest on the Vesting Date, and performance will be deemed to have been achieved at
target, resulting in a payout percentage of 100%. Settlement will occur as soon as practicable after the Vesting Date and no later than
March 15 of the year following completion of the Performance Period.  At that time you also will receive a cash payment, if any,
equal to the amount of dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares over the Performance Period multiplied by a
payout percentage of 100%.
 
If the Change in Control of PG&E Corporation occurs before the Vesting Date, and if this award is neither assumed nor continued by
the Acquiror or if the Acquiror does not provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Performance Shares subject
to this Agreement, all of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest and become nonforfeitable on the date of the Change in
Control.  Such vested Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the original Vesting Date and no
later than March 15 of the year following completion of the Performance Period.  Performance will be deemed to have been achieved
at target and the payout percentage will be 100%. At that time you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of
dividends accrued with respect to your Performance Shares to the date of the Change in Control multiplied by a payout percentage of
100%.
 
Termination In Connection
with a Change in Control
If your employment is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause in connection with a Change in Control within two
years following the Change in Control, all of your outstanding Performance Shares (to the extent they did not previously vest upon
failure of the Acquiror to assume or continue this award) will vest and become nonforfeitable on the date of termination of your
employment.
 
If your employment is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for cause in connection with a Change in Control within three
months before the Change in Control occurs, all of your outstanding Performance Shares will vest in full and become nonforfeitable
(including the portion that you would have otherwise forfeited based on the proration of vested Performance Shares through the date
of termination of your employment ) as of the date of the Change in Control.
 
Your vested Performance Shares will be settled, if at all, as soon as practicable following the original Vesting Date but no later than
March  15  of  the  year  following  completion  of  the  Performance  Period,  based  on  the  same  payout  percentage  applied  to  active
employees (which in this case will be deemed to be at target, consistent with the "Change in Control" section, above).  At that time
you also will receive a cash payment, if any, equal to the amount of dividends accrued over the Performance Period with respect to
your vested Performance Shares multiplied by the same payout percentage used to determine the number of shares you are entitled to

receive,  if  any.  PG&E  Corporation  has  the  sole  discretion  to  determine  whether  termination  of  your  employment  was  made  in
connection with a Change in Control.
 
Withholding Taxes
The  number  of  shares  of  PG&E  Corporation  common  stock  that  you  are  otherwise  entitled  to  receive  upon  settlement  of  your
Performance Shares  will  be  reduced  by  a  number  of  shares  having  an  aggregate  Fair  Market  Value,  as  determined  by  PG&E
Corporation,  equal  to  the  amount  of  any  Federal,  state,  or  local  taxes  of  any  kind  required  by  law  to  be  withheld  by  PG&E
Corporation in  connection  with  the  Performance  Shares  determined  using  the  applicable  minimum  statutory  withholding  rates ,
including social security and Medicare taxes due under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act and the California State Disability
Insurance tax (" Withholding Taxes").  If the withheld shares were not sufficient to satisfy your minimum Withholding Taxes, you
will be required to pay, as soon as practicable, including through additional payroll withholding, any amount of the Withholding
Taxes that is not satisfied by the withholding of shares described above .
 
Leaves of Absence
For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  if  you  are  on  an  approved  leave  of  absence  from  PG&E  Corporation,  or  a  recipient  of  PG&E
Corporation  sponsored  disability  benefits,  you  will  continue  to  be  considered  as  employed.   If  you  do  not  return  to  active
employment upon the expiration of your leave of absence or the expiration of your PG&E Corporation sponsored disability benefits,
you will be considered to have voluntarily terminated your employment.  See above under "Voluntary Termination."
 
PG&E Corporation reserves the right to determine which leaves of absence will be considered as continuing employment and when
your employment terminates for all purposes under this Agreement.
No Retention Rights
This Agreement is not an employment agreement and does not give you the right to be retained by PG&E Corporation.  Except as
otherwise provided in an applicable employment agreement, PG&E Corporation reserves the right to terminate your employment at
any time and for any reason.
 
Recoupment of Awards
Awards are subject to recoupment in accordance with any applicable law and any recoupment policy adopted by the Corporation
from time to time.
 
Applicable Law
This Agreement will be interpreted and enforced under the laws of the State of California.

EXHIBIT 12.1
EXHIBIT 12.1 
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY 
COMPUTATION OF RATIOS OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES 
 
  
   
   
   
   
 
 
  
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2016
  
2015
  
2014
  
2013
  
2012
 
Earnings:
  
   
   
   
   
 
Net income
 $
1,402  $
862  $
1,433  $
866  $
811 
Income tax provision (benefit)
  
70   
(19)   
384   
326   
298 
Fixed charges
  
1,417   
1,260   
1,176   
971   
891 
Total earnings
 $
2,889  $
2,103  $
2,993  $
2,163  $
2,000 
Fixed charges:
  
    
    
    
    
  
Interest on short-term borrowings
  
    
    
    
    
  
  and long-term debt, net
 $
1,363  $
1,208  $
1,125  $
917  $
834 
Interest on capital leases
  
3   
4   
6   
7   
9 
AFUDC debt
  
51   
48   
45   
47   
48 
Total fixed charges
 $
1,417  $
1,260  $
1,176  $
971  $
891 
Ratios of earnings to fixed charges
  
2.04   
1.67   
2.55   
2.23   
2.24 
Note:
For the purpose of computing Pacific Gas and Electric Company's ratios of earnings to fixed charges, "earnings" represent net income adjusted for the income or loss
from equity investees of less than 100% owned affiliates, equity in undistributed income or losses of less than 50% owned affiliates, income taxes and fixed charges
(excluding capitalized interest).  "Fixed charges" include interest on long-term debt and short-term borrowings (including a representative portion of rental expense),
amortization of bond premium, discount and expense, interest on capital leases, AFUDC debt, and earnings required to cover the preferred stock dividend
requirements.  Fixed charges exclude interest on tax liabilities.

EXHIBIT 12.2
EXHIBIT 12.2 
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY 
COMPUTATION OF RATIOS OF EARNINGS TO COMBINED 
FIXED CHARGES AND PREFERRED STOCK DIVIDENDS 
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2016
  
2015
  
2014
  
2013
  
2012
 
Earnings:
  
   
   
   
   
 
Net income
 $
1,402  $
862  $
1,433  $
866  $
811 
Income tax provision (benefit)
  
70   
(19)   
384   
326   
298 
Fixed charges
  
1,417   
1,260   
1,176   
971   
891 
Total earnings
 $
2,889  $
2,103  $
2,993  $
2,163  $
2,000 
Fixed charges:
  
    
    
    
    
  
Interest on short-term borrowings
  
    
    
    
    
  
and long-term debt, net
 $
1,363  $
1,208  $
1,125  $
917  $
834 
Interest on capital leases
  
3   
4   
6   
7   
9 
AFUDC debt
  
51   
48   
45   
47   
48 
Total fixed charges
 $
1,417  $
1,260  $
1,176  $
971  $
891 
Preferred stock dividends:
  
    
    
    
    
  
Tax deductible dividends
 $
9  $
9  $
9  $
9  $
9 
Pre-tax earnings required to cover
  
    
    
    
    
  
non-tax deductible preferred
  
    
    
    
    
  
stock dividend requirements
  
5   
5   
6   
7   
7 
Total preferred stock dividends
  
14   
14   
15   
16   
16 
Total combined fixed charges
  
    
    
    
    
  
and preferred stock
  
    
    
    
    
  
dividends
 $
1,431  $
1,274  $
1,191  $
987  $
907 
Ratios of earnings to combined
  
    
    
    
    
  
  fixed charges and preferred
  
    
    
    
    
  
  stock dividends
  
2.02   
1.65   
2.51   
2.19   
2.21 
Note:
For the purpose of computing Pacific Gas and Electric Company's ratios of earnings to combined fixed charges and preferred stock dividends, "earnings" represent net
income adjusted for the income or loss from equity investees of less than 100% owned affiliates, equity in undistributed income or losses of less than 50% owned
affiliates, income taxes and fixed charges (excluding capitalized interest).  "Fixed charges" include interest on long-term debt and short-term borrowings (including a
representative portion of rental expense), amortization of bond premium, discount and expense, interest on capital leases, AFUDC debt, and earnings required to cover
the preferred stock dividend requirements. "Preferred stock dividends" represent tax deductible dividends and pre-tax earnings that are required to pay the dividends
on outstanding preferred securities.  Fixed charges exclude interest on tax liabilities.

EXHIBIT 12.3
EXHIBIT 12.3
PG&E CORPORATION
COMPUTATION OF RATIOS OF EARNINGS TO FIXED CHARGES
 
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
(in millions)
 
2016
  
2015
  
2014
  
2013
  
2012
 
Earnings:
  
   
   
   
   
 
Net income
 $
1,407  $
888  $
1,450  $
828  $
830 
Income tax provision (benefit)
  
55   
(27)   
345   
268   
237 
Fixed charges
  
1,440   
1,284   
1,206   
1,012   
931 
Pre-tax earnings required to cover
  
    
    
    
    
  
the preferred stock dividend of
  
    
    
    
    
  
consolidated subsidiaries
  
(14)   
(14)   
(15)   
(16)   
(15)
Total earnings
 $
2,888  $
2,131  $
2,986  $
2,092  $
1,983 
Fixed charges:
  
    
    
    
    
  
Interest on short-term
  
    
    
    
    
  
borrowings and long-term
  
    
    
    
    
  
debt, net
 $
1,372  $
1,218  $
1,140  $
942  $
859 
Interest on capital leases
  
3   
4   
6   
7   
9 
AFUDC debt
  
51   
48   
45   
47   
48 
Pre-tax earnings required to cover
  
    
    
    
    
  
 the preferred stock dividend of
  
    
    
    
    
  
consolidated subsidiaries
  
14   
14   
15   
16   
15 
Total fixed charges
 $
1,440  $
1,284  $
1,206  $
1,012  $
931 
Ratios of earnings to fixed charges
  
2.01   
1.66   
2.48   
2.07   
2.13 
Note:
For the purpose of computing PG&E Corporation's ratios of earnings to fixed charges, "earnings" represent income from continuing operations adjusted for income
taxes, fixed charges (excluding capitalized interest), and pre-tax earnings required to cover the preferred stock dividend of consolidated subsidiaries.  "Fixed charges"
include interest on long-term debt and short-term borrowings (including a representative portion of rental expense), amortization of bond premium, discount and
expense, interest on capital leases, AFUDC debt, and earnings required to cover preferred stock dividends of consolidated subsidiaries.  Fixed charges exclude interest
on tax liabilities.

EXHIBIT 21
 
Significant Subsidiaries
Parent of Significant Subsidiary
 
Name of Significant Subsidiary
 
Jurisdiction of
Formation of
Subsidiary
 
Names under which Significant Subsidiary does
business
PG&E Corporation
 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
 
CA
 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
PG&E
 
 
 
  
 
 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
 
None
  
 
 

EXHIBIT 23
 
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement No. 333-215425 on Form S-3, 333-209586 on Form S-3ASR, and 333-129422, 333-176090,
333-195902 and 333-206457 on Form S-8 of PG&E Corporation and Registration Statement No. 333-215427 on Form S-3 of Pacific Gas and Electric Company of
our reports dated February 16, 2017 , relating to the consolidated financial statements of PG&E Corporation and subsidiaries  ("the Company") and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company and subsidiaries  (the "Utility"), the consolidated financial statement schedules of the Company and the Utility, and the effectiveness of the
Company's and the Utility's internal control over financial reporting, appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company for the year ended December 31, 2016.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
San Francisco, California
February 16, 2017

EXHIBIT 24
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each of the undersigned Directors of PG&E Corporation hereby constitutes and appoints JOHN R. SIMON, HYUN PARK, LINDA Y.H. CHENG,
EILEEN O. CHAN, WONDY S. LEE, and ERIC A. MONTIZAMBERT, and each of them, as his or her attorneys in fact with full power of substitution to sign and
file with the Securities and Exchange Commission in his or her capacity as such Director of said corporation the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2016 required by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and any and all amendments and other filings or documents related
thereto, and hereby ratifies all that said attorneys in fact or any of them may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have signed these presents this 15th day of February, 2017.
 
 
/s/ Lewis Chew
 
 
 
/s/ Forrest E. Miller
Lewis Chew
 
/s/ Anthony F. Earley, Jr.
 
Forrest E. Miller
 
/s/ Eric D. Mullins
Anthony F. Earley, Jr.
 
/s/ Fred J. Fowler
 
Eric D. Mullins
 
/s/ Rosendo G. Parra
Fred J. Fowler
 
/s/ Maryellen C. Herringer
 
Rosendo G. Parra
 
/s/ Barbara L. Rambo
Maryellen C. Herringer
 
/s/ Richard C. Kelly
 
Barbara L. Rambo
 
/s/ Anne Shen Smith
Richard C. Kelly
 
/s/ Roger H. Kimmel
 
Anne Shen Smith
 
/s/ Barry Lawson Williams
Roger H. Kimmel
 
/s/ Richard A. Meserve
 
Barry Lawson Williams
 
Richard A. Meserve
 
 
 
 
 
 
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each of the undersigned Directors of Pacific Gas and Electric Company hereby constitutes and appoints JOHN R. SIMON, HYUN PARK, LINDA
Y.H. CHENG, EILEEN O. CHAN, WONDY S. LEE, and ERIC A. MONTIZAMBERT, and each of them, as his or her attorneys in fact with full power of
substitution to sign and file with the Securities and Exchange Commission in his or her capacity as such Director of said corporation the Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended December 31, 2016 required by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and any and all amendments and other filings or
documents related thereto, and hereby ratifies all that said attorneys in fact or any of them may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have signed these presents this 15th day of February, 2017.
 
 
/s/ Lewis Chew
 
 
 
/s/ Eric D. Mullins
Lewis Chew
 
/s/ Anthony F. Earley, Jr.
 
Eric D. Mullins
 
/s/ Rosendo G. Parra
Anthony F. Earley, Jr.
 
/s/ Fred J. Fowler
 
Rosendo G. Parra
 
/s/ Barbara L. Rambo
Fred J. Fowler
 
/s/ Maryellen C. Herringer
 
Barbara L. Rambo
 
/s/ Anne Shen Smith
Maryellen C. Herringer
 
/s/ Richard C. Kelly
 
Anne Shen Smith
 
/s/ Nickolas Stavropoulos
Richard C. Kelly
 
/s/ Roger H. Kimmel
 
Nickolas Stavropoulos
 
/s/ Barry Lawson Williams
Roger H. Kimmel
 
/s/ Richard A. Meserve
 
Barry Lawson Williams
 
/s/ Geisha J. Williams
Richard A. Meserve
 
/s/ Forrest E. Miller
 
Geisha J. Williams
 

Forrest E. Miller
 
 
 
 

EXHIBIT 31.1
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, Anthony F. Earley, Jr., certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 of PG&E Corporation;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) ) for the registrant and
have:
a.
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during
the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent fiscal quarter
(the registrant's fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant's internal
control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.
Any  fraud,  whether  or  not  material,  that  involves  management  or  other  employees  who  have  a  significant  role  in  the  registrant's  internal  control  over
financial reporting.
Date: February 16, 2017
ANTHONY F. EARLEY, Jr.
 
Anthony F. Earley, Jr.
 
Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and President

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, Jason P. Wells, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 of PG&E Corporation;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a.
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during
the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent fiscal quarter
(the registrant's fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant's internal
control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.
Any  fraud,  whether  or  not  material,  that  involves  management  or  other  employees  who  have  a  significant  role  in  the  registrant's  internal  control  over
financial reporting.
Date: February 16, 2017
JASON P. WELLS
 
Jason P. Wells
 
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer

EXHIBIT 31.2
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, Nickolas Stavropoulos, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 of Pacific Gas and Electric Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) ) for the registrant and
have:
a.
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during
the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent fiscal quarter
(the registrant's fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant's internal
control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.
Any  fraud,  whether  or  not  material,  that  involves  management  or  other  employees  who  have  a  significant  role  in  the  registrant's  internal  control  over
financial reporting.
 
Date: February 16, 2017
 
NICKOLAS STAVROPOULOS
 
Nickolas Stavropoulos
 
President, Gas

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, Geisha J. Williams, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 of Pacific Gas and Electric Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) ) for the registrant and
have:
a.
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during
the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent fiscal quarter
(the registrant's fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant's internal
control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.
Any  fraud,  whether  or  not  material,  that  involves  management  or  other  employees  who  have  a  significant  role  in  the  registrant's  internal  control  over
financial reporting.
 
Date: February 16, 2017
 
GEISHA J. WILLIAMS
 
Geisha J. Williams
 
President, Electric

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, David S. Thomason, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016 of Pacific Gas and Electric Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a.
Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during
the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant's internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant's most recent fiscal quarter
(the registrant's fourth quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant's internal
control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.
All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.
Any  fraud,  whether  or  not  material,  that  involves  management  or  other  employees  who  have  a  significant  role  in  the  registrant's  internal  control  over
financial reporting.
Date:  February 16, 2017
DAVID S. THOMASON
 
David S. Thomason
 
Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Controller

EXHIBIT 32.1
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350 
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of PG&E Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2016 ("Form 10-K"), I, Anthony
F. Earley, Jr., Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and President of PG&E Corporation, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
                 (1)
the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
 
     
                 (2)
the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations
of PG&E Corporation.
 
     
    
 
 
ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.
 
ANTHONY F. EARLEY, JR.
 
Chairman, Chief Executive Officer and President
 
 
February 16, 2017

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350 
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of PG&E Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2016 ("Form 10-K"), I, Jason P.
Wells, Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of PG&E Corporation, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section
906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
                 (1)
the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
 
     
                 (2)
the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations
of PG&E Corporation.
 
     
 
 
 
JASON P. WELLS
 
JASON P. WELLS
 
Senior Vice President and
 
Chief Financial Officer
 
 
February 16, 2017

EXHIBIT 32.2
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350 
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the year ended December 31, 2016 ("Form 10-
K"), I, Nickolas Stavropoulos, President, Gas of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section
906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
               (1)
the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
 
     
                (2)
the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
 
 
NICKOLAS STAVROPOULOS
 
NICKOLAS STAVROPOULOS
                               
President, Gas
February 16, 2017

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350 
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the year ended December 31, 2016 ("Form 10-
K"), I, Geisha J. Williams, President, Electric of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section
906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
               (1)
the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
 
     
                (2)
the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
 
 
GEISHA J. WILLIAMS
 
GEISHA J. WILLIAMS
                               
President, Electric
February 16, 2017

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER 
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350 
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the year ended December 31, 2016 ("Form 10-
K"), I, David S. Thomason, Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Controller of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section
1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
                (1)
the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
 
     
                (2)
the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
 
 
DAVID S. THOMASON
 
DAVID S. THOMASON
 
Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Controller
 
 
February 16, 2017
