UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
____________________________________________________________________________
FORM 10-K 
(Mark One)
 
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021
 
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from _________ to  ___________  
Commission 
File Number
Exact Name of Registrant
as Specified In Its Charter
State or Other Jurisdiction of 
Incorporation or Organization
IRS Employer 
Identification Number
1-12609
PG&E CORPORATION
California
94-3234914
1-2348
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
California
94-0742640
77 Beale Street
77 Beale Street
P.O. Box 770000
P.O. Box 770000
San Francisco,
California
94117
San Francisco,
California
94117
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
415
973-1000
415
973-1000
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading Symbol(s)
Name of each exchange on which registered
Common stock, no par value
PCG
The New York Stock Exchange
Equity Units
PCGU
The New York Stock Exchange
First preferred stock, cumulative, par value $25 per share, 5% series A
redeemable
PCG-PE
NYSE American LLC
First preferred stock, cumulative, par value $25 per share, 5% redeemable
PCG-PD
NYSE American LLC
First preferred stock, cumulative, par value $25 per share, 4.80%
redeemable
PCG-PG
NYSE American LLC
First preferred stock, cumulative, par value $25 per share, 4.50%
redeemable
PCG-PH
NYSE American LLC
First preferred stock, cumulative, par value $25 per share, 4.36% series A
redeemable
PCG-PI
NYSE American LLC
First preferred stock, cumulative, par value $25 per share, 6%
nonredeemable
PCG-PA
NYSE American LLC
First preferred stock, cumulative, par value $25 per share, 5.50%
nonredeemable
PCG-PB
NYSE American LLC
First preferred stock, cumulative, par value $25 per share, 5%
nonredeemable
PCG-PC
NYSE American LLC
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: none

Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act:
PG&E Corporation:
☒Yes
☐No
Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
☒Yes
☐No
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act:
PG&E Corporation:
☐Yes
☒No
Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
☐Yes
☒No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the
preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the
past 90 days. 
PG&E Corporation:
☒Yes
☐No
Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
☒Yes
☐No
  
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of
Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).
PG&E Corporation:
☒Yes
☐No
Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
☒Yes
☐No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company or an emerging
growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2
of the Exchange Act.
PG&E Corporation
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
☒
Large accelerated filer
☐
Large accelerated filer
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☒
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Accelerated filer
☐
Accelerated filer
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
Emerging growth company
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or
revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act.
PG&E Corporation:
☐
Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of 
the effectiveness of its internal control over financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 
7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report.
PG&E Corporation:
☒
Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act).
PG&E Corporation:
☐Yes
☒No
Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
☐Yes
☒No
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed all documents and reports required to be filed by Section 12, 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 subsequent to the distribution of securities under a plan confirmed by a court.
PG&E Corporation:
☒Yes
☐No
Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
☒Yes
☐No

Aggregate market value of voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates of the registrants as of June 30, 2021, the last business day of the
most recently completed second fiscal quarter:
PG&E Corporation common stock
                    $20,185 million
Pacific Gas and Electric Company common stock
                    Wholly owned by PG&E Corporation
Common Stock outstanding as of February 4, 2022:
 
PG&E Corporation:
2,463,891,104*
Pacific Gas and Electric Company:
264,374,809
*Includes 437,743,590 shares of common stock held by PG&E ShareCo LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, and 40,000,000 shares
of common stock held by Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the documents listed below have been incorporated by reference into the indicated parts of this report, as specified in the responses to the item numbers
involved: 
Designated portions of the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2021 Annual
Meetings of Shareholders
Part III (Items 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14)

Contents 
UNITS OF MEASUREMENT
GLOSSARY
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
PART 1
ITEM 1. BUSINESS
Triple Bottom Line
Regulatory Environment
Environmental Regulation
Ratemaking Mechanisms
Human Capital
Electric Utility Operations
Natural Gas Utility Operations
Competition
ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS
ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
ITEM 2. PROPERTIES
ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
INFORMATION ABOUT OUR EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
PART II
ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED SHAREHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES
ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
LIQUIDITY AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES
ENFORCEMENT AND LITIGATION MATTERS
REGULATORY MATTERS
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY INITIATIVES
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
PG&E Corporation
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
4

CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1: ORGANIZATION AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION
NOTE 2: BANKRUPTCY FILING
NOTE 3: SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
NOTE 4: REGULATORY ASSETS, LIABILITIES, AND BALANCING ACCOUNTS
NOTE 5: DEBT
NOTE 6: COMMON STOCK AND SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION
NOTE 7: PREFERRED STOCK
NOTE 8: EARNINGS PER SHARE
NOTE 9: INCOME TAXES
NOTE 10: DERIVATIVES
NOTE 11: FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
NOTE 12: EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
NOTE 13: RELATED PARTY AGREEMENTS AND TRANSACTIONS
NOTE 14: WILDFIRE-RELATED CONTINGENCIES
NOTE 15: OTHER CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
MANAGEMENT’S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM (PCAOB ID No. 34)
ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION
ITEM 9C. DISCLOSURE REGARDING FOREIGN JURISDICTIONS THAT PREVENT INSPECTIONS
PART III
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
PART IV
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
ITEM 16. FORM 10-K SUMMARY
SIGNATURES
SCHEDULE I - CONDENSED FINANCIAL INFORMATION OF PARENT
SCHEDULE II - CONSOLIDATED VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS
5

UNITS OF MEASUREMENT 
1 Kilowatt (kW)
=
One thousand watts
1 Kilowatt-Hour (kWh)
=
One kilowatt continuously for one hour
1 Megawatt (MW)
=
One thousand kilowatts
1 Megawatt-Hour (MWh)
=
One megawatt continuously for one hour
1 Gigawatt (GW)
=
One million kilowatts
1 Gigawatt-Hour (GWh)
=
One gigawatt continuously for one hour
1 Kilovolt (kV)
=
One thousand volts
1 MVA
=
One megavolt ampere
1 Mcf
=
One thousand cubic feet
1 MMcf
=
One million cubic feet
1 Bcf
=
One billion cubic feet
1 MDth
=
One thousand decatherms
6

GLOSSARY
The following terms and abbreviations appearing in the text of this report have the meanings indicated below. 
2021 Form 10-K
PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s combined Annual Report on 
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021
AB
Assembly Bill
AFUDC
Allowance for Funds Used During Construction
Amended Articles
Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, each filed on June 22, 2020
ARO
asset retirement obligation
ASU
accounting standard update issued by the FASB
Bankruptcy Code
the United States Bankruptcy Code
Bankruptcy Court
the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Northern District of California
BPP
bundled procurement plan
CAISO
California Independent System Operator Corporation
Cal Fire
California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
CAPP
California Arrearage Payment Program
CARB
California Air Resources Board
CARE
California Alternate Rates for Energy Program
CCA
Community Choice Aggregator
CCPA
California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018
CEC
California Energy Resources Conservation and Development Commission
CEMA
Catastrophic Event Memorandum Account
Chapter 11
Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the U.S. Code
Chapter 11 Cases
the voluntary cases commenced by each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility under Chapter 11 on January 29, 2019
Confirmation Order
the order confirming the Plan, dated as of June 20, 2020 with the Bankruptcy Court
CHT
Customer Harm Threshold
CPIM
Core Procurement Incentive Mechanism
CPPMA
COVID-19 Pandemic Protections Memorandum Account
CPUC
California Public Utilities Commission
CRRs
congestion revenue rights
CVA
Climate Vulnerability Assessment
DA
Direct Access
Diablo Canyon
Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant
DOE
U.S. Department of Energy
DTA
deferred tax asset
DTSC
Department of Toxic Substances Control
EMANI
European Mutual Association for Nuclear Insurance
Emergence Date
July 1, 2020, the effective date of the Plan in the Chapter 11 Cases
EO
Executive Order
EOEP
Enhanced Oversight and Enforcement Process
EPA
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
EPS
earnings per common share
EPSS
Enhanced Powerline Safety Settings
EV
electric vehicle
EVM
enhanced vegetation management
Exchange Act
Securities Exchange Act of 1934
FASB
Financial Accounting Standards Board
7

FERC
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
FHPMA
Fire Hazard Prevention Memorandum Account
Fire Victim Trust
The trust established pursuant to the Plan for the benefit of holders of the Fire Victim Claims into which the Aggregate Fire
Victim Consideration (as defined in the Plan) has been, and will continue to be funded
FRMMA
Fire Risk Mitigation Memorandum Account
GAAP
U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
GHG
greenhouse gas
GO
general order
GRC
general rate case
GT&S
gas transmission and storage
HFTD
high fire-threat districts as set forth in the CPUC Fire-Threat Map
HSM
hazardous substance memorandum account
IRC
Internal Revenue Code
IRP
Integrated Resource Planning
IOUs
investor-owned utility(ies)
Kincade Amended Complaint
The amended criminal complaint filed by the Sonoma County District Attorney’s Office on January 28, 2022 in connection
with the 2019 Kincade fire
Kincade Complaint
The criminal complaint filed by the Sonoma County District Attorney’s Office on April 6, 2021 in connection with the 2019
Kincade fire
Lakeside Building
300 Lakeside Drive, Oakland, California, 94612
LIBOR
London Interbank Offered Rate
LSE
Load-serving entity
LTIP
Long-Term Incentive Plan (including the PG&E Corporation 2021 Long-Term Incentive Plan and its predecessor, the PG&E
Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan)
MD&A
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations set forth in Part II, Item 7, of this
Form 10-K
MGMA
Microgrids Memorandum Account
MGP
manufactured gas plants
the Monitor
third-party monitor retained by the Utility as part of its compliance with the sentencing terms of the Utility’s January 27, 2017
federal criminal conviction
NAV
net asset value
NEIL
Nuclear Electric Insurance Limited
NEM
net energy metering
NRC
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
NTSB
National Transportation Safety Board
OEIS
Office of Energy Infrastructure Safety (successor to the Wildfire Safety Division of the CPUC)
OII
order instituting investigation
OIR
order instituting rulemaking
PCAOB
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States)
PD
proposed decision
PERA
Public Employees Retirement Association
Petition Date
January 29, 2019
Plan
PG&E Corporation and the Utility, Knighthead Capital Management, LLC, and Abrams Capital Management, LP Joint Chapter
11 Plan of Reorganization, dated as of June 19, 2020
POD
Presiding Officer’s Decision
PSPS
Public Safety Power Shutoff
QF
Qualifying facilities
RAMP
Risk Assessment Mitigation Phase
8

RA
Resource Adequacy
ROE
return on equity
ROU asset
right-of-use asset
RPS
Renewables Portfolio Standard
RSA
restructuring support agreement
RTBA
Risk Transfer Balancing Account
RUBA
Residential Uncollectibles Balancing Account
SB
Senate Bill
SEC
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
SED
Safety and Enforcement Division of the CPUC
SFGO
The Utility’s San Francisco General Office headquarters complex
ShareCo
PG&E ShareCo LLC, a limited liability company whose sole member is PG&E Corporation
SPV
PG&E AR Facility, LLC
Tax Act
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017
TCC
Official Committee of Tort Claimants
TCC RSA
Restructuring Support Agreement dated December 6, 2019 with the TCC and attorneys and other advisors and agents for
certain holders of Fire Victim Claims (as defined therein), as amended
TO
transmission owner
TURN
The Utility Reform Network
Utility
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
VIE(s)
variable interest entity(ies)
VMBA
Vegetation Management Balancing Account
WEMA
Wildfire Expense Memorandum Account
Wildfire Fund
statewide fund established by AB 1054 that will be available for eligible electric utility 
companies to pay eligible claims for liabilities arising from wildfires occurring after July 12, 
2019 that are caused by the applicable electric utility company’s equipment
Wildfires OII
Order Instituting Investigation into the 2017 Northern California Wildfires and the 2018 Camp Fire
WMBA
Wildfire Mitigation Balancing Account
WMCE
Wildfire Mitigation and Catastrophic Events
WMP
wildfire mitigation plan
WMPMA
Wildfire Mitigation Plan Memorandum Account
Zogg Complaint
The criminal complaint filed by the Shasta County District Attorney’s Office on September 24, 2021
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This report contains forward-looking statements that are necessarily subject to various risks and uncertainties. These statements reflect management’s judgment
and opinions that are based on current estimates, expectations, and projections about future events and assumptions regarding these events and management’s
knowledge of facts as of the date of this report. These forward-looking statements relate to, among other matters, estimated losses, including penalties and fines,
associated with various investigations and proceedings; forecasts of capital expenditures; forecasts of expense reduction; estimates and assumptions used in critical
accounting estimates, including those relating to insurance receivables, regulatory assets and liabilities, environmental remediation, litigation, third-party claims,
the Wildfire Fund, and other liabilities; and the level of future equity or debt issuances. These statements are also identified by words such as “assume,” “expect,”
“intend,” “forecast,” “plan,” “project,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “anticipate,” “may,” “should,” “would,” “could,” “potential” and similar expressions.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are not able to predict all the factors that may affect future results. Some of the factors that could cause future results to differ
materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements, or from historical results, include, but are not limited to:
•
the extent to which the Wildfire Fund and revised recoverability standard under AB 1054 effectively mitigates the risk of liability for damages arising
from catastrophic wildfires, including whether the Utility maintains an approved WMP and a valid safety certification and whether the Wildfire Fund has
sufficient remaining funds;
9

•
the risks and uncertainties associated with wildfires that have occurred or may occur in the Utility’s service territory, including the wildfire that began on
October 23, 2019 northeast of Geyserville in Sonoma County, California (the “2019 Kincade fire”), the wildfire that began on September 27, 2020 in the
area of Zogg Mine Road and Jenny Bird Lane, north of Igo in Shasta County, California (the “2020 Zogg fire”), the wildfire that began on July 13, 2021
near the Cresta Dam in the Feather River Canyon in Plumas County, California (the “2021 Dixie fire”), and any other wildfires for which the causes have
yet to be determined; the damage caused by such wildfires; the extent of the Utility’s liability in connection with such wildfires (including the risk that the
Utility may be found liable for damages regardless of fault); investigations into such wildfires, including those being conducted by the CPUC and various
district attorney’s offices; the outcome of the criminal proceedings initiated against the Utility in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg
fire, and three other fires; potential liabilities in connection with fines or penalties that could be imposed on the Utility if the CPUC or any other
enforcement agency were to bring an enforcement action in respect of any such fire; the risk that the Utility is not able to recover costs from insurance,
from the Wildfire Fund or through rates; and the effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s reputations of such wildfires, investigations and
proceedings;
•
the extent to which the Utility’s wildfire mitigation initiatives are effective, including the Utility’s ability to comply with the targets and metrics set forth
in its WMP; to retain or contract for the workforce necessary to execute its WMP; the effectiveness of its system hardening, including undergrounding;
and the cost of the program and the timing and outcome of any proceeding to recover such costs through rates;
•
the impact of the Utility’s implementation of its PSPS program, and whether any fines, penalties or civil liability for damages will be imposed on the
Utility as a result; the costs in connection with PSPS events, the timing and outcome of any proceeding to recover such costs through rates, and the effects
on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s reputations caused by implementation of the PSPS program;
•
the Utility’s ability to safely, reliably, and efficiently construct, maintain, operate, protect, and decommission its facilities, and provide electricity and
natural gas services safely and reliably;
•
the availability, cost, coverage, and terms of the Utility’s insurance, including insurance for wildfire, nuclear, and other liabilities, the timing of any
insurance recoveries, and recovery of the costs of such insurance or, in the event liabilities exceed insured amounts, the ability to recover uninsured losses
through rates or from other third parties;
•
significant changes to the electric power and gas industries driven by technological advancements and a decarbonized economy;
•
cyber or physical attacks, including acts of terrorism, war, and vandalism, on the Utility or its third-party vendors, contractors, or customers (or others
with whom they have shared data) which could result in operational disruption; the misappropriation or loss of confidential or proprietary assets,
information or data, including customer, employee, financial, or operating system information, or intellectual property; corruption of data; or potential
costs, lost revenues, or reputational harm incurred in connection therewith;
•
the impact of severe weather events and other natural disasters, including wildfires and other fires, storms, tornadoes, floods, extreme heat events,
drought, earthquakes, lightning, tsunamis, rising sea levels, mudslides, pandemics, solar events, electromagnetic events, wind events or other weather-
related conditions, climate change, or natural disasters, and other events that can cause unplanned outages, reduce generating output, disrupt the Utility’s
service to customers, or damage or disrupt the facilities, operations, or information technology and systems owned by the Utility, its customers, or third
parties on which the Utility relies, and the effectiveness of the Utility’s efforts to prevent or respond to such conditions or events; the reparation and other
costs that the Utility may incur in connection with such conditions or events; the impact of the adequacy of the Utility’s emergency preparedness; whether
the Utility incurs liability to third parties for property damage or personal injury caused by such events; whether the Utility is able to procure replacement
power; and whether the Utility is subject to civil, criminal, or regulatory penalties in connection with such events;
•
the ability of the Utility to meet the conditions in its corrective action plan and exit the EOEP;
10

•
the timing and outcome of future regulation and federal, state or local legislation, their implementation, and their interpretation; the cost to comply with
such regulation and legislation; and the extent to which the Utility recovers its associated compliance and investment costs, including those regarding:
◦
wildfires, including inverse condemnation reform, wildfire insurance, and additional wildfire mitigation measures or other reforms targeted at
the Utility or its industry;
◦
the environment, including the costs incurred to discharge the Utility’s remediation obligations or the costs to comply with standards for GHG
emissions, renewable energy targets, energy efficiency standards, distributed energy resources, and EVs;
◦
the nuclear industry, including operations, seismic design, security, safety, relicensing, the storage of spent nuclear fuel, decommissioning, and
cooling water intake, and the Utility’s ability to continue operating Diablo Canyon until its planned retirement;
◦
the regulation of utilities and their holding companies, including the conditions imposed on PG&E Corporation when it became the Utility’s
holding company and whether the Utility can make distributions to PG&E Corporation; and
◦
taxes and tax audits;
•
the timing and outcomes of the Utility’s pending and future ratemaking and regulatory proceedings, including the extent to which PG&E Corporation and
the Utility are able to recover their costs through rates as recorded in memorandum accounts or balancing accounts, or as otherwise requested;
•
whether the Utility can control its operating costs within the authorized levels of spending, and timely recover its costs through rates; whether the Utility
can continue implementing a streamlined organizational structure and achieve projected savings; the extent to which the Utility incurs unrecoverable costs
that are higher than the forecasts of such costs; and changes in cost forecasts or the scope and timing of planned work resulting from changes in customer
demand for electricity and natural gas or other reasons;
•
the outcome of current and future self-reports, investigations or other enforcement actions, or notices of violation that could be issued related to the
Utility’s compliance with laws, rules, regulations, or orders applicable to its gas and electric operations; the construction, expansion, or replacement of its
electric and gas facilities; electric grid reliability; audit, inspection and maintenance practices; customer billing and privacy; physical and cybersecurity
protections; environmental laws and regulations; or otherwise, such as fines, penalties, remediation obligations, the transfer of ownership of the Utility’s
assets to municipalities or other public entities, or the implementation of corporate governance, operational or other changes in connection with the
EOEP;
•
the risks and uncertainties associated with PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s substantial indebtedness and the limitations on their operating flexibility
in the documents governing that indebtedness;
•
the risks and uncertainties associated with the timing and outcomes of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s ongoing litigation, including appeals of the
Confirmation Order; certain indemnity obligations to current and former officers and directors, as well as potential indemnity obligations to underwriters
for certain of the Utility’s note offerings; three purported class actions that have been consolidated and denominated In re PG&E Corporation Securities
Litigation, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California, Case No. 18-03509; the appeal of the FERC’s order denying rehearing on March 17,
2020 granting the Utility a 50-basis point ROE incentive adder for continued participation in the CAISO; the debarment proceeding; the purported PSPS
class action filed in December 2019; and other third-party claims, including the extent to which related costs can be recovered through insurance, rates, or
from other third parties;
•
the ability of PG&E Corporation and the Utility to securitize (i) the remaining $2.4 billion of fire risk mitigation capital expenditures that were or will be
incurred by the Utility and (ii) $7.5 billion of costs related to the multiple wildfires that began on October 8, 2017 and spread through Northern California,
including Napa, Sonoma, Butte, Humboldt, Mendocino, Lake, Nevada and Yuba Counties, as well as in the area surrounding Yuba City (the “2017
Northern California wildfires”), in a financing transaction that is designed to be rate neutral to customers;
11

•
the risks and uncertainties associated with any future substantial sales of shares of common stock of PG&E Corporation by existing shareholders,
including the Fire Victim Trust;
•
whether PG&E Corporation or the Utility undergoes an “ownership change” within the meaning of Section 382 of the IRC, as a result of which tax
attributes could be limited;
•
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s historical financial information not being indicative of future financial performance as a result of the Chapter 11
Cases and the financial and other restructuring undergone by PG&E Corporation and the Utility in connection with their emergence from Chapter 11;
•
the ultimate amount of unrecoverable environmental costs the Utility incurs associated with the Utility’s natural gas compressor station site located near
Hinkley, California and the Utility’s fossil fuel-fired generation sites;
•
the impact that reductions in Utility customer demand for electricity and natural gas, driven by customer departures to CCAs, DA providers and
legislative mandates to replace gas-fuel technologies, have on the Utility’s ability to make and recover its investments through rates and earn its
authorized ROE, and whether the Utility is successful in addressing the impact of growing distributed and renewable generation resources, and changing
customer demand for its natural gas and electric services;
•
the supply and price of electricity, natural gas, and nuclear fuel; the extent to which the Utility can manage and respond to the volatility of energy
commodity prices; the ability of the Utility and its counterparties to post or return collateral in connection with price risk management activities; and
whether the Utility is able to recover timely its electric generation and energy commodity costs through rates, including its renewable energy procurement
costs;
•
the ability of PG&E Corporation and the Utility to access capital markets and other sources of debt and equity financing in a timely manner on acceptable
terms;
•
the risks and uncertainties associated with the Utility’s ability to accurately forecast major capital expenditures, weighted average annual rate base and
expense reduction associated with implementation of the Lean operating system;
•
the risks and uncertainties associated with rising rates for the Utility’s customers;
•
actions by credit rating agencies to downgrade PG&E Corporation’s or the Utility’s credit ratings;
•
the severity, extent and duration of the global COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of
operations, liquidity, and cash flows, as well as on energy demand in the Utility’s service territory, the ability of the Utility to collect on customer
receivables, the ability of the Utility to mitigate these effects, including with spending reductions, the ability of the Utility to recover any losses incurred
in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, and the impact of workforce disruptions caused either by illness of workers and their family members or
workforce attrition related to potential new workplace regulations such as vaccine mandates;
•
increased employee attrition as a result of the challenging political and operating environment facing PG&E Corporation and the Utility;
•
whether PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s counterparties are available and able to meet their financial and performance obligations with respect to
contracts, credit agreements, and financial instruments, which could be affected by disruptions in the global supply chain caused by the COVID-19
pandemic or otherwise; and
•
the impact of changes in GAAP, standards, rules, or policies, including those related to regulatory accounting, and the impact of changes in their
interpretation or application.
For more information about the significant risks that could affect the outcome of the forward-looking statements and PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s future
financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows, see Item 1A. Risk Factors below and a detailed discussion of these matters contained in Item 7.
MD&A. PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements, whether in response to new information, future
events, or otherwise.
12

PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, and proxy statements, are
available free of charge on both PG&E Corporation’s website, www.pgecorp.com, and the Utility's website, www.pge.com, as promptly as practicable after they
are filed with, or furnished to, the SEC. Additionally, PG&E Corporation and the Utility routinely provide links to the Utility’s principal regulatory proceedings
before the CPUC and the FERC at http://investor.pgecorp.com, under the “Regulatory Filings” tab, so that such filings are available to investors upon filing with
the relevant agency. PG&E Corporation and the Utility also routinely post or provide direct links to presentations, documents, and other information that may be of
interest to investors at http://investor.pgecorp.com, under the “Chapter 11,” “Wildfire and Safety Updates” and “News & Events: Events & Presentations” tabs,
respectively, in order to publicly disseminate such information. Specifically, within two hours during business hours or four hours outside of business hours of the
determination that an incident is attributable or allegedly attributable to the Utility’s electric facilities and has resulted in property damage estimated to exceed
$50,000, a fatality or injury requiring overnight in-patient hospitalization, or significant public or media attention, the Utility is required to submit an electric
incident report including information about such incident. The information included in an electric incident report is limited and may not include important
information about the facts and circumstances about the incident due to the limited scope of the reporting requirements and timing of the report and is necessarily
limited to information to which the Utility has access at the time of the report. Ignitions are also reportable under CPUC Decision 14-02-015 when they involve
self-propagating fire of material other than electrical or communication facilities; the fire traveled greater than one linear meter from the ignition point; and the
Utility has knowledge that the fire occurred. It is possible that any of these filings or information included therein could be deemed to be material information. The
information contained on such website is not part of this or any other report that PG&E Corporation or the Utility files with, or furnishes to, the SEC. PG&E
Corporation and the Utility are providing the address to this website solely for the information of investors and do not intend the address to be an active link.
13

PART I
ITEM 1. BUSINESS
PG&E Corporation, incorporated in California in 1995, is a holding company whose primary operating subsidiary is Pacific Gas and Electric Company, a public
utility operating in Northern and Central California. The Utility was incorporated in California in 1905. PG&E Corporation became the holding company of the
Utility and its subsidiaries in 1997. The Utility generates revenues mainly through the sale and delivery of electricity and natural gas to customers. The Utility’s
service area is shown in the graphic below.
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s operating revenues, income, and total assets can be found below in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
The principal executive offices of PG&E Corporation and the Utility are located at 77 Beale Street, P.O. Box 770000, San Francisco, California 94177. PG&E
Corporation’s telephone number is (415) 973-1000 and the Utility’s telephone number is (415) 973-7000.
This is a combined Annual Report on Form 10-K for PG&E Corporation and the Utility. Each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility is a separate entity, with
distinct creditors and claimants, and is subject to separate laws, rules, and regulations.
Over the past several years, Northern California has experienced major wildfires. For more information about material wildfires, see Item 7. MD&A, and Note 14
of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
This 2021 Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that are necessarily subject to various risks and uncertainties. For a discussion of the significant risks
that could affect the outcome of these forward-looking statements and PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s future financial condition, results of operations,
liquidity, and cash flows, see Item 1A. Risk Factors and “Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Triple Bottom Line
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s purpose is to deliver for their hometowns, serve the planet, and lead with love. In support of this purpose, the companies
employ a Lean operating model designed to drive more effective and responsive decision-making, reduce the human struggle many coworkers face in their day-to-
day work, and deliver better outcomes for customers and communities.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility measure their progress toward the purpose by considering their impact on the “triple bottom line” of people, planet, and
prosperity, which is underpinned by performance; this consideration takes into account not only the economic value they create for customers and investors, but
also their responsibility to social and environmental goals. The triple bottom line is designed to balance the interests of the companies’ many stakeholders, and it
reflects the broader societal impacts of the companies’ activities.
14

PG&E Corporation and the Utility will continue to consider the impact on the triple bottom line of people, planet, and prosperity in their daily operations as well as
in their long-term strategic decisions. The Utility will continue to seek fair and timely regulatory treatment in order to support its customer-driven investment plan
while pursuing cost-control measures that would allow it to maintain the affordability of its service. The Lean operating system is an important means of realizing
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s objective of achieving world class performance while delivering hometown service.
People
The people element of the triple bottom line represents PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s commitment to their workforce, their customers, the residents of
local communities in which the companies do business, and other stakeholders.
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s goal is to continually reduce risk to keep customers, the communities they serve, and their workforce (both employees and
contractors) safe. Their focus is on continuously building an organization where every work activity is designed to facilitate safe performance, every worker knows
and practices safe behaviors, and every individual is encouraged to speak up and stop work if they see unsafe or risky behavior, and has confidence that their
concerns and ideas will be heard and pursued. PG&E Corporation and the Utility are committed to significantly improving their safety performance by
understanding their risks, prioritizing their work, using controls to reduce risks, and continuously measuring and improving risk reduction.
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s human capital resource objectives are to build and retain an engaged, well trained, diverse, and equitable workforce. PG&E
Corporation and the Utility place a high priority on delivering customer value and providing a hometown customer experience. The Utility’s customer-driven
investment program is aimed at improving safety, increasing electric and gas reliability, and improving customer satisfaction.
For more information, see “Human Capital” below.
Planet
The planet element of the triple bottom line represents PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s commitment to protect and serve the environment. This commitment
extends beyond compliance with various state and federal environmental, health, and safety laws and regulations. Management believes that integrating and
managing climate change and other environmental considerations in the companies’ business strategies creates long-term value for PG&E Corporation and the
Utility, and for their customers, communities, coworkers, and other stakeholders. Mitigating and adapting to the impacts of climate change presents opportunities
for growth for the Utility’s business and economic opportunity for the communities it serves.
The Utility strives to be prepared to continue to deliver safe, clean, affordable, and reliable energy in the face of increasingly severe and extreme climate-driven
natural hazards. To build resilience to these hazards, the Utility is working to systematically integrate the consideration of forward-looking climate data and tools
in its decision-making. PG&E Corporation and the Utility also work with policymakers and regulators to advance effective climate adaptation policy in California,
and work directly with local governments and communities on adaptation solutions.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are an important enabler of California’s effort to reduce GHG emissions. California has set a goal to achieve economy-wide
carbon neutrality no later than 2045. SB 100 increased California’s RPS target to 60% by the end of 2030 and requires 100% of retail sales to come from eligible
renewables or zero-carbon resources by the end of 2045.
The impacts of climate change on the Utility’s infrastructure are already a reality. Record-breaking extreme heat and heat waves are increasingly a regular
occurrence throughout California. Peak loads are expected to increase with increasing temperatures due to direct impacts of ambient temperatures on equipment
and direct impacts on electricity demand driven by rising air conditioning installation and usage. The Utility’s assets on the coast and in or near watersheds face
potential increased exposures to coastal, riverine, and precipitation-related flooding because of climate-driven changes in precipitation and sea-level rise.
Climate change will also continue to intensify the potential for wildfires throughout California. The worsening conditions across California increase the likelihood
and severity of wildfires, including those where the Utility’s equipment may be alleged to be associated with the fire’s ignition. Reducing risk will be even more
important as climate change continues to exacerbate the risks facing the Utility. A key element of preparing the Utility for the physical risks of climate change is a
system-wide CVA of the Utility’s assets, operations, and services, which the Utility expects to file with the CPUC in 2024. The CVA is expected to improve the
Utility’s understanding of its exposure to climate hazards and the sensitivity of assets and operations to these hazards.
15

The electric power industry is undergoing transformative change driven by technological advancements enabling customer choice (for example, customer-owned
generation and energy storage) and state climate policy supporting a decarbonized economy. California utilities also are experiencing increasing deployment by
customers and third parties of distributed energy resources, such as on-site solar generation, energy storage, fuel cells, energy efficiency, and load management
technologies. These developments will require sustained investments in grid modernization, renewable integration projects, energy efficiency programs, energy
storage options, and EV infrastructure. To this end, the CPUC is conducting proceedings to evaluate changes to the planning and operation of the electric
distribution grid in order to prepare for higher penetration of distributed energy resources and consider future grid modernization and grid reinforcement
investments; evaluate if traditional grid investments can be deferred by distributed energy resources, and if feasible, what, if any, compensation to utilities would
be appropriate for enabling those investments; and clarify the role of the electric distribution grid operator.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility continue to pursue policies and programs that enable safe, reliable, and affordable clean and resilient energy for their customers.
As a result of actions already taken by PG&E Corporation and the Utility, the companies have:
•
Exceeded California’s renewable portfolio standards goal for each utility (including the Utility) to deliver 33 percent of eligible renewable energy by the
end of 2020, and delivered clean electricity to customers in 2021 that was more than 90% GHG free.
•
Helped customers avoid emissions through energy efficiency programs, supporting California’s goal to double energy efficiency in existing buildings by
2030.
•
Awarded contracts for more than 1.7 GWs of battery energy storage, strengthening California’s grid efficiency and reliability.
•
Installed approximately 5,000 charging ports for EVs at workplaces and multi-family dwellings, including installing 39% of these charging ports in
disadvantaged communities, and also offered programs to support medium- and heavy-duty fleets and public fast charging in support of California’s goal
of 100 percent sales of light-duty zero-emission vehicles by 2035.
•
Brought the total number of interconnected private solar customers to more than 600,000 and supported more than 33,000 customers who have installed
battery storage at their homes or businesses.
•
Pursued decarbonization initiatives for the Utility’s natural gas delivery system, including working to interconnect several renewable natural gas projects.
Looking ahead, the Utility expects its GHG-free energy supply mix of renewable, large hydroelectric, and nuclear generation resources to remain elevated while
Diablo Canyon continues to operate. Once Diablo Canyon ceases operations in 2025, the Utility expects its percentage of GHG-free electricity to decrease
substantially. The CPUC coordinates the planning of supply resources through the Integrated Resource Planning (“IRP”) proceeding and has determined that
replacing the power generated by Diablo Canyon is the responsibility of all LSEs within the CAISO. Towards the end of the decade and beyond, the Utility’s
GHG-free energy supply mix is expected to grow relative to 2025 levels as the Utility works to meet California’s IRP GHG emissions reduction targets and its RPS
target. For more information, see “Integrated Resource Planning Procurement” below.
Prosperity
The prosperity element of the triple bottom line represents PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s commitment to meeting their financial objectives and providing
economic development opportunities and benefits in the communities they serve. Management believes clean energy should be affordable for and inclusive of all
economic backgrounds.
The Utility operates under a “cost of service ratemaking model,” which means that rates for electric and natural gas utility services are generally set at levels that
are intended to allow the Utility to recover its costs of providing service and have the opportunity to earn a return on invested capital. Under cost of service
ratemaking, a utility’s earnings depend on the outcomes of its ratemaking proceedings and its ability to manage costs.
16

In order to set rates, the CPUC and the FERC conduct proceedings to determine the amount that the Utility will be authorized to collect from its customers
(“revenue requirements”). Revenue authorized by the CPUC through GRC proceedings is intended to provide the Utility a reasonable opportunity to recover its
costs and earn a return on its investments in generation and distribution assets and general plant (also referred to as “rate base”) on a forecast basis. The Utility’s
revenue requirements consist primarily of a base amount set to enable the Utility to recover its reasonable operating expenses (e.g., maintenance, administration
and general expenses) and capital costs (e.g., depreciation, taxes, and financing expenses). In addition, the CPUC authorizes the Utility to collect revenues to
recover costs that the Utility is allowed to “pass-through” to customers (referred to as “Utility Revenues and Costs that did not Impact Earnings” in Item 7.
MD&A), including its costs to procure electricity and natural gas for customers and to administer public purpose and customer programs.
The Utility’s rate of return on electric transmission assets is determined in the FERC TO proceedings. The rate of return on all other Utility assets is set in the
CPUC’s cost of capital proceeding. Other than certain gas transmission and storage revenues, the Utility’s base revenues are “decoupled” from its sales volume
through certain regulatory balancing accounts, or revenue adjustment mechanisms, that are designed to allow the Utility to collect its authorized base revenue
requirements regardless of sales volume. As a result, the Utility’s base revenues are not impacted by fluctuations in sales resulting from, for example, weather or
economic conditions. The Utility’s earnings primarily depend on its ability to manage its base operating and capital costs (referred to as “Utility Revenues and
Costs that Impacted Earnings” in Item 7. MD&A) within its authorized base revenue requirements.
See “Ratemaking Mechanisms” below and “Regulatory Matters” in Item 7. MD&A for more information on specific CPUC and FERC proceedings.
Generally, differences between forecast costs and actual costs (referred to as “Utility Revenues and Costs that Impacted Earnings” in Results of Operations in Item
7. MD&A) can occur for numerous reasons, including the volume of work required and the impact of market forces on the cost of labor and materials. Differences
in costs can also arise from changes in laws and regulations at both the state and federal level. The Utility has initiated a program to reduce its spending on
operations and maintenance.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are committed to taking steps to improve their credit ratings and metrics over time, including by reducing their debt. PG&E
Corporation and the Utility have set goals to reduce their debt over time, including reducing PG&E Corporation’s debt by $2 billion by the end of 2023. PG&E
Corporation and the Utility expect that reducing the consolidated debt will help them achieve investment grade credit ratings for their unsecured securities, for the
benefit of both customers and investors. For more information, see Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Additionally, the Utility
filed an application with the CPUC seeking authorization for a post-emergence transaction to recover $7.5 billion of 2017 wildfire claims costs. Among other uses,
as a result of the proposed transaction, the Utility would retire $6.0 billion of Utility debt. For more information, see “Application for Post-Emergence
Securitization Transaction” in Item 7. MD&A.
On December 20, 2017, the Boards of Directors of PG&E Corporation and the Utility suspended quarterly cash dividends on both PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s common stock, as well as the Utility’s preferred stock. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s ability to issue dividends is subject to restrictions. On
February 8, 2022, the Board of Directors of the Utility authorized the payment of all cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock. For more
information, see “Dividends” in Item 7. MD&A.
Total capital expenditures (including accruals) recorded in 2021 were $8.6 billion. The Utility’s total capital expenditures (including accruals) are forecasted to be
between $7.8 billion and $8.9 billion for 2022, between $7.9 billion and $10.4 billion for 2023, between $7.9 billion and $10.7 billion for 2024, between $8.0
billion and $11.3 billion for 2025, and between $8.1 billion and $12.0 billion for 2026. The completion of projects, the timing of expenditures, and the associated
cost recovery may be affected by permitting requirements and delays, construction schedules, availability of labor, equipment and materials, financing, legal and
regulatory approvals and developments, community requests or protests, weather and other unforeseen conditions.
The Utility expects to make additional CPUC capital expenditures, the recovery of which will be subject to future regulatory approval, including the 2023 GRC.
These expenditures include capital expenditures exceeding amounts authorized in the 2020 GRC, and expenditures to be included in a later stage of the 2023 GRC.
The 2023 through 2026 currently above authorized capital spending levels are primarily for additional wildfire mitigation, transportation electrification and the
Lakeside Building. Additionally, $3.21 billion of fire risk mitigation capital expenditures will be excluded from the Utility’s equity rate base pursuant to AB 1054.
17

PG&E Corporation and the Utility are committed to keeping gas and electric services affordable for all customers. The Utility’s capital investment plan, increasing
procurement of renewable power and energy storage, increasing environmental regulations, and the cumulative impact of other public policy requirements
collectively place continuing upward pressure on customer rates. Certain CPUC proceedings, such as the OIR to Revisit Net Energy Metering Tariffs, could impact
different types of customers differently. Similarly, although the Utility generally recovers its electricity and natural gas procurement costs through rates as “pass-
through” costs, commodity prices rose substantially in 2021, relative to 2020. The Utility is addressing this customer rate pressure with cost reductions through
increased efficiency, including efficiency driven by implementing the Lean operating system, improving its work management, identifying additional opportunities
to convert expenses to capital expenditures, and an improved organizational design. The Utility has a number of programs in place to assist low-income customers,
such as the CARE program. Under the CARE program, income-qualified customers can receive a monthly discount of 20% or more on their gas and electric bill.
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Corporate Sustainability Report, which is available to the public, describes the companies’ progress toward world-class
performance measured with the triple bottom line framework.
In 2020, the Utility spent $3.9 billion with certified diverse suppliers, representing 38.9% of its total spend.
Performance: Underpinning The Triple Bottom Line
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are transitioning to the Lean operating system, which includes four basic “plays”: visual management, operating reviews,
problem solving and standard work. PG&E Corporation and the Utility have implemented the first two plays in 2021 and expect to roll out the second two plays in
2022. Visual management allows teams to see how they are performing against their most important metrics using real-time data. During 2021, PG&E Corporation
and the Utility have set up over 2,000 daily operating reviews, beginning with crews closest to the work and cascading up to senior leadership. These brief
meetings help the Utility identify gaps and quickly develop plans to support the teams performing the work and give the Utility more visibility, control and
predictability in its operations. For instance, the Lean operating system helped the Utility identify patterns in the conditions of ignitions and led to the
implementation of EPSS. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s performance is also driven by an increased focus on alignment on shared outcomes among its
leadership and within the organization.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have implemented a regional operating model to place more co-workers and operational leadership closer to their customers.
The purposes of regionalization are to address local issues faster; reduce outage response times; create faster interconnections for customers connecting solar or
distributed energy to the grid; and build stronger relationships and information flow between the companies and their customers.
California has experienced unprecedented weather conditions in recent years and the Utility’s service territory remains susceptible to additional wildfire activity. In
response, the Utility has implemented operational changes and investments that reduce wildfire risk, including:
•
Enhanced Powerline Safety Settings: In 2021, the Utility implemented the EPSS program, which adjusts the sensitivity of circuit protection devices on
certain power lines to de-energize them more rapidly in the event of a disturbance to help prevent potential ignitions. After EPSS was initiated, CPUC-
reportable ignitions were reduced substantially on EPSS-enabled circuits, compared to the prior three-year average.
•
Public Safety Power Shutoffs: The PSPS program proactively de-energizes power lines in response to forecasted weather conditions. Since its inception in
late 2017, the PSPS program has become more targeted because the Utility has developed more granular risk models, including adding consideration of
vegetation management and maintenance tag statuses for scoping PSPS events. The Utility has also installed sectionalizers for more strategic de-
energizations of circuits and transmission lines.
•
Vegetation management: The Utility inspects its overhead electric distribution and transmission facilities on an annual basis to identify and clear
vegetation that might grow or fall into utility equipment. In addition, the Utility operates an EVM program for distribution facilities in HFTD areas. The
Utility is also increasing oversight and engagement with the contractors supporting vegetation management work.
•
Asset inspections: Since 2018, the Utility has reoriented its asset inspections programs toward asset condition and consequence risk, particularly wildfire
risk, and have become more thorough, standardized, digitized, and verifiable. The Utility uses risk-informed inspection cycles. In 2021, the Utility
continued to refine its risk modeling, including further incorporating data from asset inspections.
18

•
System hardening: System hardening entails replacing or eliminating existing distribution lines in HFTDs and installing stronger and more resilient
equipment. Hardening methods include replacing bare overhead conductor with covered conductor and installing stronger poles, removing the line and
serving our customers through remote grids, or converting the line from overhead to underground. In 2021, the Utility announced a commitment to
underground 10,000 miles of electric distribution lines in HFTDs, which will eliminate ignition risks from overhead vegetation or wind-induced
equipment failures in those areas and help reduce the need for vegetation management.
Even as the Utility works to mitigate wildfire risk, it also works to reduce the impact of those mitigations on its customers, including making the PSPS program
less disruptive through sectionalizing devices for both distribution and transmission lines, temporary generation applications, and implementation of microgrid
pilot technologies. For example, in 2021, the CPUC authorized the Utility to prepare 10 substations to form microgrids in the event of PSPS outages impacting the
transmission lines feeding those substations, in addition to nine other distribution microgrids that the Utility made ready to operate in 2021. Two of the distribution
microgrids piloted battery storage and a linear generator in a hybrid configuration with diesel generation to assist in energizing the microgrids when needed.
Through these and other mitigation actions, PSPS events in 2021 impacted 78% fewer customers on average than PSPS events in 2019. The Utility also brought
online its first “remote grid” in 2021, which allows distribution lines in HFTDs to be removed and replaced with locally sited resources. Remote grids can reduce
costs and fire risks, while maintaining service to impacted customers. The Utility is pursuing the development of additional remote grid projects.
In 2021, the Utility also worked to reduce the impact of EPSS by adjusting the sensitivity of devices to reduce the likelihood of an outage, improving coordination
between its devices to reduce the size of outages, and improving internal coordination of patrol crews for faster restoration times. In 2022, the Utility plans to
expand the scope of the EPSS program to all HFTD areas.
The Utility has focused on continuously improving its gas operations safety record. Since the San Bruno natural gas pipeline explosion in 2010, the Utility’s asset
safety efforts have included replacing distribution mains and transmission pipelines, as well as strength testing transmission pipelines. The Utility uses in-line
inspections to assess the integrity of transmission pipelines. The Utility also uses safety and control systems to monitor, gather, and process real-time data on its
gas system. In 2021, the Utility’s gas operations achieved zero workforce serious injuries and fatalities (“SIF-A”) incidents and reductions in the number of injuries
that result in days away, restricted or transferred duty per 200,000 hours worked (“DART”). As of the date of this filing, the Utility’s gas system has not had a
public safety-related incident that resulted in a fatality or injury since 2015 or 2018, respectively.
The Utility has engaged in educating employees, contractors, and the public regarding safe digging programs and practices for their awareness during construction
and when digging near the Utility’s underground gas and electric assets. The Utility also installed safety devices that automatically detect increasing pressure on
systems and stop the flow of gas to avoid outages and overpressure events. Additionally, the Utility continues to streamline its efforts to respond to outages timely.
The Utility’s outage response is designed to keep the public safe while limiting customer outages and returning service safely and as quickly as possible.
The Utility’s generation operations have focused on safety and reliability. In 2021, the Utility’s generation operations achieved zero SIF-A incidents and reductions
in DART. Challenged by a drought year, the Utility scheduled dispatch and rescheduled outages to maximize availability during the summer months when demand
for electricity is highest. The Utility is working to implement a comprehensive generation asset management strategy and further mature its outage and project
management capabilities.
Regulatory Environment 
The Utility’s business is subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of various agencies at the federal, state, and local levels. At the state level, the Utility is regulated
primarily by the CPUC. At the federal level, the Utility is regulated primarily by the FERC and the NRC. The Utility is also subject to the requirements of other
federal, state and local regulatory agencies, including with respect to safety, the environment, and health, such as the NTSB and OEIS.
This section and the “Environmental Regulation” and the “Ratemaking Mechanisms” sections below summarize some of the more significant laws, regulations,
and regulatory proceedings affecting the Utility. For more information, see Item 1A. Risk Factors and “Regulatory Matters” in Item 7. MD&A.
19

PG&E Corporation is a “public utility holding company” as defined under the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005 and is subject to regulatory oversight
by the FERC. PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries are exempt from all requirements of the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005 other than the
obligation to provide access to their books and records to the FERC and the CPUC for ratemaking purposes.
California Public Utilities Commission
The CPUC is a regulatory agency that regulates privately owned public utilities in California. The CPUC has jurisdiction over the rates and terms and conditions of
service for the Utility’s electric and natural gas distribution operations, electric generation, and natural gas transmission and storage services. The CPUC also has
exercised jurisdiction over the Utility’s issuances of securities, dispositions of utility assets and facilities, energy purchases on behalf of the Utility’s electric and
natural gas retail customers, rates of return, rates of depreciation, oversight of nuclear decommissioning, and aspects of the siting of facilities used in providing
electric and natural gas utility service.
The CPUC enforces state laws and regulations that set forth safety requirements pertaining to the design, construction, testing, operation, and maintenance of utility
gas and electric facilities.  The CPUC can impose penalties of up to $100,000 per day, per violation. The CPUC has wide discretion to determine the amount of
penalties based on the totality of the circumstances, including such factors as the gravity of the violations; the type of harm caused by the violations and the number
of persons affected; and the good faith of the entity charged in attempting to achieve compliance, after notification of a violation. The CPUC also is required to
consider the appropriateness of the amount of the penalty to the size of the entity charged.
The CPUC has delegated authority to the SED to issue citations and impose penalties for violations identified through audits, investigations, or self-reports. Under
the current gas and electric citation programs adopted by the CPUC in September 2016, the SED has discretion whether to issue a penalty for each violation; but if
it assesses a penalty for a violation, it has the authority to impose the maximum statutory penalty of $100,000 per day, with an administrative limit of $8 million
per citation issued. Similar to penalties imposed by the CPUC, penalty payments for citations issued pursuant to the gas and electric safety citation programs are
the responsibility of shareholders of an issuer and may not be recovered in rates or otherwise directly or indirectly charged to customers. The CPUC has also
authorized the SED to propose for CPUC approval administrative consent orders and administrative enforcement orders when the SED deems a formal OII
unnecessary.
The California State Legislature also directs the CPUC to implement state laws and policies, such as the laws relating to wildfires and wildfire cost recovery,
increasing renewable energy resources, the development and widespread deployment of distributed generation and self-generation resources, the reduction of GHG
emissions, the establishment of energy storage procurement targets, and the development of a state-wide EV charging infrastructure. The CPUC is responsible for
approving funding and administration of state-mandated public purpose programs such as energy efficiency and other customer programs. The CPUC also
conducts audits and reviews of the Utility’s accounting, performance, and compliance with regulatory guidelines.
The CPUC has imposed various conditions that govern the relationship between the Utility and PG&E Corporation and other affiliates, including financial
conditions that require PG&E Corporation’s Board of Directors to give first priority to the capital requirements of the Utility, as determined to be necessary and
prudent to meet the Utility’s obligation to serve or to operate the Utility in a prudent and efficient manner. For more information on specific CPUC enforcement
matters and CPUC-implemented laws and policies and the related impact on PG&E Corporation and the Utility, see Item 1A. Risk Factors, and “Enforcement and
Litigation Matters,” “Regulatory Matters,” “Legislative and Regulatory Initiatives” and “Liquidity and Financial Resources” in Item 7. MD&A and Note 15 of the
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
20

Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and California Independent System Operator Corporation
The FERC has jurisdiction over the Utility’s electric transmission revenue requirements and rates, the licensing of substantially all of the Utility’s hydroelectric
generation facilities, and the interstate sale and transportation of natural gas. The FERC regulates the interconnections of the Utility’s transmission systems with
other electric systems and generation facilities, the tariffs and conditions of service of regional transmission organizations, and the terms and rates of wholesale
electricity sales. The FERC also is charged with adopting and enforcing mandatory standards governing the reliability of the nation’s electric transmission grid,
including standards to protect the nation’s bulk power system against potential disruptions from cyber and physical security breaches. The FERC’s approval is also
required under Federal Power Act Section 203 before undertaking certain transactions, including most mergers and consolidations, certain transactions that result
in a change in control of a utility, purchases of utility securities and dispositions of utility property. The FERC has authority to impose fines of up to $1 million per
day for violations of certain federal statutes and regulations. For more information on specific FERC requirements and their impact on PG&E Corporation and the
Utility, see Item 1A. Risk Factors, and “Regulatory Matters,” “Legislative and Regulatory Initiatives” and “Liquidity and Financial Resources” in Item 7. MD&A
and Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
The CAISO is the FERC-approved regional transmission organization for the Utility’s service territory. The CAISO controls the operation of the electric
transmission system in California and provides open access transmission service on a non-discriminatory basis. The CAISO is also responsible for planning
transmission system additions, ensuring the maintenance of adequate reserves of generating capacity, ensuring that the reliability of the transmission system is
maintained, and operating an interstate energy imbalance market.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
The NRC oversees the licensing, construction, operation and decommissioning of nuclear facilities, including the Utility’s two nuclear generating units at Diablo
Canyon and the Utility’s retired nuclear generating unit at Humboldt Bay. See “Electricity Resources” below. NRC regulations require extensive monitoring and
review of the safety, radiological, seismic, environmental, and security aspects of these facilities. In the event of non-compliance, the NRC has the authority to
impose fines or to force a shutdown of a nuclear plant, or both. NRC safety and security requirements have, in the past, necessitated substantial capital
expenditures at Diablo Canyon, and substantial capital expenditures could be required in the future. For more information about Diablo Canyon, see Item 1A. Risk
Factors and Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Other Regulators
The California Energy Commission is California’s primary energy policy and planning agency. The CEC is responsible for licensing all thermal power plants over
50 MW within California. The CEC also is responsible for forecasts of future energy needs used by the CPUC in determining the adequacy of the utilities’
electricity procurement plans and for adopting building and appliance energy efficiency requirements.
The CARB is the state agency responsible for setting and monitoring GHG and other emission limits. The CARB is also responsible for adopting and enforcing
regulations to implement state law requirements to gradually reduce GHG emissions in California. See “Environmental Regulation - Air Quality and Climate
Change” below.
The NTSB is an independent U.S. government investigative agency responsible for civil transportation accident investigations, including pipeline accidents. The
NTSB also conducts special investigations and safety studies, and issues safety recommendations to prevent future accidents.
The California Geologic Energy Management Division is the state agency responsible for establishing and enforcing regulations for the operation of the Utility’s
underground gas storage wells.
The OEIS is a state agency responsible for reviewing and approving the Utility’s WMP and for evaluating the Utility’s implementation of the WMP.
21

In addition, the Utility obtains permits, authorizations, and licenses in connection with the construction and operation of the Utility’s generation facilities,
electricity transmission lines, natural gas transportation pipelines, and gas compressor station facilities. The Utility also periodically obtains permits,
authorizations, and licenses in connection with distribution of electricity and natural gas that grant the Utility rights to occupy or use public property for the
operation of the Utility’s business and to conduct certain related operations. The Utility has franchise agreements with approximately 300 cities and counties that
permit the Utility to install, operate, and maintain the Utility’s electric and natural gas facilities in the public streets and highways. In exchange for the right to use
public streets and highways, the Utility pays annual fees to the cities and counties. In most cases, the Utility’s franchise agreements are for an indeterminate term,
with no expiration date. For more information see Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Third-party Monitors
On April 12, 2017, the Utility retained the Monitor at the Utility’s expense as part of its compliance with the sentencing terms of the Utility’s January 27, 2017
federal criminal conviction, which sentenced the Utility to, among other things, a five-year corporate probation period and oversight by the Monitor for a period of
five years.  On January 25, 2022, the period of probation expired and the Monitor’s oversight of the Utility ended. For more information see Item 1A. Risk Factors
and “US District Court Matters and Probation” under “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Item 7. MD&A.
Additionally, as a condition to its approval of the Plan, the CPUC required the appointment of an independent safety monitor (the “Independent Safety Monitor”)
for a term of five years, subject to extension if the CPUC determines that the Utility’s safety conditions would benefit from an Independent Safety Monitor’s
continued involvement. On January 28, 2022, the CPUC announced that it had selected Filsinger Energy Partners to serve as the Independent Safety Monitor.
According to the scope of work authorized by the CPUC, the Independent Safety Monitor will (1) monitor and alert CPUC staff whether the Utility is
implementing its highest priority and risk-driven safety mitigations and (2) monitor the Utility’s safety-related recordkeeping and record management systems. In
addition to confidential updates to the CPUC staff regarding safety-related concerns, the Independent Safety Monitor will also provide public summary reports of
its activities to the CPUC every six months.
Material Effects of Compliance with Governmental Regulations
As indicated above, the Utility’s business is subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of various agencies at the federal, state, and local levels. Compliance with such
extensive government regulations requires substantial expenditures and has had in the past and may continue to have in the future a material effect on PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, cash flows and competitive position. Generally, the Utility expects to recover the
cost of compliance with government regulations through rates in its GRC proceedings, or other proceedings. To the extent the Utility incurs costs above authorized
or incurs additional types of costs not included in rates, the Utility would expect to apply for recovery of such costs. Such recovery would be subject to the CPUC’s
approval and could involve its reasonableness review.
Costs incurred in 2021 included costs in connection with upgrading and maintaining the Utility’s electric and natural gas infrastructure in accordance with CPUC
and federal requirements, participating in the Wildfire Fund under AB 1054, execution of wildfire mitigation initiatives, the licensing and other regulations of the
FERC, environmental regulations, clean energy standards, regulations regarding Diablo Canyon, and various other generation, distribution and storage regulations,
the amount of which was substantial.
If the Utility is unable to recover these costs or incurs fines or penalties as a result of non-compliance with such laws and regulations, PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, cash flows and competitive position could be materially impacted. For more information, see Item 1A.
Risk Factors, “Regulatory Matters” in Item 7. MD&A, and Notes 14 and 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
22

Environmental Regulation
The Utility’s operations are subject to extensive federal, state, and local laws and requirements relating to the protection of the environment and the safety and
health of the Utility’s personnel and the public. These laws and requirements relate to a broad range of activities, including the remediation of hazardous and
radioactive substances; the discharge of pollutants into the air, water, and soil; the reporting and reduction of CO  and other GHG emissions; the transportation,
handling, storage and disposal of spent nuclear fuel; and the environmental impacts of land use, including endangered species and habitat protection. The penalties
for violation of these laws and requirements can be severe and may include significant fines, damages, and criminal or civil sanctions. These laws and requirements
also may require the Utility, under certain circumstances, to interrupt or curtail operations. See Item 1A. Risk Factors. Generally, the Utility recovers most of the
costs of complying with environmental laws and regulations through the Utility’s rates, subject to reasonableness review. Environmental costs associated with the
clean-up of most sites that contain hazardous substances are subject to a ratemaking mechanism described in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8.
Hazardous Waste Compliance and Remediation
The Utility’s facilities are subject to various regulations adopted by the EPA, including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended. The Utility is also subject to the regulations adopted by other federal agencies
responsible for implementing federal environmental laws. The Utility also must comply with environmental laws and regulations adopted by the State of California
and various state and local agencies. These federal and state laws impose strict liability for the release of a hazardous substance on the (1) owner or operator of the
site where the release occurred, (2) on companies that disposed of, or arranged for the disposal of, the hazardous substances, and (3) in some cases, their corporate
successors. Under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, these persons (known as “potentially responsible parties”) may
be jointly and severally liable for the costs of cleaning up the hazardous substances, monitoring and paying for the harm caused to natural resources, and paying for
the costs of health studies.
The Utility has a comprehensive program in place to comply with these federal, state, and local laws and regulations. Under federal and California laws, the Utility
may be responsible for remediation of hazardous substances even if it did not deposit those substances on the site. The Utility’s remediation activities are overseen
by the California DTSC, several California regional water quality control boards, and various other federal, state, and local agencies. The Utility has incurred
significant environmental remediation liabilities associated with former MGP sites, power plant sites, gas gathering sites, sites where natural gas compressor
stations are located, and sites used by the Utility for the storage, recycling, or disposal of potentially hazardous substances. Groundwater at the Utility’s Hinkley
and Topock natural gas compressor stations contains hexavalent chromium as a result of the Utility’s past operating practices. The Utility is responsible for
remediating this groundwater contamination and for abating the effects of the contamination on the environment.
For more information about environmental remediation liabilities, see Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Air Quality and Climate Change
The Utility’s electric generation plants, natural gas pipeline operations, vehicle fleet, and fuel storage tanks are subject to numerous air pollution control laws,
including the federal Clean Air Act, as well as state and local statutes. These laws and regulations cover, among other pollutants, those contributing to the
formation of ground-level ozone, carbon dioxide (CO ), sulfur dioxide (SO ), nitrogen oxides (NO ), particulate matter, and other emissions.
Federal Regulation
At the federal level, the EPA is charged with implementation and enforcement of the Clean Air Act. Although there have been several legislative attempts to
address climate change through imposition of nationwide regulatory limits on GHG emissions, comprehensive federal legislation has not yet been enacted. In the
absence of federal legislative action, the EPA has used its existing authority under the Clean Air Act to address GHG emissions.
2
2
2
x
23

Tackling the climate crisis is a key priority of the Biden Administration, and the Administration has signaled its intent to use its executive and regulatory
authorities to reduce emissions in line with science-based targets. On January 20, 2021, President Biden issued an EO directing the EPA to consider suspending,
revising or rescinding the Trump Administration’s rule for methane emissions from new sources in the oil and gas sector and propose a companion regulation for
existing sources, including the transmission, processing and storage segments of the industry. For power plants, the EPA is expected to propose a more stringent
GHG standard for existing sources in the wake of challenges to the Trump Administration’s Affordable Clean Energy rule.
State Regulation
California’s AB 32, the Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, provided for the gradual reduction of state-wide GHG emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. The
CARB has approved various regulations to achieve the 2020 target, including GHG emissions reporting and a state-wide, comprehensive cap-and-trade program
that sets gradually declining limits (or “caps”) on the amount of GHGs that may be emitted by major GHG emission sources within different sectors of the
economy.
The cap-and-trade program’s first compliance period, which began on January 1, 2013, applied to the electric generation and large industrial sectors. In the
subsequent compliance period, which began on January 1, 2015, the scope of the regulation was expanded to include the natural gas and transportation sectors,
effectively covering all of the state economy’s major sectors through 2020. The Utility’s compliance obligation as a natural gas supplier applies to the GHG
emissions attributable to the combustion of natural gas delivered to the Utility’s customers other than large natural gas delivery customers that are separately
regulated as covered entities and have their own compliance obligation.
In 2017, AB 398 extended the cap-and-trade program through January 1, 2031. During each year of the program, the CARB issues emission allowances (i.e., the
rights to emit GHGs) equal to the amount of GHG emissions allowed for that year. Entities with a compliance obligation can obtain allowances from the CARB at
quarterly auctions or from third parties or exchanges. Complying entities may also satisfy a portion of their compliance obligation through the purchase of offset
credits (e.g., credits for GHG reductions achieved by third parties, such as landowners, livestock owners, and farmers, that occur outside of the entities’ facilities
through CARB-qualified offset projects such as reforestation or biomass projects). The Utility expects all costs and revenues associated with the GHG cap-and-
trade program to be passed through to customers.
SB 32 (2016) requires that CARB ensure a 40% reduction in GHGs by 2030 compared to 1990 levels. The California RPS program that requires utilities to
gradually increase the amount of renewable energy delivered to their customers is also expected to help reduce GHG emissions in California. In September 2018,
SB 100 was signed into law, which accelerated California’s 50% RPS target to December 31, 2026, increased the RPS target to 60% by December 31, 2030, and
further amended the RPS statute to set a policy of meeting 100% of retail sales from eligible renewables and zero-carbon resources by December 31, 2045.
Additionally, EO B-55-18 set a statewide goal to achieve economy-wide carbon neutrality by 2045 and to maintain net negative emissions thereafter. The Utility
will be an active participant in regulatory proceedings to determine how the state will achieve carbon neutrality. For the percentage of the Utility’s estimated total
net deliveries of electricity to customers in 2021, including estimated GHG-free and renewable energy percentages, see “Electric Utility Operations-Electricity
Resources” below.
Climate Change Resilience Strategies
During 2021, the Utility continued its programs to mitigate the impact of the Utility’s operations (including customer energy usage) on the environment and to take
actions to increase its resilience to the physical impacts of climate change on the Utility’s operations. The Utility regularly reviews the most relevant scientific
literature on climate change such as rising sea levels, major storm events, increasing temperatures and heatwaves, wildfires, drought and land subsidence, to help
the Utility identify and evaluate climate change-related risks and develop resilience strategies. The Utility maintains emergency response plans and procedures to
address a range of near-term risks, including wildfires, extreme storms, and heat waves and considers climate hazards in its risk-assessment process to account for
long-term risks associated with climate change. The Utility also engages with leaders from business, government, academia, and non-profit organizations to share
information and plan for the future.
The Utility is continuing its work to better understand the current and future impacts of climate change. Climate change is incorporated into the Utility’s Risk
Assessment Mitigation Phase (“RAMP”) filing, which describes its quantitative risk modeling process and major risks. The Utility also considers the RAMP
analysis in developing its infrastructure investment plans. Additionally, the Utility is conducting a system-wide CVA focused on 2050 to identify and help
prioritize the Utility’s climate-driven hazards. Concurrent with the CVA are efforts to align key processes with the best available climate projections. For example,
the Utility is currently reviewing and updating equipment design standards that rely on historically observed heat thresholds, which are not expected to be
predictive of future temperatures.
24

With respect to electric operations, climate scientists project that climate change will lead to increased electricity demand due to more extreme and frequent hot
weather. The Utility believes its strategies to reduce GHG emissions through energy efficiency and demand response programs, infrastructure improvements, and
the use of renewable energy and energy storage will help it adapt to the expected changes in demand for electricity. The Utility is making substantial investments
to build a more resilient system that can better withstand extreme weather and related emergencies. For more information on such investments, see “Performance:
Underpinning The Triple Bottom Line” above. Over the long term, the Utility also faces the risk of higher flooding and inundation potential at coastal and low
elevation facilities due to projected sea level rise combined with high tides, storm runoff and storm surges. Inland areas, such as near the Sacramento-San Joaquin
River Delta, will also be vulnerable to flooding amid changes to precipitation patterns and extreme storms. As the state continues to face increased risk of
wildfires, the Utility’s wildfire mitigation activities, including vegetation management and undergrounding electric powerlines, will continue to play an important
role to help reduce the risk of wildfire and its impact on electric and gas facilities.
Climate scientists predict that climate change will result in rising temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns in the Utility’s service territory, including
decreasing snowpack. This could, in turn, affect the Utility’s hydroelectric generation. This issue is being analyzed as part of the Utility’s CVA. To plan for this
change, the Utility is engaging with state and local stakeholders and is also adopting strategies such as maintaining higher winter carryover reservoir storage levels,
reducing discretionary reservoir water releases, and collaborating on research and new modeling tools.
With respect to natural gas operations, both safety-related pipeline strength testing and normal pipeline maintenance and operations release the GHG methane into
the atmosphere. The Utility has taken steps to reduce the release of methane by implementing techniques including drafting and cross-compression, which reduce
the pressure and volume of natural gas within pipelines prior to venting.  In addition, the Utility continues to achieve reductions in methane emissions by
implementing improvements in leak detection and repair, upgrades at metering and regulating stations, and maintenance and replacement of other pipeline
materials. The Utility is also actively engaged with renewable natural gas producers to facilitate supply interconnections with the Utility’s natural gas pipeline
system and is participating in CPUC proceedings that evaluate standards to allow for the injection of hydrogen into natural gas systems and decarbonization
through electrification.
Emissions Data
PG&E Corporation and the Utility track and report their annual environmental performance results across a broad spectrum of areas. The Utility reports its GHG
emissions to the CARB and the EPA on a mandatory basis. On a voluntary basis, the Utility reports a more comprehensive emissions inventory to The Climate
Registry, a non-profit organization. The Utility’s third-party verified voluntary GHG inventory reported to The Climate Registry for 2020, which is the most recent
data available, totaled more than 44 million metric tons of CO  equivalent, the majority of which came from customer natural gas use. The following table shows
the 2020 GHG emissions data the Utility reported to the CARB under AB 32, which is the most recent data available. PG&E Corporation and the Utility also
publish additional GHG emissions data in their annual Corporate Sustainability Report.
Source
Amount (metric tons CO equivalent)
Fossil Fuel-Fired Plants
2,550,622 
Natural Gas Compressor Stations and Storage Facilities
315,802 
Distribution Fugitive Natural Gas Emissions
497,512 
Customer Natural Gas Use
40,304,583 
Includes nitrous oxide and methane emissions from the Utility’s generating stations.
Includes emissions from compressor stations and storage facilities that are reportable to CARB.
Includes emissions from the combustion of natural gas delivered to all entities on the Utility’s distribution system, with the exception of gas delivered to other natural gas local distribution
companies.
The Utility utilized the CEC’s Power Source Disclosure program methodology to calculate the CO  emissions rate associated with the electricity delivered to retail
customers in 2020. This resulted in a third-party verified CO  emissions rate of 160 pounds of CO  per MWh.
2
2 
 (1)
 (2)
 (3)
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
2
2
2
25

Air Emissions Data for Utility-Owned Generation
In addition to GHG emissions data provided above, the table below sets forth information about the air emissions from the Utility’s owned generation facilities.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility also publish air emissions data in their annual Corporate Sustainability Report. 
2020
2019
Total NOx Emissions (tons)
141 
135 
NOx Emissions Rate (pounds/MWh)
0.01
0.01
Total SO Emissions (tons)
15 
14 
SO Emissions Rate (pounds/MWh)
0.001 
0.001 
Nuclear Fuel Disposal
Under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982, the DOE and electric utilities with commercial nuclear power plants were authorized to enter into contracts under
which the DOE would be required to dispose of the utilities’ spent nuclear fuel and high-level radioactive waste by January 1998, in exchange for fees paid by the
utilities’ customers. The DOE has been unable to meet its contractual obligation with the Utility to dispose of nuclear waste from the Utility’s two nuclear
generating units at Diablo Canyon and the retired nuclear facility at Humboldt Bay. As a result, the Utility constructed interim dry cask storage facilities to store its
spent fuel onsite at Diablo Canyon and at Humboldt Bay until the DOE fulfills its contractual obligation to take possession of the spent fuel. The Utility and other
nuclear power plant owners sued the DOE to recover the costs that they incurred to construct interim storage facilities for spent nuclear fuel.
In September 2012, the U.S. Department of Justice and the Utility executed a settlement agreement that provided a claims process by which the Utility submits
annual requests for reimbursement of its ongoing spent fuel storage costs.  The claim for the period June 1, 2020 through May 31, 2021, totaled approximately
$11.6 million and is currently under review by the DOE.  Amounts reimbursed by DOE are refunded to customers through rates. Considerable uncertainty
continues to exist regarding when and whether the DOE will meet its contractual obligation to the Utility and other nuclear power plant owners to dispose of spent
fuel.
Ratemaking Mechanisms
The Utility’s rates for electric and natural gas utility services are generally set at levels that are intended to allow the Utility to recover its costs of providing service
and a return on invested capital (“cost-of-service ratemaking”). In order to set rates, the CPUC and the FERC conduct proceedings to determine the amount that the
Utility will be authorized to collect from its customers (“revenue requirements”). The Utility’s revenue requirements consist primarily of a base amount set to
enable the Utility to recover its reasonable operating expenses (e.g., maintenance, administration and general expenses) and capital costs (e.g., depreciation, and
financing expenses). In addition, the CPUC authorizes the Utility to collect revenues to recover costs that the Utility is allowed to “pass-through” to customers
(referred to as “Utility Revenues and Costs that did not Impact Earnings” in Item 7. MD&A), including its costs to procure electricity and natural gas for customers
and to administer public purpose and customer programs.
The Utility’s rate of return on electric transmission assets is determined in the FERC TO proceedings. The rate of return on all other Utility assets is set in the
CPUC’s cost of capital proceeding. Other than certain gas transmission and storage revenues, the Utility’s base revenues are “decoupled” from its sales volume
through certain regulatory balancing accounts, or revenue adjustment mechanisms, that are designed to allow the Utility to collect its authorized base revenue
requirements regardless of sales volume. As a result, the Utility’s base revenues are not impacted by fluctuations in sales resulting from, for example, weather or
economic conditions. The Utility’s earnings primarily depend on its ability to manage its base operating and capital costs (referred to as “Utility Revenues and
Costs that Impacted Earnings” in Item 7. MD&A) within its authorized base revenue requirements.
Due to the seasonal nature of the Utility’s business and rate design, customer electric bills are generally higher during summer months (May to October) because of
higher demand, driven by air conditioning loads.  Customer bills related to gas service are generally higher during winter months (November to March) because of
higher demand due to heating.
From time to time, the CPUC may use incentive ratemaking mechanisms that provide the Utility an opportunity to earn some additional revenues. For example, the
Utility has earned incentives for the successful implementation of energy efficiency programs.
2 
2 
26

See “Regulatory Matters” in Item 7. MD&A for more information on specific CPUC proceedings.
Base Revenues
General Rate Cases
The GRC is the primary proceeding in which the CPUC determines the amount of base revenue requirements that the Utility is authorized to collect from
customers to recover the Utility’s anticipated costs related to its electric distribution, natural gas distribution, and Utility-owned electric generation operations and
return on rate base. In the past, the CPUC has generally conducted a GRC every three years. Starting with the 2023 GRC, the CPUC will conduct a GRC every four
years that includes the Utility’s costs of its gas transmission and storage facilities. The CPUC approves the annual revenue requirements for the first year (or “test
year”) of the GRC period and typically authorizes the Utility to receive annual increases in revenue requirements for the subsequent years of the GRC period
(known as “attrition years”). Attrition year rate adjustments are generally authorized for cost increases related to invested capital and inflation. Parties in the
Utility’s GRC include the Public Advocates Office of the CPUC (formerly known as Office of Ratepayer Advocates or ORA) and TURN, which generally
represent the overall interests of residential customers, as well as numerous intervenors, that represent other business, community, customer, environmental, and
union interests. For more information about the Utility’s GRC, see “Regulatory Matters - 2020 General Rate Case” and “Regulatory Matters - 2023 General Rate
Case” in Item 7. MD&A.
Cost of Capital Proceedings
The CPUC periodically conducts a cost of capital proceeding to authorize the Utility’s capital structure and rates of return for its electric generation, electric and
natural gas distribution, and natural gas transmission and storage rate base. The CPUC’s cost of capital proceedings generally take place in a consolidated
proceeding with California’s other large investor-owned electric and gas utilities. For more information about the cost of capital proceedings, see “Regulatory
Matters - Cost of Capital Proceedings” in Item 7. MD&A.
Electricity Transmission Owner Rate Cases
The FERC determines the amount of authorized revenue requirements, including the rate of return on electric transmission assets, that the Utility may collect in
rates in the TO rate case. In its TO rate cases, the Utility uses a formula rate methodology, which includes an authorized revenue requirement and rate base for a
given year but also provides for an annual update of the following year’s revenue requirement and rates in accordance with the terms of the FERC-approved
formula. Under the formula rate mechanism, transmission revenue requirements are updated to the actual cost of service annually as part of the true-up process.
Differences between amounts collected and determined under the formula rate are either collected from or refunded to customers. The FERC-approved formula
rate will be effective through December 31, 2023. These FERC-approved rates are included by the CPUC in the Utility’s retail electric rates and by the CAISO in
its Transmission Access Charges to wholesale customers. For more information, see “Regulatory Matters - Transmission Owner Rate Cases” in Item 7. MD&A.
The Utility also recovers a portion of its revenue requirements for its wholesale electric transmission costs through charges collected under specific contracts with
wholesale transmission customers that the Utility entered into before the CAISO began its operations. These wholesale customers are charged individualized rates
based on the terms of their contracts.
Program-Specific Memorandum Account and Balancing Account Costs
Periodically, costs arise outside of the CPUC GRC rate requests or that have been deliberately excluded therefrom. These costs may result from catastrophic
events, changes in regulation, new programs, or extraordinary changes in operating practices. The Utility may seek authority to track incremental costs in a
memorandum account and the CPUC may authorize recovery of costs tracked in memorandum accounts if the costs are deemed reasonable. For instance, these
accounts allow the Utility to track the costs associated with work related to disaster and wildfire response, and other wildfire prevention-related costs. Recovery of
the costs tracked in these memorandum accounts in rates requires CPUC authorization in separate proceedings for which the Utility may be unable to predict the
outcome. Alternatively, the Utility may seek authority to track incremental costs related to these non-GRC programs in balancing accounts. The CPUC may
authorize recovery of costs tracked in the balancing accounts on either a “one-way” basis, which only allows actual costs to be recovered up to a pre-established
cap, or a “two-way” basis, which allows actual costs to be recovered, subject to CPUC review. For more information, see “Regulatory Matters - Cost Recovery
Proceedings” in Item 7. MD&A and Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
27

Revenues to Recover Energy Procurement and Other Pass-Through Costs
Electricity Procurement Costs
California IOUs are responsible for procuring electrical capacity required to meet bundled customer demand, plus applicable reserve margins, that are not satisfied
from their own generation facilities and existing electric contracts. The utilities are responsible for scheduling and bidding electric generation resources, including
certain electricity procured from third parties into the wholesale market, to meet customer demand according to which resources are the least expensive (i.e., using
the principles of “least-cost dispatch”). In addition, the utilities are required to obtain CPUC approval of their BPPs based on long-term demand forecasts. In
October 2015, the CPUC approved the Utility’s most recent comprehensive BPP. It was revised since its initial approval and will remain in effect as revised until
superseded by a subsequent CPUC-approved plan.
California law allows electric utilities to recover the costs incurred in compliance with their CPUC-approved BPPs without further after-the-fact reasonableness
review by the CPUC. The CPUC may disallow costs associated with electricity purchases if the costs were not incurred in compliance with the CPUC-approved
plan or if the CPUC determines that the utility failed to follow the principles of least-cost dispatch. Additionally, the CPUC may disallow the value of lost
generation due to unplanned outages at utility-owned generation facilities.
The Utility recovers its electric procurement costs annually primarily through balancing accounts. See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8. Each year, the CPUC reviews the Utility’s forecasted procurement costs related to power purchase agreements, derivative instruments, GHG
emissions costs, and generation fuel expense, and approves a forecasted revenue requirement. The CPUC may adjust the Utility’s retail electric rates more
frequently if the forecasted aggregate over-collections or under-collections in the Energy Resource Recovery Account, net of Portfolio Allocation Balancing
Account balances, exceed five percent of its prior year electric procurement and Utility-owned generation revenues. The CPUC performs an annual compliance
review of the procurement transactions recovered in various balancing accounts, including the Energy Resource Recovery Account and the Portfolio Allocation
Balancing Account.
The CPUC has approved various power purchase agreements that the Utility has entered into with third parties in accordance with the Utility’s CPUC-approved
BPP, to meet mandatory renewable energy targets, and to comply with RA requirements. For more information, see “Electric Utility Operations - Electricity
Resources” below as well as Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
The Utility is also responsible, as the central procurement entity (“CPE”) for its distribution service area, for seeking to procure the entire amount of required local
RA on behalf of all load serving entities in its distribution service area. The decision grants the Utility, acting as CPE, discretion to defer procurement of local
resources to the CAISO’s backstop mechanisms if bid costs are deemed unreasonably high. The Utility, as the CPE, will not be assessed fines or penalties for
failing to procure resources to meet the local RA requirements and deferring local procurement to the CAISO backstop mechanism, as long as the CPE exercised
reasonable efforts to secure capacity and certain specified requirements are met. In connection with its CPE function, the Utility is responsible for making
compliance demonstrations to the CPUC and the CAISO. The Utility recovers its administrative and procurement costs associated with its CPE function through a
balancing account. Each year, the CPUC reviews the Utility’s forecasted administrative costs related to the CPE function and approves a forecasted revenue
requirement associated with the administrative costs. The CPUC performs an annual compliance review of the CPE function, including procurement transactions
with terms of five years or less (for which costs incurred in compliance with certain prescribed criteria are deemed reasonable and pre-approved without further
after-the-fact reasonableness review). Procurement transactions with terms exceeding five years are reviewed separately. The CPUC may disallow costs associated
with the CPE function that were not incurred in compliance with the CPUC’s decisions and guidance.
The CPUC has also approved the Power Charge Indifference Adjustment (“PCIA”). The PCIA is a cost recovery mechanism to ensure that customers who switch
from the Utility’s bundled service to a non-Utility provider, such as a DA or CCA provider, pay their share of the above market costs associated with long-term
power purchase commitments and Utility-owned generation made on their behalf.
Natural Gas Procurement, Storage, and Transportation Costs
The Utility recovers the cost of gas used in generation facilities as a cost of electricity that is recovered annually through retail electric rates.
28

The Utility sets the natural gas procurement rate for small commercial and residential customers (referred to as “core” customers) monthly, based on the forecasted
costs of natural gas, core pipeline capacity and storage costs. The Utility recovers the cost of gas purchased on behalf of core customers as well as the cost of
derivative instruments for its core gas portfolio, through its retail gas rates, subject to limits as set forth in its CPIM described below. The Utility reflects the
difference between actual natural gas purchase costs and forecasted natural gas purchase costs in several natural gas balancing accounts, with under-collections and
over-collections taken into account in subsequent monthly rate changes.
The CPIM protects the Utility against after-the-fact reasonableness reviews of its gas procurement costs for its core gas portfolio. Under the CPIM, the Utility’s
natural gas purchase costs for a fixed 12-month period are compared to an aggregate market-based benchmark based on a weighted average of published monthly
and daily natural gas price indices at the points where the Utility typically purchases natural gas. Costs that fall within a tolerance band, which is 99% to 102% of
the commodity benchmark, are considered reasonable and are fully recovered through rates. One-half of the costs above 102% of the benchmark are recoverable
through rates, and the Utility’s customers receive in their rates 80% of any savings resulting from the Utility’s cost of natural gas that is less than 99% of the
benchmark. The Utility retains the remaining amount of these savings as incentive revenues, subject to a cap equal to 1.5% of total natural gas commodity costs.
While this mechanism remains in place, changes in the price of natural gas, consistent with the market-based benchmark, are not expected to materially impact net
income.
The Utility incurs transportation costs under various agreements with interstate and Canadian third-party transportation service providers. These providers transport
natural gas from the points at which the Utility takes delivery of natural gas (typically in Canada, the U.S. Rocky Mountains, and the southwestern United States)
to the points at which the Utility’s natural gas transportation system begins.  These agreements are governed by the FERC-approved tariffs that detail rates, rules,
and terms of service for the provision of natural gas transportation services to the Utility on interstate and Canadian pipelines. The FERC approves the United
States tariffs that shippers, including the Utility, pay for pipeline service, and the applicable Canadian tariffs are approved by the National Energy Board, a
Canadian regulatory agency. The transportation costs the Utility incurs under these agreements are recovered through CPUC-approved rates as core natural gas
procurement costs or as a cost of electricity.
Costs Associated with Public Purpose and Customer Programs
The CPUC authorizes the Utility to recover the costs of various public purpose and other customer programs through the collection of rates from most Utility
customers.  These programs relate to energy efficiency, demand response, distributed generation, energy research and development, and other matters.
 Additionally, the CPUC has authorized the Utility to provide discounted rates for specified types of customers, such as for low-income customers under the CARE
program, which is paid for by the Utility’s other customers.
Nuclear Decommissioning Costs
The Utility’s nuclear power facilities consist of two units at Diablo Canyon and the retired facility at Humboldt Bay. Nuclear decommissioning requires the safe
removal of nuclear facilities from service and the reduction of residual radioactivity to a level that permits termination of the NRC license and release of the
property for unrestricted use. Nuclear decommissioning costs are generally collected in advance through rates and are held in nuclear decommissioning trusts to be
used for the eventual decommissioning of each nuclear unit. The Utility files an application with the CPUC every three years requesting approval of the Utility’s
updated estimated decommissioning costs and any rate change necessary to fully fund the nuclear decommissioning trusts to the levels needed to decommission the
Utility’s nuclear plants. If the nuclear decommissioning trusts are overfunded, the amount of such overfunding will be returned to customers. Pursuant to Public
Utilities Code Section 8325, to the extent the monies available for decommissioning are insufficient to pay for all reasonable and prudent decommissioning costs,
the CPUC must authorize the electric utility to collect these charges from its customers.
For costs related to AROs see “Nuclear Decommissioning Obligation” in Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
29

Human Capital
Employees and Contractors
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility had approximately 26,000 regular employees, 11 of whom were employees of PG&E Corporation.
Of the Utility’s regular employees, approximately 16,000 are covered by collective bargaining agreements with the local chapters of three labor unions: the
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (“IBEW”) Local 1245; the Engineers and Scientists of California (“ESC”) IFPTE 20; and the Service Employees
International Union Local 24/7 (“SEIU”). The collective bargaining agreements currently in effect for the IBEW Local 1245 and ESC Local 20 will expire on
December 31, 2025. The agreements increase wages annually by 3.75% from 2022 through 2025 and maintain current contributions to specified benefits. The
IBEW and ESC represent approximately 62% of the Utility’s employee workforce and support several areas of the Utility’s business, including gas and electric
operations. The term of the SEIU bargaining agreement ended on December 31, 2021. The parties have reached an agreement which is pending ratification by the
SEIU. The Utility enjoys stable and productive relationships with its unions and did not experience any work stoppages in 2021.
PG&E Corporation’s employees are primarily at the executive management level, which experienced significant employee turnover throughout the course of its
Chapter 11 Cases in 2019 and 2020. The Utility generally has a stable workforce, which translated into low voluntary turnover during that period. The Utility’s
turnover rates for 2021 and 2020 were 5.8% and 4.7%, respectively. Approximately 41% of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s employees have a tenure of
more than 10 years, with an average tenure of 11 years. Currently, approximately 21% of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s employees are eligible to retire.
(PG&E Corporation and the Utility define retirement age as 55 years and older.)
The Utility’s contractors and subcontractors include approximately 35,300 individuals from approximately 1,560 contractor companies.
Human Capital Management
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s human capital resource objectives are to build and retain an engaged, well trained, diverse, and equitable workforce. PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s Boards of Directors are responsible for overseeing management’s development and execution of PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s human capital strategy.
To build employee engagement, the Utility has a variety of both executive-level and employee-led initiatives and programs. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s
executive teams meet regularly to discuss and evaluate the state of employee talent, determine which programs are driving engagement and performance, and
clarify the specific skills, behaviors, and values that should be cultivated. Each year, the Utility honors employees whose work embodies safety, diversity and
inclusion, environmental leadership, and community service. The Utility conducts a biennial employee engagement survey, quarterly pulse surveys, and voluntary
upward feedback surveys to measure and track employee engagement progress.
Every year, PG&E Corporation and the Utility offer or require technical, leadership, and employee training, which includes a range of technical training for
employees on the knowledge and skills required to perform their jobs safely using approved tools and work procedures. In addition, employees are required to
complete an annual compliance and ethics training and a Code of Conduct training, both of which are intended to promote a culture in which employees are
encouraged to speak up with any concerns or ideas for continuous improvement. In addition, the Utility offers a variety of other trainings and education
opportunities.
Among other programs, the Utility provides career opportunities through its Power Pathway™ workforce development program. Launched in 2008, PowerPathway
is a workforce development model to enlarge the talent pool of local, qualified, diverse candidates for skilled craft and utility industry jobs through training
program partnerships with educational, community-based and government organizations. PowerPathway helps people throughout the Utility service territory,
including women and military veterans, prepare and compete for high demand jobs in the utility and energy industry. Students receive approximately eight weeks
of industry-informed curriculum to ensure the academic, job specific, employability skills and physical training necessary to effectively compete for entry-level
employment. Programs may also include hands-on training and on-the-job training.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility also provide integrated solutions and programs that cover employee health and wellness and that encompass physical,
emotional, and financial health, including an on-site health clinic, an annual health screening, and health management tools and resources, in addition to more
traditional programs.
30

PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial incentives offered to employees include a Short-Term Incentive Plan (“STIP”), an at-risk part of employee
compensation designed to reward eligible employees for achieving specific performance goals. The 2021 STIP was focused on company objectives of safety,
customer impact, and financial health.
All PG&E Corporation or Utility officer compensation currently is funded by shareholders.
Safety
The Utility has developed a five-year workforce safety strategy that includes two major pillars: systems and culture. Systems refers to risk management,
equipment, processes and procedures. Culture refers to employee engagement, adherence to established requirements, a sense of urgency for safety, and leadership.
Focus areas in the Utility’s workplace safety strategy include: an enterprise safety management system, enhanced risk management, strengthening the contractor
management program, improvement of safety technical standards, ergonomics, safety audits, improving data management and reporting systems, and enhancing
safety leadership training. For employees and contractors performing medium- and high-risk work, the Utility’s safety metrics include the number of SIF-A
incidents and the SIF-P rate, which measures events that could have resulted in a SIF-A per 200,000 hours worked. In 2021, the Utility had five SIF-A events,
which resulted in three fatalities and three serious injuries, and a SIF-P rate of 0.11, which was 10% higher than the SIF-P rate in 2020. The requirement for
contractors to report SIF-P events was implemented in June 2020. Additionally, the Utility measures DART. In 2021, the Utility’s DART was 1.01, which was
25% lower than in 2020 and its lowest rate in the past five years.
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have continued to monitor activities at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
and the World Health Organization, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have updated their protocols and actions in accordance with guidance from these
organizations, following state and local health and safety regulations, and in consultation with the Utility’s medical director. PG&E Corporation and the Utility
have also remained focused on protecting the health and safety of their employees, contractors and the Utility’s customers, while continuing to perform critical
utility work, and have continued to monitor and track the impact of the pandemic, modifying or adopting new policies in support of their employees’ health and
safety as pandemic conditions and governmental response have changed. For example, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have directed employees to work
remotely from home where possible, implemented face coverings, physical distancing policies, and required a daily health check when an employee works outside
his or her home, required virtual ergonomic evaluations to ensure that employees working from home so do safely and ergonomically, provided additional COVID-
19 safety resources for employees who perform utility work in the field, and updated several of their employee benefits as a result of COVID-19, including
healthcare benefits and interim time off and leave policies that support the care and new educational environment of children during the pandemic.
Diversity and Inclusion
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s goal is to foster a diverse, equitable, and inclusive environment that enables all of their coworkers to bring their best selves
to work so that they can provide exceptional customer service. These efforts are led by PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Executive Vice President, People,
Shared Services and Supply Chain, with support from the executive team. The People and Compensation Committee of PG&E Corporation’s Board of Directors
reviews the companies’ diversity and inclusion practices and performance.
Key elements of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s approach include active programming to heighten cultural competency, encourage understanding and
appreciation of diversity, and integrate thoughtful content into training and performance support materials.
Additionally, the Utility’s 11 Employee Resource Groups and three Engineering Network Groups execute enterprise-wide programming, certain coworkers lead
efforts within their departments, and other specialized teams facilitate dialogue across the companies. These efforts foster employee belonging and support an
environment of inclusion that values and respects diversity in the workforce.
In 2021, women, minorities, and military veterans accounted for approximately 27%, 48% and 7%, respectively, of total PG&E Corporation and Utility employees.
Approximately 8% of the Utility’s employees are younger than 30, 60% are between the ages of 30 and 49, and 32% are 50 or older.
31

Electric Utility Operations
The Utility generates electricity and provides electric transmission and distribution services throughout its service territory in northern and central California to
residential, commercial, industrial, and agricultural customers. The Utility provides “bundled” services (i.e., electricity, transmission, and distribution services) to
customers in its service territory. Customers also can obtain electricity from alternative providers such as municipalities or CCAs, as well as from self-generation
resources, such as rooftop solar installations. For more information, see “Regulatory Matters” in Item 7. MD&A.
Electricity Resources
The Utility is required to maintain capacity adequate to meet its customers’ demand for electricity (“load”), including peak demand and planning and operating
reserves, deliverable to the locations and at times as may be necessary to provide reliable electric service. The Utility is responsible for scheduling and bidding
electric generation resources, including certain electricity procured from third parties into the wholesale market, to meet customer demand.
The following table shows the percentage of the Utility’s estimated total net deliveries of electricity to customers in 2021 represented by each major electric
resource, and further discussed below. The Utility’s deliveries were primarily from renewable energy resources that qualify under California’s RPS and other
GHG-free resources (i.e., nuclear, and large hydroelectric generation). California’s RPS requirements and SB 100 goal to serve 100% of retail electricity sales with
GHG-free resources by 2045 are discussed further below and in the Environmental Regulation section above.
The total estimated electricity generated, procured, and sold (net), as of December 31, 2021 was 33,149 GWh
and comprised of the following:
Percent of Bundled Retail
Sales (estimated
procurement)
CEC Reporting
Methodology Adjustment
Percent of Bundled Retail
Sales (estimated Power
Content Label)
Owned Generation Facilities
Renewable
2 
%
— 
%
2 
%
Nuclear
39 
%
— 
%
39 
%
Large Hydroelectric
4 
%
— 
%
4 
%
Fossil fuel-fired
19 
%
(15)
%
4 
%
  Total
64 
%
(15)
%
49 %
Third-Party Purchase Agreements
Renewable
48 
%
— 
%
48 
%
Large Hydroelectric
— 
%
— 
%
— 
%
Fossil fuel-fired
15 
%
(12)
%
3 
%
Total
63 
%
(12)
%
51 %
Others, Net
(27)
%
27 
%
— %
TOTAL
100 
%
— 
%
100 %
Total Renewable Energy Resources
50 
%
— 
%
50 %
GHG-Free Resources
93 
%
— 
%
93 %
This amount excludes electricity provided by DA providers and CCAs that procure their own supplies of electricity for their respective customers.
The allocation of “Others, Net” in the “CEC Reporting Methodology Reduction” and “Power Content Label” columns is consistent with CEC guidelines, applied to specified electric
generation and procurement volumes (i.e., fossil fuel-fired, nuclear, large hydroelectric, and renewable). Total reported generation and procurement volumes equate to actual electric retail
sales.
Amounts include biopower (e.g., biogas, biomass), solar, wind, certain hydroelectric (i.e., 30MW or less), and geothermal facilities.
Amounts consist primarily of natural gas facilities.
Amount is mainly comprised of net CAISO open market (sales)/purchases.
Amount is comprised of renewable, nuclear, and large hydroelectric facility resources generated, procured, and sold.
 (1) 
(2)
 (2)
 (3)
 (4)
 (3)
 (4)
 (2)(5)
 (3)
 (6)
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
32

Renewable Energy Resources
California law established an RPS that requires LSEs, such as the Utility, to gradually increase the amount of renewable energy they deliver to their customers. SB
350 increased the amount of renewable energy that must be delivered by most LSEs, including the Utility, to their customers from 33% of their total annual retail
sales by the end of the 2017-2020 compliance period, to 50% of their total annual retail sales by the end of the 2028- 2030 compliance period, and in each three-
year compliance period thereafter, unless changed by legislative action. SB 350 provides compliance flexibility and waiver mechanisms, including increased
flexibility to apply excess renewable energy procurement in one compliance period to future compliance periods. In September 2018, the California Governor
signed SB 100 into law, increasing from 50% to 60% of California’s electricity portfolio that must come from renewables by 2030; and established state policy that
100% of all retail electricity sales must come from RPS-eligible or carbon-free resources by 2045. The Utility may in the future incur additional costs to procure
renewable energy to meet the new renewable energy targets, which the Utility expects will continue to be recoverable through rates as “pass-through” costs. The
Utility also may be subject to penalties for failure to meet the higher targets. The CPUC is required to open a new rulemaking proceeding to adopt regulations to
implement the higher renewable targets.
Renewable generation resources, for purposes of the RPS requirements, include bioenergy such as biogas and biomass, certain hydroelectric facilities (30 MW or
less), wind, solar, and geothermal energy. RPS requirements are based on procurement, which aligns with the methodology presented in the first column of the
table above. Procurement from renewable energy sources was estimated as 50% in 2021.
The estimated total renewable deliveries as of December 31, 2021 shown above was 16,387 GWh and comprised of the following:
Type
Percent of Bundled Retail Sales (estimated
procurement)
 
Biopower
4 
%
Geothermal
5 
%
RPS-Eligible Small Hydroelectric
2 
%
Solar
28 
%
Wind
11 
%
Total
50 
%
Estimated renewable procurement amounts are expected to be consistent with Power Content Label reporting and adjustments, based on current CEC guidelines.
Estimated renewable procurement percentages above and renewable compliance percentages are expected to be consistent; however, final RPS compliance reporting may result in some
differences between the two percentages.
Energy Storage
Energy storage improves system reliability and supports California’s decarbonization goals by integrating increased levels of renewable energy. The CPUC has
established a multi-year energy storage procurement framework, under which the Utility was required to procure 580 MW of qualifying storage capacity by the end
of 2020, with all energy storage projects required to be operational by the end of 2024. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility was on track to meet its storage goals
by the end of 2024.
Additionally, the Utility has been actively procuring energy storage to meet critical reliability needs. The CPUC previously approved more than 1,100 MW of
storage to come online in 2022 and 2023. In January 2022, the Utility also requested CPUC approval for another 1,600 MW of storage to be completed by the
summer of 2024, which would bring the Utility’s total energy storage system capacity to more than 3,330 MW. Finally, the Utility expects to solicit 200 MW of
long-duration storage, which is storage with at least eight hours of discharge capacity, in 2022 to have these resources online between 2026 and 2028.
(1) (2)
(1) 
(2) 
33

Owned Generation Facilities
At December 31, 2021, the Utility owned the following generation facilities, all located in California, listed by energy source and further described below: 
Generation Type
County Location
Number of Units
Net Operating
Capacity (MW)
Nuclear 
:
  Diablo Canyon
San Luis Obispo
2 
2,240 
Hydroelectric 
:
  Conventional
16 counties in northern and central California
100 
2,648 
  Helms pumped storage
Fresno
3 
1,212 
Fossil fuel-fired:
  Colusa Generating Station
Colusa
1 
657 
  Gateway Generating Station
Contra Costa
1 
580 
  Humboldt Bay Generating Station
Humboldt
10 
163 
Photovoltaic 
:
Various
13 
152 
Total
130 
7,652 
The Utility’s Diablo Canyon power plant consists of two nuclear power reactor units, Units 1 and 2. The NRC operating licenses expire in 2024 and 2025, respectively. On January 11, 2018,
the CPUC approved the Utility’s application to retire Unit 1 by 2024 and Unit 2 by 2025.
The Utility’s hydroelectric system consists of 103 generating units at 64 powerhouses. All of the Utility’s powerhouses are licensed by the FERC (except for two small powerhouses not
subject to the FERC’s licensing requirements), with license terms between 30 and 50 years.
The Utility’s large photovoltaic facilities are Cantua solar station (20 MW), Five Points solar station (15 MW), Gates solar station (20 MW), Giffen solar station (10 MW), Guernsey solar
station (20 MW), Huron solar station (20 MW ), Stroud solar station (20 MW), West Gates solar station (10 MW), and Westside solar station (15 MW). All of these facilities are located in
Fresno County, except for Guernsey solar station, which is located in Kings County.
Generation Resources from Third Parties
The Utility has entered into various agreements to purchase power and electric capacity, including agreements for renewable energy resources, in accordance with
its CPUC-approved procurement plan. See “Ratemaking Mechanisms” above. For more information regarding the Utility’s power purchase agreements, see Note
15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Electricity Transmission
At December 31, 2021, the Utility owned approximately 18,000 circuit miles of interconnected transmission lines operating at voltages ranging from 60 kV to 500
kV. The Utility also operated 33 electric transmission substations with a capacity of approximately 70,000 MVA. The Utility’s electric transmission system is
interconnected with electric power systems in the Western Electricity Coordinating Council, which includes many western states, the Canadian provinces of
Alberta and British Columbia, and parts of Mexico.
Decisions about expansions and maintenance of the transmission system can be influenced by decisions of the Utility’s regulators and the CAISO.
Electricity Distribution
The Utility’s electric distribution network consists of approximately 108,000 circuit miles of distribution lines (of which, as of December 31, 2021, approximately
25% are underground and approximately 75% are overhead), 67 transmission switching substations, and 753 distribution substations with a capacity of
approximately 35,000 MVA. The Utility’s distribution network interconnects with its transmission system, primarily at switching and distribution substations,
where equipment reduces the high-voltage transmission voltages to lower voltages, ranging from 44 kV to 2.4 kV, suitable for distribution to the Utility’s
customers.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
34

These distribution substations serve as the central hubs for the Utility’s electric distribution network. Emanating from each substation are primary and secondary
distribution lines connected to local transformers and switching equipment that link distribution lines and provide delivery to end-users. In some cases, the Utility
sells electricity from its distribution facilities to entities, such as municipal and other utilities, that resell the electricity. The Utility operates electric distribution
control center facilities in Concord, Rocklin, and Fresno, California; these control centers form a key part of the Utility’s efforts to create a smarter, more resilient
grid.
Electricity Operating Statistics
The following table shows certain of the Utility’s operating statistics from 2019 to 2021 for electricity sold or delivered, including the classification of revenues by
type of service. No single customer of the Utility accounted for 10% or more of consolidated revenues for electricity sold in 2021, 2020 or 2019. 
2021
2020
2019
Customers (average for the year)
5,539,969 
5,498,044 
5,457,101 
Deliveries (in GWh) 
78,588 
78,497 
78,070 
Revenues (in millions):
   Residential
$
6,089 $
5,523 $
4,847 
   Commercial
5,042 
4,722 
4,756 
   Industrial
1,493 
1,530 
1,493 
   Agricultural
1,565 
1,471 
1,106 
   Public street and highway lighting
73 
69 
67 
   Other
(84)
(130)
168 
      Subtotal
14,178 
13,185 
12,437 
Regulatory balancing accounts
953 
673 
303 
Total operating revenues
$
15,131 $
13,858 $
12,740 
Selected Statistics:
Average annual residential usage (kWh)
5,889 
6,179 
5,750 
Average billed revenues per kWh:
Residential
$
0.2125 $
0.1852 $
0.1762 
Commercial
0.1802 
0.1730 
0.1585 
Industrial
0.1075 
0.1085 
0.1015 
Agricultural
0.2104 
0.2210 
0.2172 
Net plant investment per customer
$
9,199 $
8,889 $
8,375 
These amounts include electricity provided by DA providers and CCAs that procure their own supplies of electricity for their respective customers.
This activity is primarily related to provisions for rate refunds and unbilled electric revenue, partially offset by other miscellaneous revenue items.
 These amounts represent revenues authorized to be billed.
Natural Gas Utility Operations 
The Utility provides natural gas transportation services to “core” customers (i.e., small commercial and residential customers) and to “non-core” customers (i.e.,
industrial, large commercial, and natural gas-fired electric generation facilities) that are connected to the Utility’s gas system in its service territory.  Core
customers can purchase natural gas procurement service (i.e., natural gas supply) from either the Utility or non-utility third-party gas procurement service
providers (referred to as “core transport agents”).  When core customers purchase gas supply from a core transport agent, the Utility continues to provide gas
delivery, metering and billing services to customers.  When the Utility provides both transportation and procurement services, the Utility refers to the combined
service as “bundled” natural gas service.  Currently, more than 96% of core customers, representing approximately 85% of the annual core market demand, receive
bundled natural gas service from the Utility.
(1) 
 (2)
 (3)
(1) 
(2) 
(3)
35

The Utility generally does not provide procurement service to non-core customers, which must purchase their gas supplies from third-party suppliers, unless the
customer is a natural gas-fired generation facility with which the Utility has a power purchase agreement that includes its generation fuel expense. The Utility
offers backbone gas transmission, gas delivery (local transmission and distribution), and gas storage services as separate and distinct services to its non-core
customers.  Access to the Utility’s backbone gas transmission system is available for all natural gas marketers and shippers, as well as non-core customers.  The
Utility also delivers gas to off-system customers (i.e., outside of the Utility’s service territory) and to third-party natural gas storage customers.
Natural Gas Supplies
The Utility can receive natural gas from all the major natural gas basins in western North America, including basins in western Canada, the Rocky Mountains, and
the southwestern United States. The Utility can also receive natural gas from fields in California. The Utility purchases natural gas to serve its core customers
directly from producers and marketers in both Canada and the United States. The contract lengths and natural gas sources of the Utility’s portfolio of natural gas
purchase contracts have varied generally based on market conditions. During 2021, the Utility purchased approximately 302,000 MMcf of natural gas (net of the
sale of excess supply of gas). Substantially all of this natural gas was purchased under contracts with a term of one year or less. The Utility’s largest individual
supplier represented approximately 43% of the total natural gas volume the Utility purchased during 2021.
Natural Gas System Assets
The Utility owns and operates an integrated natural gas transmission, storage, and distribution system that includes most of northern and central California. At
December 31, 2021, the Utility’s natural gas system consisted of approximately 43,800 miles of distribution pipelines, over 6,200 miles of backbone and local
transmission pipelines, and various storage facilities. The Utility owns and operates eight natural gas compressor stations on its backbone transmission system and
one small station on its local transmission system that are used to move gas through the Utility’s pipelines. The Utility’s backbone transmission system, composed
primarily of Lines 300, 400, and 401, is used to transport gas from the Utility’s interconnection with interstate pipelines, other local distribution companies, and
California gas fields to the Utility’s local transmission and distribution systems.
The Utility has firm transportation agreements for delivery of natural gas from western Canada to the United States-Canada border with TransCanada NOVA Gas
Transmission, Ltd. interconnecting downstream with TransCanada Foothills Pipe Lines Ltd., B.C. System. The Foothills system interconnects at the border to the
pipeline system owned by Gas Transmission Northwest, LLC, which provides natural gas transportation services to a point of interconnection with the Utility’s
natural gas transportation system on the Oregon-California border near Malin, Oregon. The Utility also has firm transportation agreements with Ruby Pipeline,
LLC to transport natural gas from the U.S. Rocky Mountains to the interconnection point with the Utility’s natural gas transportation system in the area of Malin,
Oregon, at the California border. Similarly, the Utility has a firm transportation agreement with Transwestern Pipeline Company, LLC to transport natural gas from
supply points in the southwestern United States to interconnection points with the Utility’s natural gas transportation system in the area of California near Topock,
Arizona. (For more information regarding the Utility’s natural gas transportation agreements, see Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in
Item 8.)
The Utility owns and operates three underground natural gas storage fields and has a 25% interest in a fourth storage field, all of which are connected to the
Utility’s gas transmission system.  In 2019, the CPUC approved the discontinuation, through closure or sale, of operations at two of the Utility’s owned and
operated gas storage fields, Pleasant Creek and Los Medanos. The Utility expects to sell Pleasant Creek in 2022 in accordance with the CPUC’s final decision in
the 2019 GT&S rate case. The Utility intends to retain the Los Medanos field to further support system supply reliability as proposed in the 2023 GRC. The Utility
owns and operates compressors and other facilities at these storage fields that are used to inject gas into the fields for storage and later for withdrawal.  In addition,
four independent storage operators are interconnected to the Utility’s Northern California gas transmission system.
In 2021, the Utility continued upgrading transmission pipeline to allow for the use of in-line inspection tools and continued its work on the final recommendation
from the NTSB’s 2010-11 San Bruno investigation to hydrostatically test all high consequence pipeline mileage. The Utility currently plans to complete this NTSB
recommendation by 2022 for remaining short pipeline segments that include tie-in pieces, fittings or smaller diameter off-takes from the larger transmission
pipelines.
36

Natural Gas Operating Statistics
The following table shows the Utility’s operating statistics from 2019 through 2021 (excluding subsidiaries) for natural gas, including the classification of revenues
by type of service. No single customer of the Utility accounted for 10% or more of consolidated revenues for bundled gas sales in 2021, 2020 or 2019. 
2021
2020
2019
Customers (average for the year)
4,563,747 
4,545,700 
4,518,209 
Gas purchased (MMcf)
226,037 
226,746 
227,621 
Average price of natural gas purchased
$
3.19 $
2.02 $
2.08 
Bundled gas sales (MMcf):
  Residential
162,205 
162,682 
162,876 
  Commercial
54,262 
49,834 
54,479 
Total Bundled Gas Sales
216,467 
212,516 
217,355 
Revenues (in millions):
Bundled gas sales:
  Residential
$
2,759 $
2,517 $
2,325 
  Commercial
713 
597 
605 
  Other
140 
61 
123 
Bundled gas revenues
3,612 
3,175 
3,053 
Transportation service only revenue
1,346 
1,211 
1,249 
      Subtotal
4,958 
4,386 
4,302 
  Regulatory balancing accounts
553 
225 
87 
Total operating revenues
$
5,511 $
4,611 $
4,389 
Selected Statistics:
Average annual residential usage (Mcf)
37 
37 
38 
Average billed bundled gas sales revenues per Mcf:
  Residential
$
16.54 $
15.09 $
13.88 
  Commercial
11.63 
10.61 
9.72 
Net plant investment per customer
$
4,130 $
3,794 $
3,522 
These amounts include natural gas provided by core transport agents and CCAs that procure their own supplies of natural gas for their respective customers.
 These amounts represent revenues authorized to be billed.
Competition
Trends in Market Demand and Competitive Conditions in the Electricity Industry
California law allows qualifying non-residential electric customers of IOUs to purchase electricity from energy service providers rather than from the utilities up to
certain annual limits specified for each utility. This arrangement is known as DA. In 2018, the California legislature passed a bill to expand the annual statewide
DA cap by 4,000 GWh and directed the CPUC to consider whether DA should be further expanded. In addition, California law permits cities, counties, and certain
other public agencies that have qualified to become a CCA to generate or purchase electricity for their local residents and businesses. By law, a CCA can procure
electricity for all of its residents and businesses that do not affirmatively elect to continue to receive electricity generated or procured by a utility. In 2019, the
CPUC issued an order implementing the 4,000 GWh increase for DA transactions, including an apportionment to the Utility’s service area of approximately 1,873
GWh.
On June 24, 2021, the CPUC adopted a decision further implementing the 2018 legislation. In that decision, the CPUC recommended against further legislative
expansion of DA at this time. Although a CPUC staff report issued in September 2020 had recommended expanding DA at a rate of ten percent each year, the
CPUC ultimately found that recent reliability events and the current integrated resource planning forecasted needs for additional generation prevented a need for
further DA reopening. The CPUC found that expanded DA would result in further fragmentation of the electric market in California and raise electric system
reliability concerns. Additionally, the CPUC based its recommendation in part on DA providers’ primary reliance on unspecified power sources, which it found
may not support California’s climate goals.
 (1)
 (2)
(1) 
(2)
37

The Utility continues to provide transmission, distribution, metering, and billing services to DA customers at the election of their energy service provider. The
CCA customers continue to obtain transmission, distribution, metering, and billing services from the Utility. In addition to collecting charges for transmission,
distribution, metering, and billing services that it provides, the Utility is able to collect charges intended to recover the generation-related costs that the Utility
incurred on behalf of DA and CCA customers while they were the Utility’s customers. The Utility remains the electricity provider of last resort for these
customers. Section 387 of the Public Utilities Code allows for a request to transfer the responsibilities of the provider of last resort obligation from IOUs to other
entities.
The Utility is also impacted by the increasing viability of distributed generation and energy storage. The levels of self-generation of electricity by customers
(primarily solar installations) and the use of customer NEM, which allows self-generating customers employing qualifying renewable resources to receive bill
credits at the full retail rate, are increasing, putting upward rate pressure on remaining customers. New NEM customers are required to pay an interconnection fee,
utilize time of use rates, and are required to pay certain non-bypassable charges to help fund some of the costs of low income, energy efficiency, and other
programs that other customers pay. Significantly higher bills for remaining customers may result in a decline of the number of such customers as they may seek
alternative energy providers or adopt self-generation technologies. See “Rising rates for the Utility’s customers could result in circumstances in which the Utility is
unable to fully recover costs or earn its authorized ROE” in Item 1A. Risk Factors and “Regulatory Matters-OIR to Revisit Net Energy Metering Tariffs” in Item 7.
MD&A.
Further, in some circumstances, governmental entities such as cities and irrigation districts may have authority under the state constitution or state statute to
provide retail electric service directly to consumers. Those entities may rely upon FERC open access tariffs and Utility infrastructure to deliver energy to them at
wholesale rates for resale at retail to existing or potential new Utility customers. These entities may also seek to acquire the Utility’s transmission or distribution
facilities through eminent domain for use in serving electricity at retail to existing or potential new Utility customers. During the Chapter 11 Cases, multiple
entities communicated their interest in acquiring Utility assets through voluntary sales. It is also expected that some publicly-owned utilities will construct
duplicate or new transmission or distribution facilities to serve existing or potential new Utility customers. In some instances, microgrid formation is a key factor in
a community’s choice to engage governmental entities.
The Utility also competes for the opportunity to develop and construct certain types of electric transmission facilities within, or interconnected to, its service
territory through a competitive bidding process managed by the CAISO.
The effect of such types of retail competition generally is to reduce the number of utility customers, leading to a reduction in the Utility’s rate base.
For risks in connection with increasing competition, see Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Competition in the Natural Gas Industry
The Utility competes with other natural gas pipeline companies for customers transporting natural gas into the southern California market on the basis of
transportation rates, access to competitively priced supplies of natural gas, and the quality and reliability of transportation services. The Utility also competes for
storage services with other third-party storage providers, primarily in Northern California.
ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial results can be affected by many factors, including estimates and assumptions used in the critical accounting
estimates described in Item 7. MD&A, that can cause their actual financial results to differ materially from historical results or from anticipated future financial
results.  The following discussion of key risk factors should be considered in evaluating an investment in PG&E Corporation and the Utility and should be read in
conjunction with Item 7. MD&A and the Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of
this 2021 Form 10-K.  Any of these factors, in whole or in part, could materially affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of
operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
Risk Factors Summary
The following is a summary of the principal risks that could adversely affect our business, operations, and financial results. These risks are discussed more fully
below.
38

Risks related to wildfires, including risks related to:
•
The extent to which the Wildfire Fund and revised recoverability standard under AB 1054 effectively mitigates the risk of liability for damages arising
from catastrophic wildfires;
•
The 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, the 2021 Dixie fire or future wildfires;
•
Recovery of excess costs in connection with wildfires; and
•
Implementation of wildfire mitigation initiatives.
Risks related to operations and information technology, including risks related to:
•
The hazardous nature of the Utility’s electricity and natural gas operations;
•
The Utility’s insurance coverage;
•
Changes in the electric power and gas industries;
•
A cyber incident, cyber security breach, severe natural event or physical attack; and
•
The operation and decommissioning of the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities.
Risks related to environmental factors, including risks related to:
•
Severe weather conditions, extended drought and climate change and events resulting from these conditions (including wildfires); and
•
Extensive environmental laws.
Risks related to enforcement matters, investigations, and regulatory proceedings, including risks related to:
•
The Enhanced Oversight and Enforcement Process;
•
Legislative and regulatory developments;
•
Outcomes of enforcement proceedings in connection with extensive regulations to which the Utility is subject; and
•
Outcomes of regulatory and ratemaking proceedings and the Utility’s ability to manage its costs.
Risks related to the environment and financial condition, including risks related to:
•
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s substantial indebtedness;
•
Restrictions in indebtedness documents;
•
Appeals of the Confirmation Order;
•
Potential additional dilution to holders of PG&E Corporation common stock;
•
Any substantial sale of stock by existing stockholders;
•
Ownership and transfer restrictions associated with PG&E Corporation common stock;
•
Tax-related risks and uncertainties, including the grantor trust election for the Fire Victim Trust;
•
Restrictions on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s ability to issue dividends;
•
PG&E Corporation’s reliance on dividends, distributions and other payments from the Utility;
39

•
Restrictions on shareholders ability to change the direction or management of PG&E Corporation;
•
The COVID-19 pandemic; and
•
Increased customer rates.
General risks, including related to:
•
Attracting and maintaining a qualified workforce or prolonged labor disruptions.
Risks Related to Wildfires
The Wildfire Fund and other provisions of AB 1054 may not effectively mitigate the risk of liability for damages arising from catastrophic wildfires.
If the Utility does not have an approved WMP, the Utility will not be issued a safety certification and will consequently not benefit from the presumption of
prudency or the AB 1054 disallowance cap. Under AB 1054, the Utility is required to maintain a safety certification issued by the OEIS to be eligible for certain
benefits, including a cap on Wildfire Fund reimbursement and a reformed prudent manager standard. The AB 1054 Wildfire Fund disallowance cap, which caps
the amount of liability that the Utility could be required to bear for a catastrophic wildfire, is inapplicable if the Wildfire Fund administrator determines that the
electric utility company’s actions or inactions that resulted in the applicable wildfire constituted “conscious or willful disregard for the rights and safety of others,”
or the electric utility company fails to maintain a valid safety certification at the time the applicable wildfire ignited. In addition, if the Utility fails to maintain a
valid safety certificate at the time a wildfire ignites, the initial burden of proof in a prudency proceeding shifts from intervenors to the Utility. The Utility will be
required to reimburse amounts that are determined by the CPUC not to be just and reasonable. For more information on the disallowance cap, see Note 14 of the
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Furthermore, the Wildfire Fund will only be available for payment of eligible claims so long as there are sufficient funds remaining in the Wildfire Fund. Such
funds could be depleted more quickly than expected, including as a result of claims made by California’s other participating electric utility companies. If the Utility
is unable to maintain an AB 1054 safety certification or if the Wildfire Fund is exhausted, the ineffectiveness of the Wildfire Fund could have a material effect on
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. Also, the Utility will not be able to obtain any recovery
from the Wildfire Fund for wildfire-related losses in any year that do not exceed the greater of $1.0 billion in the aggregate and the amount of insurance coverage
required under AB 1054.
The costs of participating in the Wildfire Fund are expected to exceed $6.7 billion over the anticipated ten-year contribution period for the fund. The timing and
amount of any potential charges associated with the Utility’s contributions would also depend on various factors. In addition, there could also be a significant delay
between the occurrence of a wildfire and the timing on which the Utility recognizes impairment for the reduction in future coverage, due to the lack of data
available to the Utility following a catastrophic event, especially if the wildfire occurs in the service territory of another participating electric utility. Participation
in the Wildfire Fund is expected to have a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash
flows, and there can be no assurance that the benefits of participating in the Wildfire Fund ultimately outweigh these substantial costs.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility could be liable as a result of the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, the 2021 Dixie fire, or future wildfires.
Based on the facts and circumstances available as of the date of this report, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have determined that it is probable they will incur
losses in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire and the 2021 Dixie fire. Although PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recorded liabilities
for probable losses in connection with these fires, these liability estimates correspond to the lower end of the range of reasonably estimable losses, do not include
several categories of potential damages that are not reasonably estimable, and are subject to change based on new information.
40

Although there are a number of unknown facts surrounding Cal Fire’s causation determinations of the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, and the 2021 Dixie
fire, the Utility could be subject to significant liability in excess of recoveries that would be expected to have a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. PG&E Corporation and the Utility have also received and have responded or are
responding to document, data, and other information requests from the CPUC’s SED and law enforcement agencies that are investigating these wildfires. PG&E
Corporation and the Utility could be the subject of additional investigations, lawsuits, or enforcement actions in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020
Zogg fire, the 2021 Dixie fire or other wildfires. For more information, see Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Under California law (including Penal Code section 1202.4), if the Utility were convicted of any of the charges in the Kincade Amended Complaint or the Zogg
Complaint, the sentencing court must order the Utility to “make restitution to the victim or victims in an amount established by court order” that is “sufficient to
fully reimburse the victim or victims for every determined economic loss incurred as the result of” the Utility’s underlying conduct, in addition to interest and the
victim’s or victims’ attorneys’ fees. This requirement for full reimbursement of economic loss is not waivable by either the government or the victims and is not
offset by any compensation that the victims have received or may receive from their insurance carriers. In the event that the Utility were convicted of certain
charges in the Kincade Amended Complaint or the Zogg Complaint, the Utility currently believes that, depending on which charges it were to be convicted of, its
total losses associated with each of the Kincade Amended Complaint and the Zogg Complaint would materially exceed the $800 million and the $375 million
aggregate liability that PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recorded to reflect the lower end of the range of the reasonably estimable range of losses for the
2019 Kincade fire and 2020 Zogg fire civil claims, respectively. The Utility is currently unable to determine a reasonable estimate of the amount of such additional
losses. The Utility does not expect that any of its liability insurance would be available to cover restitution payments ordered by the court presiding over the
criminal proceeding.
There have also been numerous other wildfires in the Utility’s service territory, of which the Utility has not been alleged or determined to be a cause. The Utility
could be alleged or determined to be a cause of one or more of these wildfires.
Additionally, under the doctrine of inverse condemnation, courts have imposed liability against utilities on the grounds that losses borne by the person whose
property was damaged through a public-use undertaking should be spread across the community that benefited from such undertaking, even if the utility is unable
to recover these costs through rates. In fact, in December 2017, the CPUC denied recovery of costs that San Diego Gas & Electric Company stated it had incurred
as a result of the doctrine of inverse condemnation. Legal challenges to that denial were unsuccessful. Plaintiffs have asserted and continue to assert the doctrine of
inverse condemnation in lawsuits related to certain wildfires that occurred in the Utility’s service territory. Inverse condemnation imposes strict liability (including
liability for attorneys’ fees) for damages as a result of the design, construction and maintenance of utility facilities, including utilities’ electric transmission lines.
While the Utility currently continues to dispute the applicability of inverse condemnation to the Utility, there can be no assurance that the Utility will be successful
in challenging the applicability of inverse condemnation in the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, the 2021 Dixie fire, or other litigation against PG&E
Corporation or the Utility.
Although the Utility has taken extensive measures to reduce the threat of future wildfires, the potential that the Utility’s equipment will be involved in the ignition
of future wildfires, including catastrophic wildfires, is significant. This risk may be attributable to, and exacerbated by, a variety of factors, including climate (in
particular extended periods of seasonal dryness coupled with periods of high wind velocities and other storms), infrastructure, and vegetation conditions. Despite
significant investment in mitigation measures to improve infrastructure and manage vegetation, as well as implementation of de-energization strategies, the Utility
may not be successful in mitigating the risk of future wildfires.
In addition, wildfires have had and, along with any future wildfires, could continue to have, adverse consequences on the Utility’s proceedings with the CPUC
(including the Safety Culture OII) and the FERC, and future regulatory proceedings, including future applications with the OEIS for the safety certification
required by AB 1054. PG&E Corporation and the Utility may also suffer additional reputational harm and face an even more challenging operating, political, and
regulatory environment as a result of the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, the 2021 Dixie fire or any future wildfires. For more information about the 2019
Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, and the 2021 Dixie fire, see Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
41

The Utility may be unable to recover all or a significant portion of its excess costs in connection with wildfires from insurance, through rates, or from the
Wildfire Fund in a timely manner.
The Utility could incur substantial costs in excess of insurance coverage or amounts potentially available under the Wildfire Fund under AB 1054 in the future in
connection with the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire and the 2021 Dixie fire. There can be no assurance that the Utility will be allowed to recover costs in
excess of insurance or amounts potentially available under the Wildfire Fund under AB 1054 in the future either through FERC TO rates or as costs recorded to the
WEMA, even if a court decision were to determine that the Utility is liable as a result of the application of the doctrine of inverse condemnation. The inability to
recover all or a significant portion of costs in excess of insurance through rates or by collecting such rates in a timely manner could have a material effect on
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. For more information on wildfire recovery risk, see “The
Wildfire Fund and other provisions of AB 1054 may not effectively mitigate the risk of liability for damages arising from catastrophic wildfires” above, “The
Utility’s insurance coverage may not be sufficient to cover losses caused by an operating failure or catastrophic events, including severe weather events and events
resulting from these conditions (including wildfires), or may not be available at a reasonable cost, or available at all” below, and Note 14 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
The Utility may not effectively implement its wildfire mitigation initiatives.
The Utility’s infrastructure is aging and poses risks to safety and system reliability. Although the Utility spends significant resources on initiatives designed to
mitigate wildfire risks, there is no assurance that these initiatives will be successful or effective in reducing wildfire-related losses or that their costs will be fully
recoverable through rates. The Utility will face a higher likelihood of catastrophic wildfires in its service territory if it cannot effectively implement these efforts
and its WMPs. For example, the Utility may not be able to effectively implement its WMPs if it experiences unanticipated difficulties relative to sourcing,
engaging, training, overseeing and retaining contract workers it needs to fulfill its mitigation obligations under the WMPs. The CPUC may assess penalties on the
Utility if it finds that the Utility has failed to substantially comply with its WMPs.
There can be no assurance that the Utility’s wildfire mitigation initiatives will be effective. For instance, a wildfire may be ignited and spread even in conditions
that do not trigger proactive de-energization according to criteria for initiating a PSPS event. The Utility’s inspections of vegetation near its assets may not detect
structural weaknesses within a tree or other issues. If the Utility’s wildfire mitigation initiatives are not effective, a wildfire could be ignited and spread.
The PSPS program has been subject to significant scrutiny and criticism by various stakeholders, including customers, regulators, and lawmakers. The Utility also
is the subject of a class action litigation in connection with the 2019 PSPS events.
In addition, on a risk-informed basis, the Utility is making efforts to reduce the frequency and impacts of PSPS. The Utility may be subject to mandated changes to,
or restrictions on, its operational practices, regulatory fines and penalties, claims for damages, and reputational harm if the Utility does not execute PSPS in
compliance with applicable rules and regulations. The Utility establishes the criteria under which it implements PSPS in its territory. To the extent the Utility’s
criteria for implementing PSPS are not sufficient to mitigate the risk of wildfires, the Utility does not fully implement PSPS when criteria are met due to other
overriding conditions or the Utility’s regulators mandate changes to, or restrictions on, its criteria or other operational PSPS practices, the Utility will face a higher
likelihood of catastrophic wildfires in its territory during high-risk weather conditions.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility cannot predict the timing and outcome of the various proceedings and litigation in connection with its wildfire mitigation
initiatives. PG&E Corporation and the Utility could be subject to additional investigations, regulatory proceedings or other enforcement actions as well as to
additional litigation and claims by customers as a result of the Utility’s implementation of its wildfire mitigation initiatives, which could result in fines, penalties,
customer rebates or other payments. The amount of any fines, penalties, customer rebates or other payments (if PG&E Corporation or the Utility were to issue any
credits, rebates or other payments in connection with any other wildfire mitigation initiatives or liability for damages) could have a material effect on PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. In addition, the PSPS and EPSS programs have had an adverse
impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s reputation with customers, regulators and policymakers and future PSPS and EPSS events may increase these
negative perceptions. For more information, see “Regulatory Matters” in Item 7. MD&A.
42

Risks Related to Operations and Information Technology
The Utility’s electricity and natural gas operations are inherently hazardous and involve significant risks.
The Utility owns and operates extensive electricity and natural gas facilities, including two nuclear generation units and an extensive hydroelectric generating
system. See “Electric Utility Operations” and “Natural Gas Utility Operations” in Item 1. above. The Utility undertakes substantial capital investment projects to
construct, replace, and improve its electricity and natural gas facilities. In addition, the Utility is obligated to decommission its electricity generation facilities at the
end of their useful operating lives, and the CPUC approved retirement of Diablo Canyon by 2024 and 2025. For more information, see “The operation and
decommissioning of the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities expose it to potentially significant liabilities and the Utility may not be able to fully recover its costs
if regulatory requirements or operating conditions change or the facilities cease operations before the licenses expire” below.
The Utility’s ability to efficiently construct, maintain, operate, protect, and decommission its facilities, and provide electricity and natural gas services safely and
reliably is subject to numerous risks, many of which are beyond the Utility’s control, including those that arise from:
•
the breakdown or failure of equipment, electric transmission or distribution lines, or natural gas transmission and distribution pipelines or other assets or
group of assets, that can cause explosions, fires, public or workforce safety issues, large scale system disruption or other catastrophic events;
•
an overpressure event occurring on natural gas facilities due to equipment failure, incorrect operating procedures or failure to follow correct operating
procedures, or welding or fabrication-related defects, that results in the failure of downstream transmission pipelines or distribution assets and
uncontained natural gas flow;
•
the failure to maintain adequate capacity to meet customer demand on the gas system that results in customer curtailments, controlled/uncontrolled gas
outages, gas surges back into homes, serious personal injury or loss of life;
•
a prolonged statewide electrical black-out that results in damage to the Utility’s equipment or damage to property owned by customers or other third
parties;
•
the failure to fully identify, evaluate, and control workplace hazards that result in serious injury or loss of life for employees, contractors, or the public,
environmental damage, or reputational damage;
•
the release of radioactive materials caused by a nuclear accident, seismic activity, natural disaster, or terrorist act;
•
the failure of a large dam or other major hydroelectric facility, or the failure of one or more levees that protect land on which the Utility’s assets are built;
•
the failure to take expeditious or sufficient action to mitigate operating conditions, facilities, or equipment, that the Utility has identified, or reasonably
should have identified, as unsafe, which failure then leads to a catastrophic event (such as a wildfire or natural gas explosion);
•
inadequate emergency preparedness plans and the failure to respond effectively to a catastrophic event that can lead to public or employee harm or
extended outages;
•
operator or other human error;
•
a motor vehicle or aviation incident involving a Utility vehicle or aircraft, respectively (or one operated on behalf of the Utility) resulting in serious
injuries to or fatalities of the workforce or the public, property damage, or other consequences;
•
an ineffective records management program that results in the failure to construct, operate and maintain a utility system safely and prudently;
•
construction performed by third parties that damages the Utility’s underground or overhead facilities, including, for example, ground excavations or “dig-
ins” that damage the Utility’s underground pipelines, the risk of which may be exacerbated if the Utility does not have an effective contract management
system;
43

•
the release of hazardous or toxic substances into the air, water, or soil, including, for example, gas leaks from natural gas storage facilities; flaking lead-
based paint from the Utility’s facilities, and leaking or spilled insulating fluid from electrical equipment; and
•
attacks by third parties, including cyber-attacks, acts of terrorism, vandalism, or war. For more information, see “The Utility’s operational networks and
information technology systems could be impacted by a cyber incident, cyber security breach, severe natural event or physical attack” below.
The occurrence of any of these events could interrupt fuel supplies, affect demand for electricity or natural gas, cause unplanned outages or reduce generating
output, damage the Utility’s assets or operations, damage the assets or operations of third parties on which the Utility relies, damage property owned by customers
or others, and cause personal injury or death. As a result, the Utility could incur costs to purchase replacement power, to repair assets and restore service, and to
compensate third parties. Any of such incidents also could lead to significant claims against the Utility.
Further, although the Utility often enters into agreements for third-party contractors to perform work, such as patrolling and inspection of facilities, vegetation
management, or the construction or demolition or facilities, the Utility may have less control over contractors than its employees and may retain liability for the
quality and completion of the contractor’s work and can be subject to penalties or other enforcement action if the contractor violates applicable laws, rules,
regulations, or orders. The Utility may also be subject to liability, penalties or other enforcement action as a result of personal injury or death caused by third-party
contractor actions.
Insurance, equipment warranties, or other contractual indemnification requirements may not be sufficient or effective to provide full or even partial recovery under
all circumstances or against all hazards or liabilities to which the Utility may become subject. An uninsured loss could have a material effect on PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
The Utility’s insurance coverage may not be sufficient to cover losses caused by an operating failure or catastrophic events, including severe weather events
and events resulting from these conditions (including wildfires), or may not be available at a reasonable cost, or available at all.
As a result of the potential application to IOUs of a strict liability standard under the doctrine of inverse condemnation, past losses recorded by insurance
companies, past wildfires and the risk of increased wildfires including as a result of climate change, the Utility may not be able to obtain sufficient insurance
coverage in the future at a reasonable cost, or at all.
The Utility has experienced increased costs and difficulties in obtaining insurance coverage for wildfires and other risks that could arise from the Utility’s ordinary
operations. PG&E Corporation, the Utility or its contractors and customers could continue to experience coverage reductions or increased insurance costs in future
years. No assurance can be given that future losses will not exceed the limits of the Utility’s insurance coverage, including losses arising from litigation. Uninsured
losses and increases in the cost of insurance may not be recoverable through rates. A loss that is not fully insured or cannot be recovered through rates, and
increased insurance costs that are not recoverable, could materially affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity,
and cash flows.
The electric power and gas industries are undergoing significant changes driven by technological advancements and a decarbonized economy.
The electric power industry is undergoing transformative change driven by technological advancements enabling customer choice and state climate policy
supporting a decarbonized economy. California utilities also are experiencing increasing deployment by customers and third parties of distributed energy resources,
such as on-site solar generation, energy storage, fuel cells, energy efficiency, and demand response technologies. These developments will require modernization
of the electric distribution grid to, among other things, accommodate two-way flows of electricity, increase the grid’s capacity, and interconnect distributed energy
resources. In order to enable the California clean energy economy, sustained investments are required in grid modernization, renewable integration projects, energy
efficiency programs, energy storage options, EV infrastructure and state infrastructure modernization (e.g., rail and water projects). If the Utility is unable to
effectively adapt to these changes, its business model and its ability to execute on its strategy could be materially impacted.
44

Various jurisdictions within California have enacted prohibitions or restrictions on use and consumption of natural gas, for example in buildings, that will reduce
the use of natural gas. Reducing natural gas use could lead to a reduction in the gas customer base and a diminished need for gas infrastructure and, as a result,
could lead to certain gas assets no longer being “used and useful,” potentially causing substantial investment value of gas assets to be stranded (under CPUC
precedent, when an asset no longer meets the standard of “used and useful,” the asset is removed from rate base, which results in a reduction in associated rate
recovery). However, while natural gas demand is projected to decline over time, the costs of operating a safe and reliable gas delivery system in California have
been increasing, among other things, to cover the cost of long-term pipeline safety enhancements. Inability by the Utility to recover through rates its investments
into the natural gas system while still ensuring gas system safety and reliability could materially affect the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations,
liquidity, and cash flows.
These industry changes, costs associated with complying with new regulatory developments and initiatives and with technological advancements, or the Utility’s
inability to successfully adapt to changes in the electric and gas industry, could materially affect the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity,
and cash flows.
The Utility’s operational networks and information technology systems could be impacted by a cyber incident, cyber security breach, severe natural event, or
physical attack.
The Utility’s electricity and natural gas systems rely on a complex, interconnected network of generation, transmission, distribution, control, and communication
technologies, which can be damaged by natural events-such as severe weather or seismic events-and by malicious events, such as cyber and physical attacks.
Private and public entities, such as the North American Electric Reliability Corporation, and the U.S. federal government, including the Departments of Defense,
Homeland Security and Energy, and the White House, have noted that cyber-attacks targeting utility systems are increasing in sophistication, magnitude, and
frequency. The Utility’s operational networks also may face new cyber security risks due to modernizing and interconnecting the existing infrastructure with new
technologies and control systems. Any failure or decrease in the functionality of the Utility’s operational networks could cause harm to the public or employees,
significantly disrupt operations, negatively impact the Utility’s ability to safely generate, transport, deliver and store energy and gas or otherwise operate in the
most safe and efficient manner or at all, and damage the Utility’s assets or operations or those of third parties.
The Utility also relies on complex information technology systems that allow it to create, collect, use, disclose, store and otherwise process sensitive information,
including the Utility’s financial information, customer energy usage and billing information, and personal information regarding customers, employees and their
dependents, contractors, and other individuals. In addition, the Utility often relies on third-party vendors to host, maintain, modify, and update its systems, and to
provide other services to the Utility or the Utility’s customers. In addition, the Utility is increasingly being required to disclose large amounts of data (including
customer energy usage and personal information regarding customers) to support changes to California’s electricity market related to grid modernization and
customer choice. These third-party vendors could cease to exist, fail to establish adequate processes to protect the Utility’s systems and information, or experience
security incidents or inadequate security measures. Any incidents or disruptions in the Utility’s information technology systems could impact the Utility’s ability to
track or collect revenues and to maintain effective internal controls over financial reporting.
The Utility and its third-party vendors have been subject to, and will likely continue to be subject to, breaches and attempts to gain unauthorized access to the
Utility’s information technology systems or confidential data (including information about customers and employees), or to disrupt the Utility’s operations. None
of these breaches or attempts has individually or in the aggregate resulted in a security incident with a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s
financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. Despite implementation of security and control measures, there can be no assurance that the
Utility will be able to prevent unauthorized access to its operational networks, information technology systems or data, or the disruption of its operations. Such
events could subject the Utility to significant expenses, claims by customers or third parties, government inquiries, penalties for violation of applicable privacy
laws, investigations, and regulatory actions that could result in material fines and penalties, loss of customers and harm to PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s
reputation, any of which could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
The Utility maintains cyber liability insurance that covers certain damages caused by cyber incidents. However, there is no assurance that adequate insurance will
continue to be available at rates the Utility believes are reasonable or that the costs of responding to and recovering from a cyber incident will be covered by
insurance or recoverable through rates.
45

The operation and decommissioning of the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities expose it to potentially significant liabilities and the Utility may not be able to
fully recover its costs if regulatory requirements or operating conditions change or the facilities cease operations before the licenses expire.
The operation of the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities exposes it to potentially significant liabilities from environmental, health and financial risks, such as
risks relating to operation of the Diablo Canyon nuclear generation units as well as the storage, handling and disposal of spent nuclear fuel, and the release of
radioactive materials caused by a nuclear accident, seismic activity, natural disaster, or terrorist act. If the Utility incurs losses that are either not covered by
insurance or exceed the amount of insurance available, such losses could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition,
results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. In addition, the Utility may be required under federal law to pay up to $275 million of liabilities arising out of each
nuclear incident occurring not only at the Utility’s Diablo Canyon facility but at any other nuclear power plant in the United States.
On January 11, 2018, the CPUC approved the retirement of Diablo Canyon units by 2024 and 2025. However, the Utility continues to face public concern about
the safety of nuclear generation and nuclear fuel. Some of these nuclear opposition groups regularly file petitions at the NRC and in other forums challenging the
actions of the NRC and urging governmental entities to adopt laws or policies in opposition to nuclear power. Although an action in opposition may ultimately fail,
regulatory proceedings may take longer to conclude and be more costly to complete. It is also possible that public pressure could grow leading to adverse changes
in legislation, regulations, orders, or their interpretation. As a result, operations at the Utility’s two nuclear generation units at Diablo Canyon could cease before
their respective licenses expire in 2024 and 2025. In such an instance, the Utility could be required to record a charge for the remaining amount of its unrecovered
investment and such charge could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash
flows.
In addition, in order to retain highly skilled personnel necessary to safely operate Diablo Canyon during the remaining years of operations, the Utility will incur
costs in connection with (i) an employee retention program to ensure adequate staffing levels at Diablo Canyon, and (ii) an employee retraining and development
program, to facilitate redeployment of a portion of Diablo Canyon personnel to the decommissioning project and elsewhere in the Utility. There can be no
assurance that the Utility will be successful in retaining highly skilled personnel under its employee programs.
The Utility has incurred, and may continue to incur, substantial costs to comply with NRC regulations and orders. See “Regulatory Environment” in Item 1.
Business above. If the Utility were unable to recover these costs, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and
cash flows could be materially affected. The Utility may determine that it cannot comply with the new regulations or orders in a feasible and economic manner and
voluntarily cease operations; alternatively, the NRC may order the Utility to cease operations until the Utility can comply with new regulations, orders, or
decisions. The Utility may incur a material charge if it ceases operations at Diablo Canyon’s two nuclear generation units before their respective licenses expire in
2024 and 2025. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility’s unrecovered investment in Diablo Canyon was $1.16 billion.
The Utility also has an obligation to decommission its electricity generation facilities, including its nuclear facilities, as well as gas transmission system assets, at
the end of their useful lives. See “Asset Retirement Obligations” in Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statement in Item 8. The Utility’s costs to
decommission its nuclear facilities through nuclear decommissioning are subject to reasonableness review by the CPUC. The Utility will be responsible for any
costs that the CPUC determines were not reasonably incurred. If the Utility’s actual decommissioning costs, including the amounts held in the nuclear
decommissioning trusts, exceed estimated costs, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be
materially affected.
46

Risks Related to Environmental Factors
Severe weather conditions, extended drought, and climate change could materially affect PG&E Corporation and the Utility.
Extreme weather, drought and shifting climate patterns have intensified the challenges associated with many of the other risks facing PG&E Corporation and the
Utility, particularly wildfire management in California. The Utility’s service territory encompasses some of the most densely forested areas in California and, as a
consequence, is subject to higher risk from vegetation-related ignition events than other California IOUs. Further, environmental extremes, such as drought
conditions and extreme heat followed by periods of wet weather, can drive additional vegetation growth (which can then fuel fires) and influence both the
likelihood and severity of extraordinary wildfire events. In particular, the risk posed by wildfires, including during the 2021 wildfire season, has increased in the
Utility’s service area as a result of an ongoing extended period of drought, bark beetle infestations in the California forest and wildfire fuel increases due to rising
temperatures and record rainfall following the drought, and strong wind events, among other environmental factors. As of December 31, 2021, more than 86% of
California is experiencing severe to extreme drought. Moderate or severe drought conditions occur and can persist in virtually all of the Utility’s service territory.
More than half of the Utility’s service area is in an HFTD. Contributing factors other than environmental can include local land use policies and historical forestry
management practices. The combined effects of extreme weather and climate change also impact this risk. In January 2018, the CPUC approved a statewide fire-
threat map that shows that approximately half of the Utility’s service territory is facing “elevated” or “extreme” fire danger. Approximately 25,000 circuit miles of
the Utility’s nearly 81,000 distribution overhead circuit miles and approximately 5,500 miles of the nearly 18,000 transmission overhead circuit miles are in such
HFTDs, significantly more in total than other California IOUs.
Severe weather events and other natural disasters, including wildfires and other fires, storms, tornadoes, floods, extreme heat events (including recent extreme heat
events during the 2021 wildfire season), drought, earthquakes, lightning, tsunamis, rising sea levels, pandemics, solar events, electromagnetic events, wind events
or other weather-related conditions, climate change, or natural disasters, could result in severe business disruptions, prolonged power outages, property damage,
injuries and loss of life, significant decreases in revenues and earnings, and significant additional costs to PG&E Corporation and the Utility. Any such event could
have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. Any of such events also could
lead to significant claims against the Utility. Further, these events could result in regulatory penalties and disallowances, particularly if the Utility encounters
difficulties in restoring power to its customers on a timely basis or if the related losses are found to be the result of the Utility’s practices or the failure of electric
and other equipment of the Utility.
Further, the Utility has been studying the potential effects of climate change (increased severity and frequency of storm events, sea level rise, land subsidence,
change in temperature extremes, changes in precipitation patterns and drought, and wildfire) on its assets, operations, and services, and the Utility is developing
adaptation plans to set forth a strategy for those events and conditions that the Utility believes are most significant. Consequences of these climate-driven events
may vary widely and could include increased stress on the energy supply network due to new patterns of demand, reduced hydroelectric output, physical damage to
the Utility’s infrastructure, higher operational costs, and an increase in the number and duration of customer outages and safety consequences for both employees
and customers. As a result, the Utility’s hydroelectric generation could change, and the Utility would need to consider managing or acquiring additional generation.
If the Utility increases its reliance on conventional generation resources to replace hydroelectric generation and to meet increased customer demand, it may become
more costly for the Utility to comply with GHG emissions limits. In addition, climate hazards such as heatwaves, windstorms, and flooding caused by rising sea
levels and extreme storms could damage the Utility’s facilities, including gas, generation, and electric transmission and distribution assets. The Utility could incur
substantial costs to repair or replace facilities, restore service, or compensate customers and other third parties for damages or injuries. The Utility anticipates that
the increased costs would be recovered through rates, but as rate pressures increase, the likelihood of disallowance or non-recovery may increase. See “Rising rates
for the Utility’s customers could result in circumstances in which the Utility is unable to fully recover costs or earn its authorized ROE” above.
Events or conditions caused by climate change could have a greater impact on the Utility’s operations than the Utility’s studies suggest and could result in lower
revenues or increased expenses, or both. If the CPUC fails to adjust the Utility’s rates to reflect the impact of events or conditions caused by climate change, PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially affected.
47

The Utility’s operations are subject to extensive environmental laws, and such laws could change.
The Utility’s operations are subject to extensive federal, state, and local environmental laws, regulations, and orders, relating to air quality, water quality and usage,
remediation of hazardous wastes, and the protection and conservation of natural resources and wildlife. The Utility incurs significant capital, operating, and other
costs associated with compliance with these environmental statutes, rules, and regulations. The Utility has been in the past, and may be in the future, required to
pay for environmental remediation costs at sites where it is identified as a potentially responsible party under federal and state environmental laws. Although the
Utility has recorded liabilities for known environmental obligations, these costs can be difficult to estimate due to uncertainties about the extent of contamination,
remediation alternatives, the applicable remediation levels, and the financial ability of other potentially responsible parties. For more information, see Note 15 of
the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Environmental remediation costs could increase in the future as a result of new legislation, the current trend toward more stringent standards, and stricter and more
expansive application of existing environmental regulations. Failure to comply with these laws and regulations, or failure to comply with the terms of licenses or
permits issued by environmental or regulatory agencies, could expose the Utility to claims by third parties or the imposition of civil or criminal fines or other
sanctions.
The CPUC has authorized the Utility to recover its environmental remediation costs for certain sites through various ratemaking mechanisms. One of these
mechanisms allows the Utility rate recovery for 90% of its hazardous substance remediation costs for certain approved sites without a reasonableness review. The
CPUC may discontinue or change these ratemaking mechanisms in the future, or the Utility may incur environmental costs that exceed amounts the CPUC has
authorized the Utility to recover through rates.
Some of the Utility’s environmental costs, such as the remediation costs associated with the Hinkley natural gas compressor site, are not recoverable through rates
or insurance. See “Environmental Regulation” in Item 1. and Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. The Utility’s costs to
remediate groundwater contamination near the Hinkley natural gas compressor site and to abate the effects of the contamination, changes in estimated costs, and
the extent to which actual remediation costs differ from recorded liabilities have had, and may continue to have, a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
Risks Related to Other Enforcement Matters, Investigations, and Regulatory Proceedings
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are subject to the Enhanced Oversight and Enforcement Process.
The EOEP is a six-step process with potentially escalating CPUC oversight and enforcement measures based on specific “triggering events” identified for each of
the six steps. If the Utility is placed into the EOEP, it will be subject to additional reporting requirements and additional monitoring and oversight by the CPUC.
Higher steps of the process (steps 3 through 6) also contemplate additional enforcement mechanisms, including appointment of an independent third-party monitor,
appointment of a chief restructuring officer, pursuit of the receivership remedy, and review of the Utility’s Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity (i.e., its
license to operate as a utility). The process contains provisions for the Utility to cure and exit the process if it can satisfy specific criteria. The EOEP states that the
Utility should presumptively move through the steps of the process sequentially, but the CPUC may place the Utility into the appropriate step of the process upon
occurrence of a specified triggering event.
On April 15, 2021, the CPUC placed the Utility into step 1 of the EOEP for failing to sufficiently prioritize clearing vegetation on its highest risk power lines as
part of the 2020 WMP work. There can be no assurance regarding if or when the Utility will exit the EOEP, or whether the CPUC will initiate another step 1
proceeding or whether the CPUC will seek to move the Utility into a higher step of the process. See “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Item 7. MD&A.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility could be materially affected by legislative and regulatory developments.
The Utility is subject to extensive regulations. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be
materially affected if the Wildfire Fund does not effectively mitigate the financial risk of liability for damages arising from catastrophic wildfires where the
Utility’s facilities are a substantial cause. See “The Wildfire Fund and other provisions of AB 1054 may not effectively mitigate the risk of liability for damages
arising from catastrophic wildfires.” above.
48

In June 2018, the State of California enacted the CCPA, which went into effect on January 1, 2020, with a 12-month look-back period requiring compliance by
January 1, 2019. The State of California announced enacted regulations in August 2020 and March 2021 which provide guidance on the requirements of the CCPA.
The CCPA requires companies that process information on California residents to make new disclosures to consumers about their data collection, use and sharing
practices, allows consumers to opt out of certain data sharing with third parties and provides a new cause of action for data breaches. The CCPA provides for
financial penalties in the event of non-compliance and statutory damages in the event of a data security breach. On November 3, 2020, Californians voted to
approve Proposition 24, a ballot measure that creates the California Privacy Rights Act (the “CPRA”), which amended and expanded the CCPA. The State of
California enacted the CPRA in November 2020, with most provisions operative as of January 1, 2023 and applicable to personal information collected beginning
January 1, 2022. Failure to comply with the CCPA and the CPRA could result in the imposition of material fines imposed on PG&E Corporation and the Utility.
Also, SB 100 (the 100 Percent Clean Energy Act of 2018) increased the percentage from 50% to 60% of California’s electricity portfolio that must come from
renewables by 2030; and established state policy that 100% of all retail electricity sales must come from renewable portfolio standard-eligible or carbon-free
resources by 2045. Failure to comply with SB 100 could result in fines imposed on PG&E Corporation and the Utility that could be material.
The Utility is subject to extensive regulations and the risk of enforcement proceedings in connection with compliance with such regulations.
The Utility is subject to extensive regulations, including federal, state, and local energy, environmental and other laws and regulations, and the risk of enforcement
proceedings in connection with compliance with such regulations. The Utility could incur material charges, including fines and other penalties, in connection with
the Safety Culture OII (as defined in “Order Instituting an Investigation into PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Safety Culture” under “Enforcement and
Litigation Matters” in Item 7. MD&A) and other matters that the CPUC’s SED may be investigating. The SED could launch investigations at any time on any issue
it deems appropriate. In addition, OEIS has authority to approve and oversee compliance with the WMP.
The Utility could be subject to additional regulatory or governmental enforcement action in the future with respect to compliance with federal, state, or local laws,
regulations or orders that could result in additional fines, penalties or customer refunds, including those regarding renewable energy and RA requirements;
customer billing; customer service; affiliate transactions; vegetation management; design, construction, operating and maintenance practices; safety and inspection
practices; compliance with CPUC GOs or other applicable CPUC decisions or regulations; whether the Utility is able to achieve the targets in its WMPs; federal
electric reliability standards; and environmental compliance. CPUC staff could also impose penalties on the Utility in the future in accordance with its authority
under the gas and electric safety citation programs. The amount of such fines, penalties, or customer refunds could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s
and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
The Utility also is a target of a number of investigations, in addition to certain investigations in connection with the wildfires. See “Risks Related to Wildfires,”
above. The Utility is unable to predict the outcome of pending investigations, including whether any charges will be brought against the Utility, or the amount of
any costs and expenses associated with such investigations.
If these investigations result in enforcement action against the Utility, the Utility could incur additional fines or penalties the amount of which could be substantial
and, in the event of a judgment against the Utility, suffer further ongoing negative consequences. Furthermore, a negative outcome in any of these investigations,
or future enforcement actions, could negatively affect the outcome of future ratemaking and regulatory proceedings to which the Utility may be subject; for
example, by enabling parties to challenge the Utility’s request to recover costs that the parties allege are somehow related to the Utility’s violations.
49

The Utility’s ratemaking and cost recovery proceedings may not authorize sufficient revenues, or the Utility’s actual costs could exceed its authorized or
forecasted costs due to various factors, including if the Utility is not able to manage its costs effectively.
The Utility’s financial results depend on its ability to earn a reasonable return on capital, including long-term debt and equity, and to recover costs from its
customers, through the rates it charges its customers as approved by the CPUC and the FERC. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of
operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially affected if the CPUC or the FERC does not authorize sufficient revenues for the Utility or if the amount of
actual costs incurred differs from the forecast or authorized costs embedded in rates. The outcome of the Utility’s ratemaking proceedings can be affected by many
factors, including the level of opposition by intervening parties; potential rate impacts; increasing levels of regulatory review; changes in the political, regulatory,
or legislative environments; and the opinions of the Utility’s regulators, consumer and other stakeholder organizations, and customers, about the Utility’s ability to
provide safe, reliable, and affordable electric and gas services. If the CPUC does not authorize sufficient funding for investments in the Utility’s infrastructure, it
may negatively impact the Utility's ability to modernize the grid and make it resilient to risks related to climate change, including wildfires.
In addition to the amount of authorized revenues, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could
be materially affected if the Utility’s actual costs differ from authorized or forecast costs. The Utility’s ability to recover its costs and earn a reasonable rate of
return can be affected by many factors, including the time delay between when costs are incurred and when those costs are recovered through rates. The CPUC or
the FERC may not allow the Utility to recover costs on the basis that such costs were not reasonably or prudently incurred or for other reasons. Further, the Utility
may be required to incur expenses before the relevant regulatory agency approves the recovery of such costs. For example, the Utility has incurred, and continues
to incur, costs to strengthen its wildfire mitigation and prevention efforts before it is clear whether such costs will be recoverable through rates. Also, the CPUC
may deny recovery of uninsured wildfire- related costs incurred by the Utility if the CPUC determines that the Utility was not prudent.
The Utility may incur additional costs or reduced revenue for many reasons including changing market circumstances, unanticipated events (such as wildfires,
storms, earthquakes, accidents, or catastrophic or other events affecting the Utility’s operations), increased self-generation by customers, an increase in distributed
generation, lower customer demand due to adverse economic conditions, the loss of the Utility’s customers to other retail providers like CCAs or DA providers,
whether the CAISO wholesale electricity market continues to function effectively, returning customers, or compliance with new state laws or policies. See
“Competition in the Electricity Industry” in Item 1.
Risks Related to PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Environment and Financial Condition
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s substantial indebtedness may adversely affect their financial health and operating flexibility.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have a substantial amount of indebtedness, most of which is secured by liens on certain assets of PG&E Corporation and the
Utility. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation had approximately $4.71 billion of outstanding indebtedness (such indebtedness consisting of PG&E
Corporation’s $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of senior secured notes due 2028, $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of senior secured notes due 2030,
and borrowings under the $2.75 billion secured term loan agreement entered into in June 2020), and the Utility had approximately $38.3 billion of outstanding
indebtedness (such indebtedness including outstanding First Mortgage Bonds, borrowings under the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement and borrowings under the
Utility Term Loan Credit Agreement). In addition, PG&E Corporation had $500 million of additional borrowing capacity under the Corporation Revolving Credit
Agreement, and the Utility had $1.4 billion of additional borrowing capacity under the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement. In addition, the Utility had outstanding
preferred stock with an aggregate liquidation preference of $252 million.
Since PG&E Corporation and the Utility have a high level of debt, a substantial portion of cash flow from operations will be used to make payments on this debt.
Furthermore, since a significant percentage of the Utility’s assets are used to secure its debt, this reduces the amount of collateral available for future secured debt
or credit support and reduces its flexibility in operating these secured assets. This relatively high level of debt and related security could have other important
consequences for PG&E Corporation and the Utility, including:
•
limiting their ability or increasing the costs to refinance their indebtedness;
•
limiting their ability to borrow additional amounts for working capital, capital expenditures, debt service requirements, execution of their business
strategy or other purposes;
50

•
limiting their ability to use operating cash flow in other areas of their business;
•
increasing their vulnerability to general adverse economic and industry conditions, including increases in interest rates, particularly given their substantial
indebtedness that bears interest at variable rates, as well as to catastrophic events; and
•
limiting their ability to capitalize on business opportunities.
Under the terms of the agreements and indentures governing their respective indebtedness, PG&E Corporation and the Utility are permitted to incur additional
indebtedness, some of which could be secured (subject to compliance with certain tests) and which could further accentuate these risks. As a result of the high level
of indebtedness, PG&E Corporation and the Utility may be unable to generate sufficient cash through operations to service such debt, and may need to refinance
such indebtedness at or prior to maturity and be unable to obtain financing on suitable terms or at all. As a capital-intensive company, the Utility relies on access to
the capital markets. If the Utility were unable to access the capital markets or the cost of financing were to substantially increase, its financial condition, results of
operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially affected. The Utility’s ability to obtain financing, as well as its ability to refinance debt and make
scheduled payments of principal and interest, are dependent on numerous factors, including the Utility’s levels of indebtedness, maintenance of acceptable credit
ratings, financial performance, liquidity and cash flow, and other market conditions. The Utility’s inability to service its substantial debt or access the financial
markets on reasonable terms could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash
flows.
The documents that govern PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s indebtedness limit their flexibility in operating their business.
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s material financing agreements, including certain of their respective credit agreements and indentures, contain various
covenants restricting, among other things, their ability to:
•
incur or assume indebtedness or guarantees of indebtedness;
•
incur or assume liens;
•
sell or dispose of all or substantially all of its property or business;
•
merge or consolidate with other companies;
•
enter into any sale leaseback transactions; and
•
enter into swap agreements.
The restrictions contained in these material financing agreements could affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s ability to operate their business and may limit
their ability to react to market conditions or take advantage of potential business opportunities as they arise. For example, such restrictions could adversely affect
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s ability to finance their operations and expenditures, make strategic acquisitions, investments or alliances, sell assets,
restructure their organization or finance their capital needs. Additionally, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s ability to comply with these covenants and
restrictions may be affected by events beyond their control, including prevailing regulatory, economic, financial and industry conditions.
Parties have appealed the Confirmation Order.
Following entry of the Confirmation Order confirming the Plan, certain parties filed notices of appeal with respect to the Confirmation Order. While a number of
such appeals have been dismissed, there can be no assurance that any of the remaining appeals will not be successful and, if successful, that any such appeal would
not have a material adverse effect on PG&E Corporation and the Utility.
51

PG&E Corporation may be required to issue shares with respect to HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims, which would result in dilution to holders of PG&E
Corporation common stock, or pay a material amount of cash with respect to allowed Subordinated Debt Claims.
On the Emergence Date, PG&E Corporation issued to the Fire Victim Trust a number of shares of common stock equal to 22.19% of the outstanding common
stock on such date. As further described in “Satisfaction of HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims and Subordinated Debt Claims” in Note 14 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, PG&E Corporation may be required to issue shares of its common stock in satisfaction of allowed HoldCo Rescission
or Damage Claims. If such issuance is required, it may be determined that, under the Plan, the Fire Victim Trust should receive additional shares of PG&E
Corporation common stock such that it would have owned 22.19% of the outstanding common stock of reorganized PG&E Corporation on the Emergence Date,
assuming that such issuance of shares in satisfaction of the HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims had occurred on the Emergence Date. Any such issuances will
result in dilution to anyone who holds shares of PG&E Corporation common stock prior to such issuance and may cause the trading price of PG&E Corporation
shares to decline.
Additionally, PG&E Corporation may be required to pay a material amount of cash with respect to allowed Subordinated Debt Claims (as defined in “Satisfaction
of HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims and Subordinated Debt Claims” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8). Such
payment may have a material adverse impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
Any substantial sale of stock by existing stockholders could depress the market value of PG&E Corporation’s common stock, thereby devaluing the market
price.
Certain stockholders, including the Fire Victim Trust, received a large number of shares in the Chapter 11 Cases and may continue to hold shares of PG&E
Corporation. PG&E Corporation can make no prediction as to the effect, if any, that sales of shares, or the availability of shares for future sale, will have on the
prevailing market price of shares of PG&E Corporation common stock. Sales of substantial amounts of shares of common stock in the public market, or the
perception that such sales could occur, could depress prevailing market prices for such shares. Such sales may also make it more difficult for PG&E Corporation to
sell equity securities or equity-linked securities in the future at a time and price which it deems appropriate.
PG&E Corporation may also sell additional shares of common stock in subsequent offerings or issue additional shares of common stock or securities convertible
into shares of PG&E Corporation common stock. The issuance of any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock in future financings, acquisitions upon
conversion or exercise of convertible securities, or otherwise may result in a reduction of the book value and market price of PG&E Corporation's outstanding
common stock. If PG&E Corporation issues any such additional shares, the issuance will cause a reduction in the proportionate ownership and voting power of all
current shareholders. PG&E Corporation cannot predict the size of future issuances of shares of PG&E Corporation common stock or securities convertible into
shares of PG&E Corporation common stock or, for any issuance, the effect, if any, that such future issuances will have on the market price of PG&E Corporation's
common stock.
PG&E Corporation common stock is subject to ownership and transfer restrictions intended to preserve PG&E Corporation’s ability to use its net operating
loss carryforwards and other tax attributes.
PG&E Corporation has incurred and may also continue to incur in connection with the Plan significant net operating loss carryforwards and other tax attributes, the
amount and availability of which are subject to certain qualifications, limitations and uncertainties. The Amended Articles (as defined below) impose certain
restrictions on the transferability and ownership of PG&E Corporation common stock and preferred stock (together, the “capital stock”) and other interests
designated as “stock” of PG&E Corporation by the Board of Directors as disclosed in an SEC filing (such stock and other interests, the “Equity Securities,” and
such restrictions on transferability and ownership, the “Ownership Restrictions”) in order to reduce the possibility of an equity ownership shift that could result in
limitations on PG&E Corporation’s ability to utilize net operating loss carryforwards and other tax attributes from prior taxable years or periods for federal income
tax purposes. Any acquisition of PG&E Corporation capital stock that results in a shareholder being in violation of these restrictions may not be valid.
52

Subject to certain exceptions, the Ownership Restrictions restrict (i) any person or entity (including certain groups of persons) from directly or indirectly acquiring
or accumulating 4.75% or more of the outstanding Equity Securities and (ii) the ability of any person or entity (including certain groups of persons) already
owning, directly or indirectly, 4.75% or more of the Equity Securities to increase their proportionate interest in the Equity Securities. For more information, see
“Because PG&E Corporation and the Utility have elected to treat the Fire Victim Trust as a grantor trust, the application of the Ownership Restrictions, as defined
in PG&E Corporation’s Amended Articles of Incorporation, will be determined on the basis of a number of shares outstanding that could differ materially from the
number of shares reported as outstanding on the cover page of its periodic reports under the Exchange Act” below. Any transferee receiving Equity Securities that
would result in a violation of the Ownership Restrictions will not be recognized as a shareholder of PG&E Corporation or entitled to any rights of shareholders,
including, without limitation, the right to vote and to receive dividends or distributions, whether liquidating or otherwise, in each case, with respect to the Equity
Securities causing the violation.
The Ownership Restrictions remain in effect until the earliest of (i) the repeal, amendment, or modification of Section 382 (and any comparable successor
provision) of the Internal Revenue Code, in a manner that renders the restrictions imposed by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code no longer applicable to
PG&E Corporation, (ii) the beginning of a taxable year in which the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation determines that no tax benefits attributable to net
operating losses or other tax attributes are available, (iii) the date selected by the Board of Directors if it determines that the limitation amount imposed by Section
382 of the Internal Revenue Code as of such date in the event of an “ownership change” of PG&E Corporation (as defined in Section 382 of the Internal Revenue
Code and Treasury Regulation Sections 1.1502-91 et seq.) would not be materially less than the net operating loss carryforwards or “net unrealized built-in loss”
(within the meaning of Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code and Treasury Regulation Sections 1.1502-91 et seq.) of PG&E Corporation, and (iv) the date
selected by the Board of Directors if it determines that it is in the best interests of PG&E Corporation’s shareholders for the Ownership Restrictions to be removed
or released. The Ownership Restrictions may also be waived by the Board of Directors on a case by case basis.
Because PG&E Corporation and the Utility have elected to treat the Fire Victim Trust as a grantor trust, the application of the Ownership Restrictions, as
defined in PG&E Corporation’s Amended Articles of Incorporation, will be determined on the basis of a number of shares outstanding that could differ
materially from the number of shares reported as outstanding on the cover page of its periodic reports under the Exchange Act.
The Plan contemplated that the Fire Victim Trust would be treated as a “qualified settlement fund” for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes, subject to PG&E
Corporation’s ability to elect to treat the Fire Victim Trust as a grantor trust for U.S. federal and state income tax purposes instead. On July 8, 2021, PG&E
Corporation, the Utility, ShareCo, and the Fire Victim Trust entered into the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement, pursuant to which PG&E Corporation
and the Utility made a grantor trust election for the Fire Victim Trust effective retroactively to the inception of the Fire Victim Trust.
As a result of the grantor trust election, shares of PG&E Corporation common stock owned by the Fire Victim Trust are treated as held by the Utility and, in turn
attributed to PG&E Corporation for income tax purposes. Consequently, any shares owned by the Fire Victim Trust are effectively excluded from the total number
of outstanding equity securities when calculating a person’s Percentage Stock Ownership (as defined in the Amended Articles) for purposes of the Ownership
Restrictions. See “Tax Matters” in Item 7. MD&A for an example of these calculations. PG&E Corporation does not control the number of shares held by the Fire
Victim Trust and is not able to determine in advance the number of shares the Fire Victim Trust will hold. PG&E Corporation intends to periodically make
available to investors information about the number of shares of common stock held by the Fire Victim Trust, the Utility, and ShareCo as of a specified date for
purposes of the Ownership Restrictions, including in its Quarterly Reports and Annual Reports filed with the SEC.
PG&E Corporation intends to enforce the Ownership Restrictions as described in the foregoing paragraph (calculated as excluding any shares owned by the Fire
Victim Trust, the Utility, and ShareCo from the number of outstanding equity securities). All current and prospective shareholders are advised to consider the
foregoing in determining their ownership and acquisition of PG&E Corporation common stock.
53

PG&E Corporation may not be able to use some or all of its net operating loss carryforwards and other tax attributes to offset future income.
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation had net operating loss carryforwards for PG&E Corporation’s consolidated group for U.S. federal and California
income tax purposes of approximately $21.1 billion and $18.9 billion, respectively, and PG&E Corporation incurred and may also continue to incur in connection
with the Plan significant net operating loss carryforwards and other tax attributes. The ability of PG&E Corporation to use some or all of these net operating loss
carryforwards and certain other tax attributes may be subject to certain limitations. Under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code (which also applies for
California state income tax purposes), if a corporation (or a consolidated group) undergoes an “ownership change,” such net operating loss carryforwards and other
tax attributes may be subject to certain limitations. In general, an ownership change occurs if the aggregate stock ownership of certain shareholders (generally five
percent shareholders, applying certain look-through and aggregation rules) increases by more than 50% over such shareholders’ lowest percentage ownership
during the testing period (generally three years).
As of the date of this report, it is more likely than not that PG&E Corporation has not undergone an ownership change and its net operating loss carryforwards and
other tax attributes are not limited by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. However, whether PG&E Corporation underwent or will undergo an ownership
change as a result of the transactions in PG&E Corporation’s equity that occurred pursuant to the Plan depends on several factors outside PG&E Corporation’s
control and the application of certain laws that are uncertain in several respects. Accordingly, there can be no assurance that the IRS would not successfully assert
that PG&E Corporation has undergone or will undergo an ownership change pursuant to the Plan. In addition, even if these transactions did not cause an ownership
change, they may increase the likelihood that PG&E Corporation may undergo an ownership change in the future. If the IRS successfully asserts that PG&E
Corporation did undergo, or PG&E Corporation otherwise does undergo, an ownership change, the limitation on its net operating loss carryforwards and other tax
attributes under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code could be material to PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations,
liquidity, and cash flows.
In particular, limitations imposed on PG&E Corporation’s ability to utilize net operating loss carryforwards or other tax attributes could cause U.S. federal and
California income taxes to be paid earlier than would be paid if such limitations were not in effect and could cause such net operating loss carryforwards or other
tax attributes to expire unused, in each case reducing or eliminating the benefit of such net operating loss carryforwards and other tax attributes. In addition, PG&E
Corporation’s ability to utilize its net operating loss carryforwards is critical to a successful rate-neutral securitization transaction and to PG&E Corporation’s and
the Utility’s commitment to make certain operating and capital expenditures. Failure to consummate a securitization transaction or obtain alternative sources of
capital could have a material adverse effect on PG&E Corporation and the Utility and the value of PG&E Corporation common stock.
PG&E Corporation’s ability to pay dividends on shares of its common stock is subject to restrictions.
Pursuant to the Confirmation Order, PG&E Corporation may not pay dividends on shares of its common stock until it recognizes $6.2 billion in Non-GAAP Core
Earnings following the Emergence Date. “Non-GAAP Core Earnings” means GAAP earnings adjusted for certain non-core items.
Subject to the foregoing restrictions, any decision to declare and pay dividends in the future will be made at the discretion of the Board of Directors and will
depend on, among other things, PG&E Corporation’s results of operations, financial condition, cash requirements, contractual restrictions, and other factors that the
Board of Directors may deem relevant.
54

PG&E Corporation is a holding company and relies on dividends, distributions and other payments, advances, and transfers of funds from the Utility to meet
its obligations.
PG&E Corporation conducts its operations primarily through its subsidiary, the Utility, and substantially all of PG&E Corporation’s consolidated assets are held by
the Utility. Accordingly, PG&E Corporation’s cash flow and its ability to meet its debt service obligations under its existing and future indebtedness are largely
dependent upon the earnings and cash flows of the Utility and the distribution or other payment of these earnings and cash flows to PG&E Corporation in the form
of dividends or loans or advances and repayment of loans and advances from the Utility. The ability of the Utility to pay dividends or make other advances,
distributions, and transfers of funds will depend on its results of operations and may be restricted by, among other things, applicable laws limiting the amount of
funds available for payment of dividends and certain restrictive covenants contained in the agreements of those subsidiaries. Additionally, the Utility must use its
resources to satisfy its own obligations, including its obligation to serve customers, to pay principal and interest on outstanding debt, to pay preferred stock
dividends, and to meet its obligations to employees and creditors, before it can distribute cash to PG&E Corporation. Under the Utility’s Articles of Incorporation,
the Utility cannot pay common stock dividends unless all cumulative preferred dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock have been paid. As of January 31, 2022,
there were $59.1 million of such cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock. In addition, the CPUC has imposed various conditions that
govern the relationship between PG&E Corporation and the Utility, including financial conditions that require the Board of Directors to give first priority to the
capital requirements of the Utility, as determined to be necessary and prudent to meet the Utility’s obligation to serve or to operate the Utility in a prudent and
efficient manner. On February 8, 2022, the Board of Directors of the Utility authorized the payment of all cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s
preferred stock as of January 31, 2022 totaling $59.1 million, payable on May 13, 2022, to holders of record on April 29, 2022 and declared a dividend on the
Utility’s preferred stock totaling $3.5 million that will be accrued during the three-month period ending April 30, 2022, payable on May 15, 2022, to holders of
record on April 29, 2022. It is uncertain when PG&E Corporation and the Utility will commence the payment of dividends on their common stock. The
deterioration of income from, or other available assets of, the Utility for any reason could limit or impair the Utility’s ability to pay dividends or other distributions
to PG&E Corporation, which could, in turn, materially and adversely affect PG&E Corporation’s ability to meet its obligations.
California law and certain provisions in the Amended Articles and the amended and restated bylaws of PG&E Corporation (the “Amended Bylaws”) may
prevent efforts by shareholders to change the direction or management of PG&E Corporation.
The Amended Articles and the Amended Bylaws contain provisions that may make the acquisition of PG&E Corporation more difficult without the approval of the
Board of Directors, including the following:
•
until 2024, the Board of Directors will be divided into two equal classes, with members of each class elected in different years for different terms;
•
only holders of shares who are entitled to cast ten percent or more of the votes can request a special meeting of the shareholders, and any such request
must satisfy the requirements specified in the Amended Bylaws; action by shareholders may otherwise only be taken at an annual or special meeting duly
called by or at the direction of a majority of the Board of Directors, or action by written consent signed by shareholders owning at least the number of
votes necessary to authorize the action at a meeting where all shares entitled to vote were present;
•
advance notice for all shareholder proposals is required; and
•
any person acquiring PG&E Corporation Equity Securities will be restricted from owning 4.75% or more of such Equity Securities (as determined for
federal income tax purposes (see “Tax Matters” in Item 7. MD&A)), subject to certain exceptions as may be determined by the Board of Directors of
PG&E Corporation.
These and other provisions in the Amended Articles, the Amended Bylaws, and California law could make it more difficult for shareholders or potential acquirers
to obtain control of the Board of Directors or initiate actions that are opposed by the then-current Board of Directors, including delaying or impeding merger,
tender offer, or proxy contest involving PG&E Corporation. The existence of these provisions could negatively affect the price of PG&E Corporation common
stock and limit opportunities for shareholders to realize value in a corporate transaction.
55

PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows have been and could continue to be significantly
affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows have been (beginning in March 2020) and could continue
to be significantly affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic (and its variants), but the extent of such impact is uncertain.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility continue to evaluate the impact of the current COVID-19 outbreak on their business and financial results. The consequences of a
continued and prolonged outbreak and resulting governmental and regulatory orders have had and could continue to have a negative impact on the Utility’s
financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting economic conditions, and resulting decrease in economic and industrial activity in the Utility’s service
territory, have and will continue to have a significant adverse impact on the Utility’s customers. These circumstances have impacted and will continue to impact
the Utility for a period of time that PG&E Corporation and the Utility are unable to predict. For example, the economic downturn has resulted in a reduction in
customer receipts and collection delays throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Utility’s accounts receivable balances over 30 days outstanding as of December 31, 2021 were approximately $1.1 billion, or $832 million higher as compared
to the balances as of December 31, 2019. The Utility is unable to estimate the portion of the increase directly attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Utility
expects to continue experiencing an impact on monthly cash collections for as long as current COVID-19 circumstances persist.
On January 1, 2021, electric rates were reset using sales that were adjusted for the COVID-19 pandemic impacts and significant ongoing shortfalls are not currently
expected in 2021. PG&E Corporation and the Utility are currently unable to quantify the long-term potential impact of the changes in customer collections or
changes in energy demand on earnings and cash flows due, in part, to uncertainties regarding the timing, duration and intensity of the COVID-19 outbreak and the
resulting economic downturn. Although the CPUC authorized the establishment of memorandum and balancing accounts to track costs associated with customer
protection measures, the timing of regulatory relief, if any, and ultimate cost recovery from such accounts or otherwise, are uncertain.
The COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic downturn have resulted and will continue to result in workforce disruptions, both in personnel availability
(including a reduction in contract labor resources) and deployment. Increased governmental regulation of the COVID-19 pandemic protections, including
vaccination mandates or testing requirement for workers, could result in employee attrition, workforce disruptions and increased supplier and contractor costs.
Although the Utility continues to prioritize customer and community safety, these disruptions necessitate changes to the Utility’s operating and capital expenditure
plans, which could lead to project delays or service disruptions in certain programs. Delays in production and shipping of materials used in the Utility’s operations
may also impact operations.
The Utility has experienced shortages in certain materials, longer lead times and delivery delays as a result of domestic and international raw material and labor
shortages. If these disruptions to the supply chain persist or worsen, the Utility may be delayed or prevented from completing planned maintenance and capital
projects work.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility expect additional financial impacts in the future as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Potential longer-term impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic on PG&E Corporation or the Utility include the potential for higher credit spreads, borrowing costs and incremental financing needs. PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s analysis of the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing and subject to change. PG&E Corporation and the Utility
are unable to predict the timing, duration or intensity of the COVID-19 pandemic situation and any resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic and any variant strains
of the COVID-19 virus, the effectiveness and intensity of measures to contain the COVID-19 pandemic (including availability and effectiveness of vaccines), and
the effects of the COVID-19 situation on the business, financial condition and results of operations of PG&E Corporation and the Utility and on the business and
general economic conditions in the State of California and the United States of America.
56

Rising rates for the Utility’s customers could result in circumstances in which the Utility is unable to fully recover costs or earn its authorized ROE.
The rates paid by the Utility’s customers are impacted by the Utility’s costs, commodity prices, and broader energy trends. The Utility’s capital investment plan,
increasing procurement of renewable power and energy storage, increasing environmental regulations, leveling demand, and the cumulative impact of other public
policy requirements, collectively place continuing upward pressure on customer rates. In particular, the Utility will need to make substantial, sustained investments
to its infrastructure to adapt to climate change. For more information on factors that could cause the Utility’s costs to increase, see “The Utility’s ratemaking and
cost recovery proceedings may not authorize sufficient revenues, or the Utility’s actual costs could exceed its authorized or forecasted costs due to various factors,
including if the Utility is not able to manage its costs effectively” above. If customer rates increase, the CPUC may face greater pressure to approve lesser amounts
in the Utility’s ratemaking or cost recovery proceedings.
The Utility generally recovers its electricity and natural gas procurement costs through rates as “pass-through” costs. Increases in the Utility’s commodity costs
directly impact customer bills.
Increasing levels of self-generation of electricity by customers (primarily solar installations) and customer enrollment in NEM, which allows self-generating
customers to receive bill credits for surplus power at the full retail rate, shifts costs to other customers. Under this structure, NEM customers do not pay their
proportionate share of the cost of maintaining and operating the electric transmission and distribution system, subject to certain exceptions, while still receiving
electricity from the system when their self-generation is inadequate to meet their electricity needs. These unpaid costs are subsidized by customers not participating
in NEM. Accordingly, as more electric customers switch to NEM and self-generate energy, the burden on the remaining customers increases, which in turn
encourages more self-generation, further increasing rate pressure on existing non-NEM customers.
Other long-term trends could also increase costs for gas customers. Natural gas providers are subject to compliance with CARB’s cap-and-trade program, and
natural gas end-use customers have an increasing exposure to carbon costs under the program through 2030 (when the full cost will be reflected in customer bills).
CARB may also require aggressive energy efficiency programs to reduce natural gas end use. Increased renewable portfolio standards generation in the electric
sector could reduce electric generation gas load. Additionally, customers replacing natural gas appliances with electric appliances will lead to further reduced gas
demand. The combination of reduced load and increased costs to maintain the gas system could result in higher natural gas customer bills. In addition, some local
city governments have passed ordinances restricting use of natural gas in new construction and, if other jurisdictions follow suit, this could affect future demand for
the provision of natural gas. If fewer customers receive gas from the Utility, the Utility’s gas system maintenance costs, many of which cannot be reduced in the
short term even if gas quantities decrease, would be borne by fewer customers. Finally, a potential mandate to purchase renewable natural gas for core customers
could lead to cost recovery risk if utilities are competing with the transportation sector without receiving the same incentives.
A confluence of technology-related cost declines and sustained federal or state subsidies could make a combination of distributed generation and energy storage a
viable, cost-effective alternative to the Utility’s bundled electric service which could further reduce energy demand. Reduced energy demand or significantly
slowed growth in demand due to customer migration to other energy providers, adoption of energy efficient technology, conservation, increasing levels of
distributed generation and self-generation, unless substantially offset through regulatory cost allocations, could increase the energy rates for other customers.
If rates were to rise too rapidly, customer usage could decline. This decline would decrease the volume of sales, among which the Utility’s fixed costs are
allocated, and increase rates.
To relieve some of this upward rate pressure, the CPUC may authorize lower revenues than the Utility requested or increase the period over which the Utility is
allowed to recover amounts, which could impact the Utility’s ability to timely recover its operating costs. The Utility’s level of authorized capital investment could
decline as well, leading to a slower growth in rate base and earnings. As a result, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations,
liquidity, and cash flows could be materially affected.
57

General Risk Factors
The Utility may be unable to attract and retain qualified personnel and senior management talent, or prolonged labor disruptions may occur.
The Utility’s workforce is aging, and many employees are or will become eligible to retire within the next few years. Although the Utility has undertaken efforts to
recruit and train new field service personnel, the Utility may be faced with a shortage of experienced and qualified personnel. The majority of the Utility’s
employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements with three unions. Labor disruptions could occur depending on the outcome of negotiations to renew
the terms of these agreements with the unions or if tentative new agreements are not ratified by their members. In addition, some of the remaining non-represented
Utility employees could join one of these unions in the future.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility also may face challenges in attracting and retaining senior management talent especially if they are unable to restore the
reputational harm generated by the negative publicity stemming from the ongoing enforcement proceedings and the Chapter 11 Cases. Any such occurrences could
materially affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. For more information about labor
disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, see “PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows have
been and could continue to be significantly affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic” above.
ITEM 1B. UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
None.
ITEM 2. PROPERTIES
The Utility owns or has obtained the right to occupy or use real property comprising the Utility’s electricity and natural gas distribution facilities, electric
generation facilities, natural gas gathering facilities and generation facilities, and natural gas and electricity transmission facilities, which are described in Item 1.
Business, under “Electric Utility Operations” and “Natural Gas Utility Operations.” The Utility occupies or uses real property primarily through various leases,
easements, rights-of-way, permits, or licenses from private landowners or governmental authorities. In total, the Utility occupies 9 million square feet of real
property, including 7 million square feet owned by the Utility. On September 17, 2021, the sale of the SFGO closed and the Utility entered into a leaseback
agreement with the new SFGO owner (the “Leaseback Agreement”) to lease back certain space within the SFGO to allow for additional time to relocate critical
facilities to other Utility sites. The Leaseback Agreement commenced on September 17, 2021 and continues through various dates for the various leased spaces,
with December 31, 2023 being the latest lease expiration date. On October 23, 2020, the Utility entered into an office lease agreement with BA2 300 Lakeside LLC
for approximately 910,000 rentable square feet of space within the Lakeside Building to serve as the Utility’s principal administrative headquarters. The term of
the lease will begin on or about April 8, 2022 and the lease grants the Utility an option to purchase the legal parcel that contains the Lakeside Building. For more
information, see Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
PG&E Corporation also leases approximately 42,000 square feet of office space from a third party in San Francisco, California. This lease will expire and be
surrendered at the end of February 2022.
The Utility currently owns approximately 148,000 acres of land, including approximately 121,000 acres of watershed lands. In 2002, the Utility agreed to
implement its Land Conservation Commitment (“LCC”) to permanently preserve the six “beneficial public values” on all the watershed lands through conservation
easements or equivalent protections, as well as to make approximately 40,000 acres of the watershed lands available for donation to qualified organizations. The
six “beneficial public values” being preserved by the LCC include: natural habitat of fish, wildlife, and plants; open space; outdoor recreation by the general
public; sustainable forestry; agricultural uses; and historic values. The Utility’s goal is to implement all the LCC transactions by the end of 2023, subject to
securing all required regulatory approvals.
ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are parties to various lawsuits and regulatory proceedings in the ordinary course of their business.  For more information
regarding material lawsuits and proceedings, see “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Item 7. MD&A, Item 1A. Risk Factors and Notes 2, 14, and 15 of the
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
58

ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable. 
INFORMATION ABOUT OUR EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
The following individuals serve as executive officers of PG&E Corporation, as of February 10, 2022. Except as otherwise noted, all positions have been held at
PG&E Corporation.
Name
Age
Positions Held Over Last Five Years
Time in Position
Patricia K. Poppe
53
Chief Executive Officer
January 4, 2021 to present
President and Chief Executive Officer, CMS Energy
Corporation
July 2016 to December 2020
Vice President, Customer Experience, Rates and Regulations,
Consumers Energy Company
January 2011 to July 2016
Christopher A. Foster
43
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
March 24, 2021 to present
Vice President and Interim Chief Financial Officer
September 26, 2020 to March 23, 2021
Vice President, Treasury and Investor Relations
March 9, 2020 to September 25, 2020
Senior positions within PG&E Corporation’s Investor
Relations department, including as its Vice President starting
in December 2018
November 2017 to March 8, 2020
Senior positions within PG&E Corporation and the Utility,
including Director, Integrated Grid Planning and Innovation
from June 2016 to October 2017
September 2011 to October 2017
Carla J. Peterman
43
Executive Vice President, Corporate Affairs and Chief
Sustainability Officer
June 1, 2021 to present
Senior Vice President, Strategy and Regulatory
Affairs, Southern California Edison
September 2019 to May 2021
Commissioner, California Public Utilities Commission
December 2012 to December 2018
Julius Cox
50
Executive Vice President, People, Shared Services and Supply
Chain, PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company
February 1, 2021 to present
Senior Vice President & Chief Human Resources Officer,
American Electric Power
October 2019 to January 2021
Executive Vice President & Chief Transformation Officer,
Dynegy Inc.
September 2017 to April 2018
Executive Vice President & Chief Administrative Officer,
Dynegy Inc.
October 2014 to September 2017
Ajay Waghray
60
Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer
September 21, 2020 to present
Founder, Agni Growth Ventures, LLC
January 2019 to September 2021
Executive Vice President and Chief Technology Officer,
Assurant Inc.
May 2016 to December 2018
Sumeet Singh
43
Executive Vice President, Chief Risk Officer and Chief Safety
Officer, PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company
January 1, 2022 to present
59

Senior Vice President and Chief Risk Officer, PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
February 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021
Interim President and Chief Risk Officer, Pacific Gas and
Electric Company; Senior Vice President and Chief Risk
Officer, PG&E Corporation
January 1, 2021 to January 31, 2021
Senior Vice President and Chief Risk Officer, PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
August 2020 to December 31, 2021
Gas Safety & Integrity Officer, Energy, Picarro, Inc.
February 2020 to August 2020
Senior positions within the Utility including Vice President,
Asset, Risk Management and Community Wildfire Safety
Program from May 2019 to January 2020, Vice President,
Community Wildfire Safety Program, from September 2018 to
May 2019, Vice President, Gas Asset and Risk Management
from September 2015 to August 2018
September 2015 to January 2020
John R. Simon
57
Executive Vice President, General Counsel and Chief Ethics &
Compliance Officer
August 15, 2020 to present
Executive Vice President, Law, Strategy, and Policy
June 2019 to August 2020
Executive Vice President
May 2019 to June 2019
Interim Chief Executive Officer
January 2019 to May 2019
Executive Vice President and General Counsel
March 2017 to January 2019
Executive Vice President, Corporate Services and Human
Resources
August 2015 to February 2017
Adam L. Wright
44
Executive Vice President, Operations and Chief Operating
Officer, Pacific Gas and Electric Company
February 1, 2021 to present
Chief Executive Officer and President, MidAmerican Energy
Company
January 2018 to January 26, 2021
President of MidAmerican Funding LLC
January 2018 to January 26, 2021
Vice President, Gas Delivery, MidAmerican Energy Company
May 2015 to January 2018
Vice President, Wind Generation & Development,
MidAmerican Energy Company
January 2012 to May 2015
Marlene M. Santos
61
Executive Vice President and Chief Customer Officer, Pacific
Gas and Electric Company
March 15, 2021 to present
President, Gulf Power Company
January 2019 to March 2021
Chief Integration Officer, NextEra Energy, Inc.
March 2015 to December 2018
Jason M. Glickman
41
Executive Vice President, Engineering, Planning, and Strategy,
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
May 3, 2021 to present
Global Head of Utilities and Renewables, Bain & Company
March 2020 to April 2021
Partner, Bain & Company
January 2014 to April 2021
Consultant, Bain & Company
August 2007 to December 2013
60

The following individuals serve as executive officers of the Utility as of February 10, 2022. Except as otherwise noted, all positions have been held at the Utility.
Adam L. Wright
44
Executive Vice President, Operations and Chief Operating
Officer
February 1, 2021 to present
Chief Executive Officer and President, MidAmerican Energy
Company
January 2018 to January 26, 2021
President of MidAmerican Funding LLC
January 2018 to January 26, 2021
Vice President, Gas Delivery, MidAmerican Energy Company
May 2015 to January 2018
Vice President, Wind Generation & Development,
MidAmerican Energy Company
January 2012 to May 2015
Marlene M. Santos
61
Executive Vice President and Chief Customer Officer
March 15, 2021 to present
President, Gulf Power Company
January 2019 to March 2021
Chief Integration Officer, NextEra Energy, Inc.
March 2015 to December 2018
Jason M. Glickman
41
Executive Vice President, Engineering, Planning, and Strategy
May 3, 2021 to present
Global Head of Utilities and Renewables, Bain & Company
March 2020 to April 2021
Partner, Bain & Company
January 2014 to April 2021
Consultant, Bain & Company
August 2007 to December 2013
David S. Thomason
46
Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and Controller, Pacific
Gas and Electric Company
June 2016 to present
Vice President and Controller, PG&E Corporation
June 2016 to present
Senior Director, Financial Forecasting and Analysis
March 2015 to May 2016
Senior Director, Corporate Accounting
March 2014 to March 2015
Julius Cox
50
Executive Vice President, People, Shared Services and Supply
Chain, PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company
February 1, 2021 to present
Senior Vice President & Chief Human Resources Officer,
American Electric Power
October 2019 to January 2021
Executive Vice President & Chief Transformation Officer,
Dynegy Inc.
September 2017 to April 2018
Executive Vice President & Chief Administrative Officer,
Dynegy Inc.
October 2014 to September 2017
Sumeet Singh
43
Executive Vice President, Chief Risk Officer and Chief Safety
Officer, PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company
January 1, 2022 to present
Senior Vice President and Chief Risk Officer, PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
February 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021
Interim President and Chief Risk Officer, Pacific Gas and
Electric Company; Senior Vice President and Chief Risk
Officer, PG&E Corporation
January 1, 2021 to January 31, 2021
61

Senior Vice President and Chief Risk Officer, PG&E
Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
August 2020 to December 31, 2021
Gas Safety & Integrity Officer, Energy, Picarro, Inc.
February 2020 to August 2020
Senior positions within the Utility including Vice President,
Asset, Risk Management and Community Wildfire Safety
Program from May 2019 to January 2020, Vice President,
Community Wildfire Safety Program, from September 2018 to
May 2019, Vice President, Gas Asset and Risk Management
from September 2015 to August 2018
September 2015 to January 2020
62

PART II
ITEM 5. MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED SHAREHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY
SECURITIES
As of February 4, 2022, there were 45,223 holders of record of PG&E Corporation common stock. A substantially greater number of holders of PG&E Corporation
common stock are “street name” or beneficial holders, whose shares of record are held by banks, brokers, and other financial institutions. PG&E Corporation
common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange and is traded under the symbol “PCG.” Shares of common stock of the Utility are wholly owned by
PG&E Corporation. On December 20, 2017, the Boards of Directors of PG&E Corporation and the Utility suspended quarterly cash dividends on both PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s common stock, beginning the fourth quarter of 2017, as well as the Utility’s preferred stock, beginning the three-month period
ending January 31, 2018. On February 8, 2022, the Board of Directors of the Utility authorized the payment of all cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s
preferred stock as of January 31, 2022 totaling $59.1 million, payable on May 13, 2022, to holders of record on April 29, 2022 and declared a dividend on the
Utility’s preferred stock totaling $3.5 million that will be accrued during the three-month period ending April 30, 2022, payable on May 15, 2022, to holders of
record on April 29, 2022. See “Liquidity and Financial Resources - Dividends” in Item 7. MD&A and PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Statements of Equity, the
Utility’s Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity, and Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Information about the
frequency and amount of dividends declared on preferred stock by the Utility appears in Note 7 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Sales of Unregistered Equity Securities
During the quarter ended December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation did not make any equity contributions to the Utility. Also, PG&E Corporation did not make any
sales of unregistered securities during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 that were not previously disclosed in a quarterly report on Form 10-Q or a current
report on Form 8-K.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
During the quarter ended December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation did not redeem or repurchase any shares of common stock or equity units outstanding. PG&E
Corporation does not have any preferred stock outstanding. Also, during the quarter ended December 31, 2021, the Utility did not redeem or repurchase any shares
of its various series of preferred stock outstanding.
ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
Not applicable.
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
This is a combined report of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, and includes separate Consolidated Financial Statements for each of these two entities. This
combined MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in
Item 8.
Summary of Changes in Net Income and Earnings per Share
PG&E Corporation’s net loss attributable to common shareholders was $102 million in 2021, compared to $1.3 billion in 2020. In the year ended December 31,
2021, PG&E Corporation recorded a $1.3 billion charge, net of tax as a result of the grantor trust election, with no similar amount in 2020. This amount is partially
offset by increases in base revenues authorized in the 2020 GRC and previously deferred costs associated with various regulatory proceedings in the year ended
December 31, 2021. In the year ended December 31, 2020, PG&E Corporation recognized $1.1 billion of expense related to the Backstop Commitment Premium
Shares and $452 million of expense related to the Additional Backstop Premium Shares, with no similar amounts in 2021.
63

Key Factors Affecting Financial Results
PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe that their financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows may be materially affected by the following
factors:
•
The Uncertainties in Connection with Any Future Wildfires, Wildfire Insurance, and AB 1054. While PG&E Corporation and the Utility cannot predict the
occurrence, timing or extent of damages in connection with future wildfires, factors such as environmental conditions (including weather and vegetation
conditions) and the efficacy of wildfire risk mitigation initiatives are expected to influence the frequency and severity of future wildfires. To the extent
that future wildfires occur in the Utility’s service territory, the Utility may incur costs associated with the investigations of the causes and origins of such
fires, even if it is subsequently determined that such fires were not caused by the Utility’s facilities. The financial impact of future wildfires could be
mitigated through insurance, the Wildfire Fund or other forms of cost recovery. However, the Utility may not be able to obtain sufficient wildfire
insurance coverage at a reasonable cost, or at all, and any such coverage may include limitations that could result in substantial uninsured losses
depending on the amount and type of damages resulting from covered events, including coverage limitations applicable to different insurance layers. The
Utility will not be able to obtain any recovery from the Wildfire Fund for wildfire-related losses in any Wildfire Fund coverage year (“Coverage Year”)
that do not exceed the greater of $1.0 billion in the aggregate and the amount of insurance coverage required under AB 1054. In addition, the policy
reforms contemplated by AB 1054 are likely to affect the financial impact of future wildfires on PG&E Corporation and the Utility should any such
wildfires occur. The Wildfire Fund is available to the Utility to pay eligible claims for liabilities arising from wildfires and serves as an alternative to
traditional insurance products, provided that the Utility satisfies the conditions to the Utility’s ongoing participation in the Wildfire Fund set forth in AB
1054 and that the Wildfire Fund has sufficient remaining funds. See “Loss Recoveries” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
in Item 8.
However, the impact of AB 1054 on PG&E Corporation and the Utility is subject to numerous uncertainties, including the Utility’s ability to demonstrate
to the CPUC that wildfire-related costs paid from the Wildfire Fund were just and reasonable and therefore not subject to reimbursement, and whether the
benefits of participating in the Wildfire Fund ultimately outweigh its substantial costs. Finally, even if the Utility satisfies the ongoing eligibility and other
requirements set forth in AB 1054, for eligible claims against the Utility arising from wildfires that occurred between July 12, 2019 and the Utility’s
emergence from Chapter 11 on July 1, 2020, the availability of the Wildfire Fund to pay such claims would be capped at 40% of the allowed amount of
such claims. See “Wildfire Fund under AB 1054” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
•
The Costs, Effectiveness, and Execution of the Utility’s Wildfire Mitigation Initiatives. In response to the wildfire threat facing California, PG&E
Corporation and the Utility have taken aggressive steps to mitigate the threat of catastrophic wildfires, the spread of wildfires should they occur and the
impact of PSPS events.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility incurred substantial expenditures in 2020 and 2021 in connection with the 2020-2022 WMP. For more information, see
Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. The Utility expects that its wildfire mitigation initiatives will continue to involve
substantial and ongoing expenditures. The extent to which the Utility will be able to recover these expenditures and potential other costs through rates is
uncertain.
The Utility has implemented operational changes and investments that reduce wildfire risk, including the EPSS, PSPS, vegetation management, asset
inspection, and system hardening programs. These programs, particularly the PSPS and EPSS programs, have been the subject of significant scrutiny and
criticism by various stakeholders, including the California governor, the CPUC and the court that oversaw the Utility’s probation. The PSPS and EPSS
programs have had an adverse impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s reputation with customers, regulators and policymakers, and future PSPS
events may increase these negative perceptions. See “OII to Examine the Late 2019 Public Safety Power Shutoff Events” in “Regulatory Matters” below.
The Utility is subject to a number of legal and regulatory requirements related to its wildfire mitigation efforts, which require periodic inspections of
electric assets and ongoing reporting related to this work. Although the Utility believes that it has complied substantially with these requirements, it is
undertaking a review and has identified instances of noncompliance. The Utility intends to update the CPUC and OEIS as its review progresses. The
Utility could face fines, penalties, enforcement action, or other adverse legal or regulatory consequences for the late inspections or other noncompliance
related to wildfire mitigation efforts. See “Self-Reports to the CPUC” in “Regulatory Matters” below.
64

While PG&E Corporation and the Utility are committed to taking aggressive wildfire mitigation actions, if additional requirements are imposed that go
beyond current expectations, such requirements could have a substantial impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of
operations, liquidity, and cash flows. The success of the Utility’s wildfire mitigation efforts depends on many factors, including on whether the Utility is
able to retain or contract for the workforce necessary to execute its wildfire mitigation actions. See “Order Instituting Investigation into the 2017 Northern
California Wildfires and the 2018 Camp Fire” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
•
The Timing and Outcome of Ratemaking Proceedings. The Utility’s financial results may be impacted by the timing and outcome of its FERC TO18 rate
case and the resulting impact on the TO19 and TO20 rate cases, 2023 GRC, WMCE applications, and its ability to timely recover costs not currently in
rates, including costs already incurred and future costs tracked in its CEMA, WEMA, WMPMA, FRMMA, CPPMA, VMBA, WMBA, and RTBA. The
outcome of regulatory proceedings can be affected by many factors, including intervening parties’ testimonies, potential rate impacts, the regulatory and
political environments, and other factors. See Notes 4 and 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 and “Regulatory Matters”
below.
•
The Impact of Wildfires. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s liabilities for the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, or the 2021 Dixie fire, are
significant and may be excluded from any potential amounts recoverable under applicable insurance policies, the WEMA, FERC TO rates, or the Wildfire
Fund under AB 1054. Recorded liabilities in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire and the 2021 Dixie fire have already exceeded potential amounts
recoverable under applicable insurance policies. Liabilities in excess of recoverable amounts for these wildfires could have a material impact on PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility had recorded an aggregate liability of $800 million, $375 million, and $1.15 billion for
claims in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, and the 2021 Dixie fire, respectively, and in each case before available insurance and
other probable cost recoveries in the case of the 2021 Dixie fire. These liability amounts correspond to the lower end of the range of reasonably estimable
probable losses, but do not include all categories of potential damages and losses. Claims related to the 2019 Kincade fire that were not satisfied in full as
of the Emergence Date were not discharged in connection with emerging from Chapter 11.
On April 6, 2021, the Sonoma County District Attorney’s Office charged the Utility with five felonies and 28 misdemeanors in connection with the 2019
Kincade fire, and on January 28, 2022, the Sonoma County District Attorney’s Office filed the Kincade Amended Complaint, which replaced two felonies
with five different felonies and dropped six misdemeanor counts. On September 24, 2021, the Shasta County District Attorney’s Office charged the
Utility with 11 felonies and 20 misdemeanors in connection with the 2020 Zogg fire and three other fires. If the Utility were to be convicted of certain
charges in the Kincade Amended Complaint or the Zogg Complaint, the Utility could be subject to material fines, penalties, and restitution, as well as
non-monetary remedies such as oversight requirements, and accordingly the Utility currently believes that, depending on which charges it were to be
convicted of, its total losses associated with the 2019 Kincade fire or the 2020 Zogg fire would materially exceed the $800 million or $375 million,
respectively, of aggregate liability that PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recorded.
If the eligible claims for liabilities arising from wildfires were to exceed $1.0 billion in any Coverage Year, the Utility may be eligible to make a claim to
the Wildfire Fund under AB 1054 for such excess amount, except that recoveries for the 2019 Kincade fire would be subject to the 40% limitation on the
allowed amount of claims arising before emergence from bankruptcy, and recoveries for each of these fires would also be subject to the other limitations
and requirements under AB 1054. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility had recorded insurance receivables of $430 million for the 2019 Kincade fire,
$337 million for the 2020 Zogg fire, and $563 million for the 2021 Dixie fire. The Utility had recorded regulatory recovery and Wildfire Fund receivables
of $448 million and $150 million, respectively, for the 2021 Dixie fire. However, there can be no assurance that such amounts will ultimately be
recovered, and the Utility does not expect that any of its liability insurance would cover restitution payments ordered by the courts presiding over the
criminal proceedings. See “2019 Kincade Fire,” “2020 Zogg Fire,” and “2021 Dixie Fire” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8 for more information.
65

•
The Outcome of Other Enforcement, Litigation, and Regulatory Matters, and Other Government Proposals. The Utility’s financial results may continue to
be impacted by the outcome of other current and future enforcement, litigation, and regulatory matters, including those described above as well as the
outcome of the Safety Culture OII, and potential penalties in connection with the Utility’s WMP and safety and other self-reports. See Note 15 of the
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. In addition, the Utility’s business profile and financial results could be impacted by the outcome
of recent calls for municipalization of part or all of the Utility’s businesses, offers by municipalities and other public entities to acquire the electric assets
of the Utility within their respective jurisdictions and calls for state intervention, including the possibility of a state takeover of the Utility. PG&E
Corporation and the Utility cannot predict the nature, occurrence, timing or extent of any such scenario, and there can be no assurance that any such
scenario would not involve significant ownership or management changes to PG&E Corporation or the Utility, including by the state of California.
Further, certain parties filed notices of appeal with respect to the Confirmation Order, including provisions related to the injunction contained in the Plan
that channels certain pre-petition fire-related claims to trusts to be satisfied from the trusts’ assets. There can be no assurance that any such appeal will not
be successful and, if successful, that any such appeal would not have a material adverse effect on PG&E Corporation and the Utility.
•
The Uncertainties in Connection with the Enhanced Oversight and Enforcement Process. On April 15, 2021, the CPUC placed the Utility in step 1 of the
EOEP. As a result, the Utility is subject to additional reporting requirements, monitoring, and oversight by the CPUC. See “Enhanced Oversight and
Enforcement Process” in “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” below.
•
The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and cash flows have
been and could continue to be significantly affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. The principal areas of near-term impact include
liquidity, financial results and business operations, stemming primarily from the ongoing economic hardship of the Utility’s customers, the moratorium on
service disconnections, and an observed reduction in non-residential electrical load. The Utility continues to monitor the overall impact of the COVID-19
pandemic; however, the Utility expects a significant impact on monthly cash collections as long as current circumstances persist. PG&E Corporation and
the Utility expect additional financial impacts in the future as a result of COVID-19 pandemic. Other impacts of COVID-19 pandemic on PG&E
Corporation and the Utility have included operational disruptions, workforce disruptions, both in personnel availability (including a reduction in contract
labor resources) and deployment, delays in production and shipping of materials used in the Utility’s operations, higher credit spreads and borrowing
costs and could potentially also include a reduction in revenue due to the cost of capital adjustment mechanism and incremental financing needs. For more
information on the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on PG&E Corporation and the Utility, see “PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition,
results of operations, liquidity and cash flows have been and could continue to be significantly affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.” in
Item 1A Risk Factors and “COVID-19” in Liquidity and Financial Resources below.
For more information about the risks that could materially affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash
flows, or that could cause future results to differ from historical results, see Item 1A. Risk Factors.  In addition, this annual report contains forward-looking
statements that are necessarily subject to various risks and uncertainties.  These statements reflect management’s judgment and opinions that are based on current
estimates, expectations, and projections about future events and assumptions regarding these events and management’s knowledge of facts as of the date of this
report.  See “Forward-Looking Statements” above for a list of some of the factors that may cause actual results to differ materially.  PG&E Corporation and the
Utility are unable to predict all the factors that may affect future results and do not undertake an obligation to update forward-looking statements, whether in
response to new information, future events, or otherwise.
Tax Matters
PG&E Corporation had a U.S. federal net operating loss carryforward of approximately $21.1 billion and California net operating loss carryforward of
$18.9 billion at the end of 2021.
66

Under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code, if a corporation (or a consolidated group) undergoes an “ownership change,” net operating loss carryforwards
and other tax attributes may be subject to certain limitations. In general, an ownership change occurs if the aggregate stock ownership of certain shareholders
(generally five percent shareholders, applying certain look-through and aggregation rules) increases by more than 50% over such shareholders’ lowest percentage
ownership during the testing period (generally three years). PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Amended Articles limit Transfers (as defined in the Amended
Articles) that increase a person’s or entity’s (including certain groups of persons) ownership of PG&E Corporation’s equity securities to 4.75% or more prior to the
Restriction Release Date (as defined in the Amended Articles) without approval by the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation (the “Ownership Restrictions”).
As discussed below under “Update on Ownership Restrictions in PG&E Corporation’s Amended Articles,” due to the election to treat the Fire Victim Trust as a
grantor trust for income tax purposes, the calculation of Percentage Stock Ownership (as defined in the Amended Articles) will effectively be based on a reduced
number of shares outstanding, namely the total number of outstanding equity securities less the number of equity securities held by the Fire Victim Trust, the
Utility and ShareCo. As of the date of this report, it is more likely than not that PG&E Corporation has not undergone an ownership change, and consequently, its
net operating loss carryforwards and other tax attributes are not limited by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code.
On July 8, 2021, PG&E Corporation, the Utility, ShareCo and the Fire Victim Trust entered into the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement, pursuant to
which PG&E Corporation and the Utility made a grantor trust election for the Fire Victim Trust effective retroactively to the inception of the Fire Victim Trust.
As a result of the benefits of a grantor trust election, the Utility’s tax deductions occur when the Fire Victim Trust pays the fire victims, rather than when the Utility
transferred cash and other property (including PG&E Corporation common stock) to the Fire Victim Trust. Therefore, $5.4 billion of cash and $4.54 billion of
PG&E Corporation common stock, in the aggregate $10.0 billion, that were transferred to the Fire Victim Trust in 2020, will not be deductible for tax purposes by
the Utility until the Fire Victim Trust pays the fire victims.
Furthermore, the activities of the Fire Victim Trust are treated as activities of the Utility for tax purposes. PG&E Corporation’s net operating loss has decreased by
approximately $10.0 billion which will be offset by payments made by the Fire Victim Trust to the fire victims (which totaled approximately $1.67 billion in 2021)
and the net activities of the Fire Victim Trust. Additionally, there was a $1.3 billion charge, net of tax, decreasing net DTAs for the payment made to the Fire
Victim Trust in PG&E Corporation common stock on its Consolidated Financial Statements for activity through December 31, 2020. PG&E Corporation will
recognize income tax benefits and the corresponding DTA as the Fire Victim Trust sells shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, and the amounts of such
benefits and assets will be impacted by the price at which the Fire Victim Trust sells the shares, rather than the price at the time such shares were transferred to the
Fire Victim Trust. As of December 31, 2021, to the knowledge of PG&E Corporation, the Fire Victim Trust had not sold any shares of PG&E Corporation
common stock, resulting in no tax impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. On
January 31, 2022, the Fire Victim Trust initiated an exchange of 40,000,000 Plan Shares for an equal number of New Shares in the manner contemplated by the
Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement and announced that it had entered into a transaction for the sale of these shares.
Update on Ownership Restrictions in PG&E Corporation’s Amended Articles
As a result of the grantor trust election, shares of PG&E Corporation common stock owned by the Fire Victim Trust are treated as held by the Utility and, in turn,
attributed to PG&E Corporation for income tax purposes. Consequently, any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock owned by the Fire Victim Trust, along
with any shares owned by the Utility directly, are effectively excluded from the total number of outstanding equity securities when calculating a person’s
Percentage Stock Ownership (as defined in the Amended Articles) for purposes of the 4.75% ownership limitation in the Amended Articles. Shares owned by
ShareCo are also effectively excluded because ShareCo is a disregarded entity for income tax purposes. For example, although PG&E Corporation had
2,463,891,104 shares outstanding as of February 4, 2022, only 1,548,403,924 shares (the number of outstanding shares of common stock less the number of shares
held by the Fire Victim Trust, the Utility and ShareCo) count as outstanding for purposes of the ownership restrictions in the Amended Articles. As such, based on
the total number of outstanding equity securities and assuming the Fire Victim Trust has not sold any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, a person’s
effective Percentage Stock Ownership limitation for purposes of the Amended Articles as of February 4, 2022 was 2.98% of outstanding shares. As of December
31, 2021, to the knowledge of PG&E Corporation, the Fire Victim Trust had not sold any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock. On January 31, 2022, the
Fire Victim Trust initiated an exchange of 40,000,000 Plan Shares for an equal number of New Shares in the manner contemplated by the Share Exchange and Tax
Matters Agreement and announced that it had entered into a transaction for the sale of these shares.
67

RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion presents PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s operating results for 2021, 2020, and 2019.  See “Key Factors Affecting Financial
Results” above for further discussion about factors that could affect future results of operations.
PG&E Corporation
The consolidated results of operations consist primarily of results related to the Utility, which are discussed in the “Utility” section below.  The following table
provides a summary of net income (loss) available for common shareholders: 
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
Consolidated Total
$
(102)
$
(1,318)
$
(7,656)
PG&E Corporation
(226)
(1,715)
(20)
Utility
124 
397 
(7,636)
PG&E Corporation’s net loss decreased in 2021, as compared to 2020 and primarily consists of income taxes, interest expense on long-term debt, and
reorganization items, net. PG&E Corporation’s net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $1.5 billion in expense related to the Backstop
Commitment Premium Shares and Additional Backstop Premium Shares, which is not deductible for tax purposes.
Utility
The table below shows certain items from the Utility’s Consolidated Statements of Income for 2021, 2020, and 2019.  The table separately identifies the revenues
and costs that impacted earnings from those that did not impact earnings.  In general, expenses the Utility is authorized to pass through directly to customers (such
as costs to purchase electricity and natural gas, as well as costs to fund public purpose programs) and the corresponding amount of revenues collected to recover
those pass-through costs, do not impact earnings.
68

Revenues that impact earnings are primarily those that have been authorized by the CPUC and the FERC to recover the Utility’s costs to own and operate its assets
and to provide the Utility an opportunity to earn its authorized rate of return on rate base.  Expenses that impact earnings are primarily those that the Utility incurs
to own and operate its assets.
 
2021
2020
2019
 
Revenues and Costs:
 
Revenues and Costs:
 
Revenues and Costs:
 
(in millions)
That
Impacted
Earnings
That Did Not
Impact
Earnings
Total Utility
That
Impacted
Earnings
That Did Not
Impact
Earnings
Total Utility
That
Impacted
Earnings
That Did Not
Impact
Earnings
Total Utility
Electric operating revenues
$
9,542 
$
5,589 
$
15,131 
$
8,979 
$
4,879 
$
13,858 
$
8,634 
$
4,106 
$
12,740 
Natural gas operating revenues
3,753 
1,758 
5,511 
3,460 
1,151 
4,611 
3,259 
1,130 
4,389 
Total operating revenues
13,295 
7,347 
20,642 
12,439 
6,030 
18,469 
11,893 
5,236 
17,129 
Cost of electricity
— 
3,232 
3,232 
— 
3,116 
3,116 
— 
3,095 
3,095 
Cost of natural gas
— 
1,149 
1,149 
— 
782 
782 
— 
734 
734 
Operating and maintenance
6,820 
3,374 
10,194 
6,399 
2,308 
8,707 
7,167 
1,583 
8,750 
Wildfire-related claims, net of insurance
recoveries
258 
— 
258 
251 
— 
251 
11,435 
— 
11,435 
Wildfire fund expense
517 
— 
517 
413 
— 
413 
— 
— 
— 
Depreciation, amortization, and
decommissioning
3,403 
— 
3,403 
3,469 
— 
3,469 
3,233 
— 
3,233 
Total operating expenses
10,998 
7,755 
18,753 
10,532 
6,206 
16,738 
21,835 
5,412 
27,247 
Operating income (loss)
2,297 
(408)
1,889 
1,907 
(176)
1,731 
(9,942)
(176)
(10,118)
Interest income
22 
— 
22 
39 
— 
39 
82 
— 
82 
Interest expense 
(1,373)
— 
(1,373)
(1,111)
— 
(1,111)
(912)
— 
(912)
Other income, net
104 
408 
512 
294 
176 
470 
63 
176 
239 
Reorganization items, net
(12)
— 
(12)
(310)
— 
(310)
(320)
— 
(320)
Income (loss) before income taxes
$
1,038 
$
— 
$
1,038 
$
819 
$
— 
$
819 
$
(11,029)
$
— 
$
(11,029)
Income tax provision (benefit) 
 
 
900 
 
 
408 
 
 
(3,407)
Net income (loss)
 
 
138 
 
 
411 
 
 
(7,622)
Preferred stock dividend requirement 
 
 
14 
 
 
14 
 
 
14 
Income (loss) Attributable to Common
Stock
 
 
$
124 
 
 
$
397 
 
 
$
(7,636)
 These items impacted earnings.
Utility Revenues and Costs that Impacted Earnings
The following discussion presents the Utility’s operating results for 2021, 2020, and 2019, focusing on revenues and expenses that impacted earnings for these
periods.
Operating Revenues
The Utility’s electric and natural gas operating revenues that impacted earnings increased by $856 million, or 7%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to
increased base revenues authorized in the 2020 GRC and FERC formula rates.
The Utility’s electric and natural gas operating revenues that impacted earnings increased by $546 million, or 5%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to
increased base revenues authorized in the 2020 GRC and 2019 GT&S rate cases, additional revenues recorded pursuant to the TO20 rate case, and CEMA interim
rate relief.
Operating and Maintenance
The Utility’s operating and maintenance expenses that impacted earnings increased by $421 million, or 7%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to increases
in labor and insurance costs as well as a $135 million charge related to wildfire response and mitigation regulatory matters, including the 2020 WMCE settlement.
These increases were partially offset by $298 million in previously deferred CEMA costs recorded in conjunction with interim rate relief in 2020, with no
comparable costs in 2021.
(1)
(1)
(1)
69

The Utility’s operating and maintenance expenses that impacted earnings decreased by $768 million, or 11%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a
reduction in accelerated transmission inspection and repair costs of approximately $460 million. Additionally, in 2019 the Utility recorded $398 million related to
the Wildfires OII settlement and $237 million in disallowed costs for previously incurred capital expenditures in excess of adopted amounts in the 2019 GT&S rate
case in 2019, with no similar charges in 2020. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $223 million in previously deferred CEMA costs recorded in
conjunction with interim rate relief (see “2018 CEMA Application” below) (the Utility amortized $298 million in deferred CEMA costs in 2020, compared to $75
million amortized in 2019). The Utility also experienced increased insurance premium costs in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019.
Wildfire-Related Claims, Net of Recoveries
Costs related to wildfires that impacted earnings increased by $7 million, or 3%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The Utility recognized pre-tax charges of $1.15 billion
related to the 2021 Dixie fire, offset by $563 million of probable insurance recoveries, $347 million of probable recoveries through the WEMA, and $150 million
of probable recoveries from the Wildfire Fund in 2021, with no comparable charges and recoveries in 2020. The Utility recognized pre-tax charges of $175 million
related to the 2019 Kincade fire in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $625 million, partially offset by $430 million of probable insurance
recoveries in the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, the Utility recognized pre-tax charges of $100 million related to the 2020 Zogg fire, fully offset by
$100 million of probable insurance recoveries, in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to pre-tax charges of $275 million, partially offset by $219
million of probable insurance recoveries in the year ended December 31, 2020.
In addition to the probable wildfire-related recoveries noted above, in 2021, the Utility recorded $101 million of probable recoveries through FERC TO formula
rates, which are recorded as a reduction to regulatory liabilities and are not captured in wildfire-related claims, which along with the items noted above, fully offset
the $1.15 billion charge related to the 2021 Dixie fire.
Costs related to wildfires that impacted earnings decreased by $11.2 billion, or 98%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The Utility recognized pre-tax charges of
$625 million related to the 2019 Kincade fire, partially offset by $430 million of probable insurance recoveries, and pre-tax charges of $275 million related to the
2020 Zogg fire, partially offset by $219 million of probable insurance recoveries in 2020. The Utility recognized charges of $11.4 billion in 2019, for wildfire-
related claims primarily associated with the 2018 Camp fire and 2017 Northern California wildfires.
See Item 1A. Risk Factors and Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Wildfire Fund Expense
Wildfire fund expense that impacted earnings increased by $104 million, or 25%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Due to the Chapter 11 Cases, the Utility’s
participation in the Wildfire Fund was limited to 40% for the period from July 12, 2019 to June 30, 2020. Additionally, the Utility recorded $43 million of
accelerated amortization as a result of the Wildfire Fund receivable accrued in relation to the 2021 Dixie fire.
Wildfire fund expense that impacted earnings increased by $413 million, or 100%, in 2020 compared to 2019. In 2020, the Utility became eligible to participate in
the Wildfire Fund and as a result recorded amortization and accretion expense related to the Wildfire Fund coverage received from the effective date of AB 1054
through December 31, 2020.
See Notes 3 and 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Depreciation, Amortization, and Decommissioning
The Utility’s depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning expenses decreased by $66 million, or 2%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a reduction
in decommissioning expense that was recorded as a result of the final 2018 Nuclear Decommissioning Cost Triennial Proceeding decision.
The Utility’s depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning expenses increased by $236 million, or 7%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to capital
additions and an increase in depreciation rates associated with the TO20 decision.
70

Interest Income
The Utility’s interest income that impacted earnings decreased by $17 million, or 44%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Interest income decreased by $43 million, or
52%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The Utility’s interest income is primarily affected by changes in regulatory balancing accounts and changes in interest rates.
Interest Expense
Interest expense that impacted earnings increased by $262 million, or 24%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to the issuance of additional long-term debt.
The Utility’s interest expense that impacted earnings increased by $199 million, or 22%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the issuance of new debt in
2020 in connection with the emergence from Chapter 11.
Other Income, Net
Changes to Other income, net that impact earnings are primarily driven by fluctuations in the balance of construction work in progress that impact equity AFUDC.
Reorganization Items, Net
Reorganization items, net that impacted earnings decreased by $298 million, or 96%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to the Utility’s emergence from the
Chapter 11 Cases on July 1, 2020.
There was no material change to reorganization items, net that impacted earnings in 2020 compared to 2019.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
Income tax expense increased by $492 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a DTA write-off associated with the grantor trust election for the Fire
Victim Trust in 2021, as compared to a smaller DTA write-off associated with the decline in value of PG&E Corporation common stock contributed into a Fire
Victim Trust in the same period in 2020.
The Utility’s income tax benefit increased by $3.8 billion in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a pre-tax loss in 2019 compared to pre-tax income in 2020.
Additionally, there was a $619 million adjustment from the measurement of the DTA associated with the difference between the liability recorded related to the
TCC RSA and the ultimate value of PG&E Corporation stock contributed to the Fire Victim Trust in 2020. 
71

The following table reconciles the income tax expense at the federal statutory rate to the income tax provision:
2021
2020
2019
Federal statutory income tax rate
21.0 %
21.0 %
21.0 %
Increase (decrease) in income tax rate resulting from:
State income tax (net of federal benefit)
24.1 %
19.1 %
7.5 %
Effect of regulatory treatment of fixed asset differences
(51.6) %
(44.9) %
2.8 %
Tax credits
(1.2) %
(1.7) %
0.1 %
Fire Victim Trust
91.9 %
51.7 %
— %
Bankruptcy and emergence
— %
2.4 %
— %
Other, net
2.6 %
2.2 %
(0.5) %
Effective tax rate
86.8 %
49.8 %
30.9 %
Includes the effect of state flow-through ratemaking treatment and the effect of the grantor trust election.
Includes the effect of federal flow-through ratemaking treatment for certain property-related costs. For these temporary tax differences, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize the
deferred tax impact in the current period and record offsetting regulatory assets and liabilities. Therefore, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s effective tax rates are impacted as these
differences arise and reverse. PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize such differences as regulatory assets or liabilities as it is probable that these amounts will be recovered from or
returned to customers in future rates. In 2021 and 2020, the amounts also reflect the impact of the amortization of excess deferred tax benefits to be refunded to customers as a result of the
Tax Act passed in December 2017.
Includes the effect of the grantor trust election as discussed in Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
 These amounts primarily represent the impact of tax audit settlements and non-tax deductible penalty costs in 2021 and 2020.
Utility Revenues and Costs that did not Impact Earnings
Fluctuations in revenues that did not impact earnings are primarily driven by procurement costs. See below for more information.
Cost of Electricity
The Utility’s cost of electricity includes the cost of power purchased from third parties (including renewable energy resources), fuel and associated transmission
costs used in its own generation facilities, fuel and associated transmission costs supplied to other facilities under power purchase agreements, costs to comply with
California’s cap-and-trade program, and realized gains and losses on price risk management activities. Cost of electricity also includes net sales (Utility owned
generation and third parties) in the CAISO electricity markets. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. The Utility’s total
purchased power is driven by customer demand, net CAISO electricity market activities (purchases or sales), the availability of the Utility’s own generation
facilities (including Diablo Canyon and its hydroelectric plants), and the cost-effectiveness of each source of electricity.
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
Cost of purchased power, net
$
2,883 
$
2,854 
$
2,809 
Fuel used in own generation facilities
349 
262 
286 
Total cost of electricity
$
3,232 
$
3,116 
$
3,095 
Cost of Natural Gas
The Utility’s cost of natural gas includes the costs of procurement, storage and transportation of natural gas, costs to comply with California’s cap-and-trade
program, and realized gains and losses on price risk management activities. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. The
Utility’s cost of natural gas is impacted by the market price of natural gas, changes in the cost of storage and transportation, and changes in customer demand. 
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
Cost of natural gas sold
$
1,010 
$
648 
$
622 
Transportation cost of natural gas sold
139 
134 
112 
Total cost of natural gas
$
1,149 
$
782 
$
734 
 (1)
 (2)
 (3)
 (4)
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4)
72

Operating and Maintenance Expenses
The Utility’s operating expenses that did not impact earnings include certain costs that the Utility is authorized to recover as incurred.  If the Utility were to spend
more than authorized amounts, these expenses could have an impact to earnings.
Other Income, Net
The Utility’s other income, net that did not impact earnings includes pension and other post-retirement benefit costs that fluctuate primarily from market and
interest rate changes.
LIQUIDITY AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES
Overview
The Utility’s ability to fund operations, finance capital expenditures, make scheduled principal and interest payments, and make distributions to PG&E Corporation
depends on the levels of its operating cash flows and access to the capital and credit markets. The CPUC authorizes the Utility’s capital structure, the aggregate
amount of long-term and short-term debt that the Utility may issue, and the revenue requirements the Utility is able to collect to recover its cost of capital. The
Utility generally utilizes retained earnings, equity contributions from PG&E Corporation and long-term debt issuances to maintain its CPUC-authorized long-term
capital structure consisting of 52% equity and 48% debt and preferred stock and relies on short-term debt, including its revolving credit facilities, to fund
temporary financing needs. On May 28, 2020, the CPUC approved a final decision in the Chapter 11 Proceedings OII, which, among other things, grants the Utility
a temporary, five-year waiver from compliance with its authorized capital structure for the financing in place upon the Utility’s emergence from Chapter 11.
PG&E Corporation’s ability to fund operations, make scheduled principal and interest payments, and fund equity contributions to the Utility depends on the level
of cash on hand, cash received from the Utility, and PG&E Corporation’s access to the capital and credit markets.
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s credit ratings may be affected by the ultimate outcome of pending enforcement and litigation matters. Credit rating
downgrades may impact the cost and availability of short-term borrowings, including credit facilities, and long-term debt costs. In addition, some of the Utility’s
commodity contracts contain collateral posting provisions tied to the Utility’s credit rating from each of the major credit rating agencies. The collateral posting
provisions for some of the Utility’s power and natural gas commodity, and transportation and service agreements state that if the Utility’s credit ratings were to fall
below investment grade, the Utility would be required to post additional cash immediately to fully collateralize some or all of its net liability positions. The
Utility’s credit ratings fell below investment grade in January 2019, at which time the Utility was required to post additional collateral under its commodity
purchase agreements. A further downgrade would not materially impact the collateral postings for procurement activity. See Note 10 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have various contractual commitments which impact cash requirements. These commitments are discussed in “Recognition of
Lease Assets and Liabilities” in Note 3, Note 5, Note 12, and “Purchase Commitments” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
COVID-19
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows have been and could continue to be significantly affected
by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the emergence of variant strains of the virus (including Delta and
Omicron), and the resulting economic conditions and government orders have had and will continue to have a significant adverse impact on the Utility’s customers
and, as a result, these circumstances have impacted and will continue to impact the Utility for an indeterminate period of time. The principal areas of near-term
impact include liquidity, financial results and business operations, stemming primarily from the ongoing economic hardship of the Utility’s customers, the
moratorium on service disconnections for residential and small business customers and for eligible medium and large commercial and industrial customers that
expired on September 30, 2021, the CPUC’s “Emergency Authorization and Order Directing Utilities to Implement Emergency Customer COVID-19 Protections”
and an observed reduction in non-residential electrical load. The Utility’s accounts receivable balances over 30 days outstanding as of December 31, 2021, were
approximately $1.1 billion, or $832 million higher as compared to the balance as of December 31, 2019. The Utility is unable to estimate the portion of the
increase directly attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Utility expects to continue experiencing an impact on monthly cash collections for as long as current
COVID-19 circumstances persist.
73

On April 16, 2020, the CPUC adopted a resolution ordering utilities to implement a number of emergency customer protections, including a moratorium on service
disconnections for residential and small business customers, beginning on March 4, 2020, which it subsequently extended through June 30, 2021. The CPUC
authorized utilities to establish memorandum accounts to track incremental costs associated with complying with the resolution. On April 19, 2021, the CPUC
issued a final decision to implement a temporary moratorium on service disconnection for medium and large commercial and industrial customers. Although the
moratorium on service disconnections ended on September 30, 2021, the Utility does not anticipate resuming service disconnections until 2022. If the moratorium
on service disconnections were to be reinstated, it could have a material impact on results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows of PG&E Corporation
and the Utility.
Although the Utility is seeking further regulatory relief to mitigate the impact of the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, there can be no assurance as to the
amount or timing of such relief. On July 16, 2021, the California governor signed into law AB 135, which provides financing assistance to customer accounts in
arrears. See “Assembly Bill 135” below for more information. AB 135 allocates roughly $300 million in relief funding to the Utility’s customers and the amount
was paid on January 27, 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility had access to approximately $2.2 billion of total liquidity comprised of approximately $165 million
of Utility cash, $126 million of PG&E Corporation cash and $1.9 billion of availability under PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s revolving credit facilities. The
2022 cost of capital application was filed off-cycle based on the extraordinary event of the COVID-19 pandemic and related government response. See “Cost of
Capital Proceedings” below for more information.
The Utility has established the CPPMA memorandum accounts for tracking costs related to the CPUC’s emergency authorization and order, which, as of December
31, 2021, totaled $49 million and is reflected in Long-term regulatory assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. In addition to the $49 million recorded to the
CPPMA that is subject to CPUC approval, the Utility has recorded approximately $127 million of undercollections from residential customers from June 11, 2020
to December 31, 2021 to the RUBA, which has been approved by the CPUC and is reflected in Regulatory balancing accounts receivable on the Consolidated
Balance Sheets. During the quarter ended December 31, 2021, there was an adjustment to the RUBA current balancing accounts receivable of $180 million as a
result of the expected CAPP funding, which was received on January 27, 2022. For more information on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on PG&E
Corporation and the Utility, see “PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows have been and could
continue to be significantly affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic” in Item 1A. Risk Factors in Part I of this 2021 Form 10-K.
The COVID-19 pandemic may continue to impact PG&E Corporation and the Utility financially, and PG&E Corporation and the Utility will continue to monitor
the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.  PG&E Corporation and the
Utility maintain separate bank accounts and primarily invest their cash in money market funds. 
Financial Resources
Equity Financings
On April 30, 2021, PG&E Corporation entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with the Agents, the Forward Sellers and the Forward Purchasers (each as
defined in “At the Market Equity Distribution Program” in Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8), establishing an at the market
equity distribution program, pursuant to which PG&E Corporation, through the Agents, may offer and sell from time to time shares of PG&E Corporation’s
common stock having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $400 million. The Equity Distribution Agreement provides that, in addition to the issuance and sale of
shares of common stock by PG&E Corporation to or through the Agents, PG&E Corporation may enter into Forward Sale Agreements (as defined in “At the
Market Equity Distribution Program” in Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8) with the Forward Purchasers.
74

As of December 31, 2021, there was $400 million available under PG&E Corporation’s at the market equity distribution program for future offerings. During the
year ended December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation has not sold any shares pursuant to the Equity Distribution Agreement or any Forward Sale Agreement.
Debt Financings
In March 2021, the Utility issued (i) $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.367% First Mortgage Bonds due March 10, 2023, (ii) $450 million aggregate
principal amount of 3.25% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1, 2031, and (iii) $450 million aggregate principal amount of 4.20% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1,
2041. The proceeds were used for (i) the prepayment of all of the $1.5 billion 364-day term loan facility (maturing June 30, 2021) outstanding under the Utility
Term Loan Credit Agreement, (ii) the repayment of all of the borrowings outstanding under the Utility’s revolving credit facility pursuant to the Utility Revolving
Credit Agreement, and (iii) general corporate purposes.
In June 2021, the Utility issued $800 million aggregate principal amount of 3.0% First Mortgage Bonds due June 15, 2028. The proceeds were used for general
corporate purposes, including the repayment of borrowings under the Utility’s revolving credit facility pursuant to the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement.
On November 15, 2021, the Utility completed the sale of (i) $300 million aggregate principal amount of Floating Rate First Mortgage Bonds due November 14,
2022, (ii) $900 million aggregate principal amount of 1.70% First Mortgage Bonds due November 15, 2023 and (iii) an additional $550 million aggregate principal
amount of 3.25% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1, 2031 (the “2031 Bonds”). The 2031 Bonds are part of the same series of debt securities issued by the Utility in
March 2021. The proceeds were used for the repayment of the $1.45 billion aggregate principal amount of the Utility’s Floating Rate First Mortgage Bonds due
November 15, 2021. The Utility used the remaining net proceeds for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of approximately $300 million of
borrowings outstanding under the Utility’s revolving credit facility pursuant to the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement.
For more information, see “Recovery Bonds” below and “Long-Term Debt” in Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Credit Facilities
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility had $500 million and $1.4 billion available under their respective $500 million and $6.4 billion credit
facilities, including the Utility’s term loan credit facility and Receivables Securitization Program. The amount the Utility may borrow under the Receivables
Securitization Program is limited to the lesser of the facility limit and the facility availability. The facility availability may vary based on the amount of accounts
receivable that the Utility owns that are eligible for sale to the SPV and the portion of those accounts receivable that are sold to the SPV that are eligible for
advances by the lenders under the Receivables Securitization Program from time to time.
For more information, see “Credit Facilities” in Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Intercompany Note Payable
On August 11, 2021, PG&E Corporation borrowed $145 million from the Utility under an interest bearing 364-day intercompany note due August 10, 2022. The
intercompany note includes usual and customary provisions for notes of this type. The interest rate on the loan is a variable rate equal to the interest rate applicable
to loans under the Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement. Interest is due on the last business day of each month, commencing on August 31, 2021. The proceeds
were borrowed to fund debt service obligations of PG&E Corporation. As of December 31, 2021, the intercompany note is reflected in Accounts receivable - other
on the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheet and is eliminated upon consolidation of PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Recovery Bonds
On November 12, 2021, PG&E Recovery Funding LLC, a bankruptcy remote, limited liability company wholly owned by the Utility, issued approximately $860
million of senior secured recovery bonds. The recovery bonds were issued in three tranches: (1) approximately $266 million with an interest rate of 1.46% and is
due July 15, 2033, (2) approximately $160 million with an interest rate of 2.28% and is due January 15, 2038, and (3) approximately $434 million with an interest
rate of 2.82% and is due July 15, 2048. The net proceeds were used to fund fire risk mitigation capital expenditures that have been incurred by the Utility and
incurred by PG&E Corporation on behalf of the Utility in 2020 and 2021.
75

For more information, see “AB 1054” in Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Dividends
On December 20, 2017, the Boards of Directors of PG&E Corporation and the Utility suspended quarterly cash dividends on both PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s common stock, beginning the fourth quarter of 2017, as well as the Utility’s preferred stock, beginning the three-month period ending January 31, 2018.
On March 20, 2020, PG&E Corporation and the Utility filed a motion with the Bankruptcy Court that includes a dividend restriction for PG&E Corporation.
According to the dividend restriction, PG&E Corporation “will not pay common dividends until it has recognized $6.2 billion in non-GAAP core earnings
following the Effective Date” of the Plan. The Bankruptcy Court entered the order approving the motion on April 9, 2020.
In addition, the Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement requires that PG&E Corporation (1) maintain a ratio of total consolidated debt to consolidated
capitalization of no greater than 70% as of the end of each fiscal quarter and (2) if revolving loans are outstanding as of the end of a fiscal quarter, a ratio of
adjusted cash to fixed charges, as of the end of such fiscal quarter, of at least 150% prior to the date that PG&E Corporation first declares a cash dividend on its
common stock and at least 100% thereafter.
Under the Utility’s Articles of Incorporation, the Utility cannot pay common stock dividends unless all cumulative preferred dividends on the Utility’s preferred
stock have been paid. As of January 31, 2022, there were $59.1 million of such cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock. Additionally, the
CPUC requires the Utility to maintain a capital structure composed of at least 52% equity on average. On May 28, 2020, the CPUC approved a final decision in the
Chapter 11 Proceedings OII, which, among other things, grants the Utility a temporary, five-year waiver from compliance with its authorized capital structure for
the financing in place upon the Utility’s emergence from Chapter 11.
Subject to the foregoing restrictions, any decision to declare and pay dividends in the future will be made at the discretion of the Boards of Directors and will
depend on, among other things, results of operations, financial condition, cash requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors that the Boards of Directors
may deem relevant. On February 8, 2022, the Board of Directors of the Utility authorized the payment of all cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s
preferred stock as of January 31, 2022 totaling $59.1 million, payable on May 13, 2022, to holders of record on April 29, 2022 and declared a dividend on the
Utility’s preferred stock totaling $3.5 million that will be accrued during the three-month period ending April 30, 2022, payable on May 15, 2022, to holders of
record on April 29, 2022. It is uncertain as to when PG&E Corporation and the Utility will commence the payment of dividends on their common stock.
Utility Cash Flows
The Utility’s cash flows were as follows: 
Year Ended December 31,
 (in millions)
2021
2020
2019
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
$
2,448 
$
(19,047)
$
4,810 
Net cash used in investing activities
(7,050)
(7,748)
(6,378)
Net cash provided by financing activities
4,379 
26,070 
1,395 
Net change in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash
$
(223)
$
(725)
$
(173)
76

Operating Activities
The Utility’s cash flows from operating activities primarily consist of receipts from customers less payments of operating expenses, other than expenses such as
depreciation that do not require the use of cash.  During 2021, net cash provided by operating activities increased by $21.5 billion compared to the same period in
2020.  This increase was primarily due to the payment of $18.8 billion in satisfaction of pre-petition wildfire-related claims in 2020 as compared to the payment of
$758 million to the Fire Victim Trust in 2021. Additionally, the Utility made initial and first annual contributions to the Wildfire Fund of $5.2 billion during the
year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the $193 million contribution made during the year ended December 31, 2021. Lastly, the Utility paid
approximately $260 million more in interest in satisfaction of pre-petition claims during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2021. The increase was
partially offset by wildfire-related insurance reimbursements of $2.2 billion received in 2020 as compared to $0.1 billion in 2021.
During 2020, net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $23.9 billion compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the payment of $18.8
billion in satisfaction of pre-petition wildfire-related claims (including claims associated with the 2018 Camp fire, the 2017 Northern California wildfires, and the
2015 Butte fire), and the initial, first, and second annual contributions made to the Wildfire Fund of $5.2 billion, with no similar payments made in 2019.
Future cash flow from operating activities will be affected by various factors, including:
•
the timing and amount of costs in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, and the 2021 Dixie fire, and the timing and amount of any
potential related insurance, Wildfire Fund, and regulatory recoveries;
•
the timing and amounts of costs, including fines and penalties, that may be incurred in connection with current and future enforcement, litigation, and
regulatory matters (see “Wildfire-Related Securities Class Action” in Note 14 and “Enforcement Matters” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8 and “Regulatory Matters” below for more information);
•
the severity, extent and duration of the global COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the Utility’s service territory, the ability of the Utility to collect on
its customer invoices, the ability of the Utility’s customers to pay their utility bills in full and in a timely manner, the ability of the Utility to offset these
effects, including with spending reductions, and the ability of the Utility to recover through rates any losses incurred in connection with the COVID-19
pandemic, as well as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the availability or cost of financing;
•
the timing and amounts of available funds to pay eligible claims for liabilities arising from future wildfires;
•
the timing and amount of substantially increasing costs in connection with 2020-2022 WMPs and the costs previously incurred in connection with the
2019 WMP that are not currently being recovered through rates (see “Regulatory Matters” below for more information);
•
the timing and amount of premium payments related to wildfire insurance (see “Insurance Coverage” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8 for more information);
•
the timing of the gain to be returned to customers from the sale of the SFGO and transmission tower wireless licenses and the amounts incurred related to
the move to and the leasing of the Lakeside Building; and
•
the timing and outcomes of the Utility’s pending and future ratemaking and regulatory proceedings, including the extent to which PG&E Corporation and
the Utility are able to recover their costs through regulated rates as recorded in memorandum accounts or balancing accounts, or as otherwise requested.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material
effect on their financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources,
other than those discussed under “Purchase Commitments” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
77

Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $698 million during 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the sale of
the SFGO, which resulted in net proceeds received of $749 million in September 2021, with no similar receipts in 2020. See “Application to Sell General Office
Complex” below for more information.
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $1.4 billion during 2020 as compared to 2019 partially due to the payment of pre-petition vendor payables for
capital expenditures as a result of emerging from the Chapter 11 Cases. The Utility’s investing activities primarily consist of the construction of new and
replacement facilities necessary to provide safe and reliable electricity and natural gas services to its customers. Cash used in investing activities also includes the
proceeds from sales of nuclear decommissioning trust investments which are largely offset by the amount of cash used to purchase new nuclear decommissioning
trust investments.  The funds in the decommissioning trusts, along with accumulated earnings, are used exclusively for decommissioning and dismantling the
Utility’s nuclear generation facilities.
Future cash flows used in investing activities are largely dependent on the timing and amount of capital expenditures.  The Utility estimates that it will incur
between $7.8 billion and $8.9 billion in 2022. Additionally, future cash flows used in investing activities will be impacted by the timing and amount related to the
intended purchase of the Lakeside Building.
Financing Activities
During 2021, net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $21.7 billion as compared to 2020. This decrease was primarily due to PG&E Corporation
making a cash equity contribution to the Utility of approximately $13.0 billion in 2020, with no similar activity in 2021. Additionally, during 2021, the Utility
issued approximately $3.3 billion less of long-term debt, net of repayments, as compared to the same period in 2020. In addition, the Utility had net borrowings of
$4.6 billion under its credit facilities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to net repayments of $246 million during the same period in 2021. The
Utility had net borrowings of short-term debt of $1.4 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net repayments of short-term debt of
$1.2 billion during the same period in 2021. The decrease was partially offset by $1.5 billion of net repayments of debtor-in-possession credit facilities in 2020,
with no similar payments in 2021. Lastly, the Utility received $370 million of proceeds in 2021 in connection with the Transaction Agreement between the Utility
and SBA, with no similar receipts in 2020. For more information, see “Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless Licenses” in Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8.
During 2020, net cash provided by financing activities increased by $24.7 billion as compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to PG&E Corporation
making a cash equity contribution to the Utility of approximately $13.0 billion, and the Utility receiving $10.4 billion in proceeds from the issuance of short-term
and long-term first mortgage bonds, with no similar activities in 2019. Additionally, the Utility had net borrowings of $4.6 billion under its credit facilities during
the year ended December 31, 2020, with no similar activity in 2019 due to the Utility entering into the facilities in 2020. These increases were partially offset by
net repayments of $1.5 billion on the debtor-in-possession facilities in 2020, as compared to net borrowings of $1.5 billion on the debtor-in-possession facilities in
2019.
Cash provided by or used in financing activities is driven by the Utility’s financing needs, which depend on the level of cash provided by or used in operating
activities, the level of cash provided by or used in investing activities, the conditions in the capital markets, and the maturity date or prepayment date of existing
debt instruments.  Additionally, future cash flows from financing activities will be affected by the timing and outcome of the Utility’s applications for a post-
emergence securitization transaction and for an AB 1054 securitization transaction. See “Application for Post-Emergence Securitization Transaction” and
“Application for AB 1054 Securitization Transaction” below for more information. 
ENFORCEMENT AND LITIGATION MATTERS
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have significant contingencies arising from their operations, including contingencies related to the enforcement and litigation
matters described in Notes 14 and 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. that are incorporated by reference herein. The outcome of
these matters, individually or in the aggregate, could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations,
liquidity, and cash flows.
78

U.S. District Court Matters and Probation
On August 9, 2016, the jury in the federal criminal trial against the Utility in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, in San
Francisco, found the Utility guilty on one count of obstructing a federal agency proceeding and five counts of violations of pipeline integrity management
regulations of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act. On January 26, 2017, the court imposed a sentence on the Utility in connection with the conviction. The court
sentenced the Utility to a five-year corporate probation period, oversight by the Monitor for a period of five years, with the ability to apply for early termination
after three years, a fine of $3 million to be paid to the federal government, certain advertising requirements, and community service.
In the course of 2021, the court entered numerous other orders, including in connection with the Utility’s vegetation management, the Utility’s PSPS program, the
2018 Camp fire, the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire and the 2021 Dixie fire.
On January 25, 2022, the period of probation expired and the Monitor’s oversight of the Utility ended.
Enhanced Oversight and Enforcement Process
In the OII to Consider PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Plan of Reorganization final decision, the CPUC adopted an EOEP designed to provide a roadmap for
how the CPUC will monitor the Utility’s operational performance on an ongoing basis. The EOEP contains six steps that are triggered by specific events and
includes enhanced reporting requirements and additional monitoring and oversight. These trigger events include failure to obtain an approved WMP, failure to
comply with regulatory reporting requirements in the WMP, insufficient progress toward approved safety or risk-driven investments and failure to comply with or
demonstrate sufficient progress toward certain metrics (some of which will be determined in an ongoing regulatory proceeding). The EOEP also contains
provisions for the Utility to cure and permanently exit the EOEP if it can satisfy specific criteria. If the Utility is placed into the EOEP, actions taken would occur
in coordination with the CPUC’s existing formal and informal reporting requirements and procedures. The EOEP does not replace or limit the CPUC’s regulatory
authority, including the authority to issue Orders to Show Cause and Orders Instituting Investigations and to impose fines and penalties. The EOEP requires the
Utility to report the occurrence of a triggering event to the CPUC’s executive director no later than five business days after the date on which any member of senior
management of the Utility becomes aware of the occurrence of a triggering event.
The Utility is unable to predict whether additional fines or penalties may be imposed, or other regulatory actions may be taken.
On August 18, 2021, the President of the CPUC informed the Utility that the CPUC staff intends to conduct a fact-finding review regarding a pattern of self-
reported missed inspections and other self-reported safety incidents to determine whether a recommendation to advance the Utility further within the EOEP is
warranted.
Vegetation Management
The CPUC placed the Utility into step 1 of the EOEP on April 15, 2021 and imposed additional reporting requirements on the Utility. The CPUC’s resolution
states that a step 1 triggering event had occurred because the Utility “has made insufficient progress toward approved safety or risk-driven investments related to
its electric business.” The resolution finds that, based on the CPUC’s evaluation of the Utility’s EVM work in 2020, the Utility “is not sufficiently prioritizing its
Enhanced Vegetation Management (“EVM”) based on risk” and “is not making risk-driven investments.” The resolution also finds that “less than five percent of
the EVM work” the Utility completed in 2020 “was on the 20 highest risk power lines according to [its] own risk rankings.”
As required by the CPUC’s resolution, the Utility submitted a corrective action plan to the CPUC’s Executive Director on May 6, 2021, which is designed to
correct or prevent recurrence of the step 1 triggering event, or otherwise mitigate any ongoing safety risk or impact, as soon as practicable, among other things. The
corrective action plan addresses the EVM situation that occurred in 2020 and provides a risk-informed EVM workplan for 2021. The Utility is required to update
the information contained in the corrective action plan every 90 days. The Utility will remain in step 1 of the EOEP until the CPUC determines that the Utility has
met the conditions of the corrective action plan. If the Utility does not adequately meet such conditions within the timeframe approved by the CPUC, the CPUC
may place the Utility into a higher step of the EOEP, or the Utility may remain in step 1 of the EOEP if it demonstrates sufficient progress towards meeting such
conditions.
The Utility is unable to predict the outcome of this regulatory process.
79

Order Instituting an Investigation into PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Safety Culture
On August 27, 2015, the CPUC began a formal investigation into whether the organizational culture and governance of PG&E Corporation and the Utility
prioritize safety and adequately direct resources to promote accountability and achieve safety goals and standards (the “Safety Culture OII”). The CPUC directed
the SED to evaluate the Utility’s and PG&E Corporation’s organizational culture, governance, policies, practices, and accountability metrics in relation to the
Utility’s record of operations, including its record of safety incidents.
On June 18, 2019, the CPUC issued a ruling requesting comments from parties on four proposals that it stated may improve the safety culture of PG&E
Corporation and the Utility. The four proposals are: separating the Utility into gas and electric utilities (including, as one possibility, sale of the gas assets to a third
party); establishing periodic review of the Utility’s certificate of convenience and necessity; modifying or eliminating PG&E Corporation’s holding company
structure; and linking the Utility’s rate of return or ROE to safety performance metrics.
On September 4, 2020, the administrative law judge issued a ruling updating case status, which states that the proceeding will remain open as a vehicle to monitor
the progress of the Utility in improving its safety culture, and to address any relevant issues that arise, with the CPUC’s consultant NorthStar Consulting Group,
Inc. continuing in a monitoring role. The ruling states that additional issues may be raised in the proceedings by parties or the CPUC.
REGULATORY MATTERS
The Utility is subject to substantial regulation by the CPUC, the FERC, the NRC, and other federal and state regulatory agencies. The resolutions of the
proceedings described below and other proceedings may materially affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity,
and cash flows.
During 2021, the Utility continued to make progress on regulatory matters.
•
In June, the Utility filed its 2023 GRC application. The application requests a revenue requirement of $15.46 billion for the 2023 test year.
•
In August, the CPUC approved the Utility’s agreement to sell the SFGO. In September, the sale closed.
•
In September, OEIS issued a final decision statement approving the Utility’s 2021 WMP, and in October the CPUC ratified the OEIS’ approval.
•
In September, the Utility filed a motion seeking CPUC approval of a settlement agreement for its 2020 WMCE application. Under the settlement
agreement, the Utility would recover a revenue requirement of $1.04 billion, or 81% of the requested $1.28 billion.
•
In September, the Utility filed its 2021 WMCE application, requesting cost recovery of approximately $1.6 billion of recorded expenditures related to
wildfire mitigation, certain catastrophic events, and a number of other activities, resulting in a proposed revenue requirement of approximately $1.47
billion.
•
In October, the CPUC approved the settlement agreement among the Utility and other parties that authorizes the Utility to recover $445.5 million in
incremental insurance costs in its WEMA that were incurred for the period of July 26, 2017 through December 31, 2019.
•
In November, the Utility filed a motion seeking CPUC approval of a settlement agreement for its 2018 CEMA application. Under the settlement
agreement, the Utility would recover approximately $683 million plus interest, compared to the requested $763 million.
In addition, on January 31, 2022, the OEIS issued the Utility’s 2021 safety certification, which will be valid for 12 months or until a timely request for a new safety
certification is acted upon, whichever occurs later.
80

Cost Recovery Proceedings
Periodically, costs arise that could not have been anticipated by the Utility during CPUC GRC rate requests or that have been deliberately excluded therefrom.
These costs may result from catastrophic events, changes in regulation, or extraordinary changes in operating practices. The Utility may seek authority to track
incremental costs in a memorandum account and the CPUC may authorize recovery of costs tracked in memorandum accounts if the costs are deemed incremental
and prudently incurred. The CPUC also authorized balancing accounts with limitations or caps to cost recovery. These accounts, which include the CEMA,
WEMA, FHPMA, FRMMA, WMPMA, VMBA, WMBA, and RTBA among others, allow the Utility to track the costs associated with work related to disaster and
wildfire response, other wildfire prevention-related costs, certain third-party wildfire claims, and insurance costs. While the Utility generally expects such costs to
be recoverable, there can be no assurance that the CPUC will authorize the Utility to recover the full amount of its costs.
In recent years, the amount of the costs recorded in these accounts has increased. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility had recorded an aggregate amount of
approximately $5.4 billion in costs not otherwise being recovered in existing revenue requirements, if any, for the CEMA, WEMA, FHPMA, FRMMA, WMPMA,
VMBA, WMBA, MGMA, and RTBA. Because rate recovery may require CPUC authorization for these accounts, there is a delay between when the Utility incurs
costs and when it may recover those costs.
If the amount of the costs recorded in these accounts continues to increase, the delay between incurring and recovering costs lengthens, or the Utility does not
recover the full amount of its costs, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially
affected.
Except as otherwise noted, the Utility is unable to predict the timing and outcome of the following applications. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial
condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially affected if the Utility is unable to timely recover costs included in these applications.
For more information, see Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8., “Regulatory Matters - Wildfire Mitigation and Catastrophic
Events Costs Recovery Applications,” “Regulatory Matters - Application for Recovery of Costs Recorded in the Wildfire Expense Memorandum Account,” and
“Regulatory Matters - Catastrophic Event Memorandum Accounts and Applications” below.
Wildfire Mitigation and Catastrophic Events Cost Recovery Applications
2020 WMCE Application
On September 30, 2020, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC requesting cost recovery of recorded expenditures related to wildfire mitigation and certain
catastrophic events (the “2020 WMCE application”). The recorded expenditures, which exclude amounts disallowed as a result of the CPUC’s decision in the OII
into the 2017 Northern California wildfires and the 2018 Camp fire, consist of $1.18 billion in expense and $801 million in capital expenditures, resulting in a
proposed revenue requirement of approximately $1.28 billion.
The costs addressed in the 2020 WMCE application cover activities mainly during the years 2017 to 2019 and are incremental to those previously authorized in the
Utility’s 2017 GRC and other proceedings. The Utility’s request includes amounts from the FHPMA of $293 million, the FRMMA and the WMPMA of $740
million, and the CEMA of $251 million.
Given the CPUC’s prior approval of $447 million in interim rate relief (which includes interest), the Utility proposed to recover the remaining $868 million
revenue requirement over a one-year period (following the conclusion of interim rate relief recovery). Cost recovery requested in this application is subject to the
CPUC’s reasonableness review, which could result in some or all of the interim rate relief being subject to refund.
On September 21, 2021, the Utility and certain parties filed a motion with the CPUC seeking approval of a settlement agreement that would resolve all of the
issues raised by the settling parties in the 2020 WMCE application. The settlement agreement proposes that the Utility recover a revenue requirement of $1.04
billion. The settlement agreement would authorize the Utility to continue to recover the interim revenue requirement of $447 million over a 17-month amortization
period, followed by an additional revenue requirement of $591 million over a 24-month amortization period. On September 23, 2021, the CPUC extended the
statutory deadline for a PD in this matter to April 1, 2022.
81

2021 WMCE Application
On September 16, 2021, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC requesting cost recovery of approximately $1.6 billion of recorded expenditures, resulting
in a proposed revenue requirement of approximately $1.47 billion (the “2021 WMCE application”). The costs addressed in this application reflect costs related to
wildfire mitigation and certain catastrophic events, as well as implementation of various customer-focused initiatives. These costs were incurred primarily in 2020.
The recorded expenditures consist of $1.4 billion in expenses and $197 million in capital expenditures. The costs addressed in the 2021 WMCE application are
incremental to those previously authorized in the Utility’s 2017 GRC, 2020 GRC, and other proceedings. The majority of the Utility’s proposed revenue
requirement would be collected over a two-year period starting in January 2023.
The Utility’s requested revenue requirement includes amounts recorded to the VMBA of $592 million, the CEMA of $535 million, the WMBA of $149 million,
and other memo accounts. On November 18, 2021, the Utility filed updates to the application, increasing total costs by $19.4 million. On December 30, 2021, the
Utility filed supplemental testimony reducing the cost recovery ask of the COVID-19 CEMA costs by $12.2 million. The $12.2 million reduction is a result of
identified avoided costs, such as employee business travel expenses and in-person training costs, due to the pandemic.
The scoping memo shows a schedule with the CPUC issuing a PD in the fourth quarter of 2022.
Wildfire Expense Memorandum Account Application
On February 7, 2020, the Utility filed an application requesting cost recovery of $499 million of insurance premiums paid by the Utility between July 26, 2017
through December 31, 2019, which were recorded in the WEMA. These costs are incremental to the insurance costs authorized in the 2017 GRC. These
incremental costs are not associated with any specific wildfire event. The application does not seek recovery of wildfire claims or associated legal costs eligible for
recording to the WEMA. On October 21, 2021, the CPUC adopted a final decision approving a settlement agreement among the Utility and the other active parties
that authorizes the Utility to recover $445.5 million over a 12-month period beginning January 1, 2022.
Catastrophic Event Memorandum Account Application
The CPUC allows utilities to recover the reasonable, incremental costs of responding to catastrophic events that have been declared a disaster or state of emergency
by competent federal or state authorities. The Utility has historically sought such costs through standalone CEMA applications. More recently, the Utility has
sought CEMA-eligible costs through its WMCE applications.
In addition to the Utility’s responsibilities in responding to catastrophic events, in 2014, the CPUC directed the Utility to perform additional fire prevention and
vegetation management work in response to the severe drought in California. Through 2019, the costs associated with this work were tracked in the CEMA. In the
2020 GRC decision, the CPUC required the Utility to track these costs in the VMBA beginning January 1, 2020.
2018 CEMA Application
On March 30, 2018, the Utility submitted to the CPUC its 2018 CEMA application requesting cost recovery of $183 million in connection with seven catastrophic
events that included fire and storm declared emergencies from mid-2016 through early 2017, as well as $405 million related to work performed in 2016 and 2017
to cut back or remove dead or dying trees that were exposed to years of drought conditions and bark beetle infestation. The Utility filed three revisions to this
application, resulting in a total cost recovery request of $763 million.
On April 25, 2019, the CPUC approved the Utility’s request for interim rate relief, allowing for recovery of $373 million of costs as requested by the Utility at that
time. The interim rate relief was implemented, commencing on October 1, 2019. Costs included in the interim rate relief are subject to audit and refund.
On November 2, 2021, the Utility filed with the CPUC a settlement agreement with the active parties in the matter. The settlement agreement, if approved by the
CPUC, would authorize the Utility to collect a total of $683 million plus interest for the 2018 CEMA application. As noted above, $373 million of the total amount
has already been collected in interim rates. The interim rates would become final and no longer subject to refund. The remainder of the authorized revenue
requirement that has yet to be collected would be amortized over a 12-month period.
82

Forward-Looking Rate Cases
The Utility routinely participates in forward-looking rate case applications before the CPUC and the FERC. Those applications include GRCs, where the revenue
required for general operations (“base revenue”) of the Utility is assessed and reset. In addition, the Utility is periodically involved in proceedings to adjust its
regulated return on rate base.
Decisions in GRC proceedings are generally expected prior to the commencement of the period to which the rates would apply. However, delayed decisions in the
Utility’s GRCs may cause the Utility to develop its budgets based on possible outcomes, rather than authorized amounts. When decisions are delayed, the CPUC
typically provides rate relief to the Utility effective as of the commencement of the rate case period (not effective as of the date of the delayed decision).
Nonetheless, the Utility’s spending during the period of the delay may exceed the authorized amount, without an ability for the Utility to seek cost recovery of such
excess. If the Utility’s spending during the period of the delay is less than the authorized amount, the Utility could be exposed to operational and financial risk
associated with the lower level of work achieved compared to that funded by the CPUC.
Except as otherwise noted, the Utility is unable to predict the timing and outcome of the following applications. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial
condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially affected depending on the outcomes of these applications.
The Utility’s rate cases that are pending, have pending appeals, or were completed in 2021 are summarized in the following table:
Rate Case
Request
Status
2023 GRC
Revenue requirement of $15.28 billion for 2023
Filed June 2021. A decision on the initial track of the
proceeding is expected in the second quarter of 2023.
2019 GT&S
Removal of $39.4 million of disallowance
Approved January 2022.
2022 Cost of Capital
Leave cost of capital components at pre-2022 levels for 2022
Filed August 2021. Briefing is expected to be completed by
March 2022.
2015 GT&S
Revenue requirement of $416 million
Settlement agreement to recover $356 million of revenue
requirement filed July 2021.
2023 General Rate Case
On June 30, 2021, the Utility filed its 2023 GRC application with the CPUC. The 2023 GRC combined what had historically been separated into the GRC and
GT&S rate cases. In the 2023 GRC, the CPUC will determine the annual amount of base revenues that the Utility will be authorized to collect from customers from
2023 through 2026 to recover its anticipated costs for gas distribution, gas transmission and storage, electric distribution, and electric generation and to provide the
Utility an opportunity to earn its authorized rate of return. The Utility’s revenue requirements for other portions of its operations, such as electric transmission, and
electricity and natural gas purchases, are authorized in other regulatory proceedings overseen by the CPUC or the FERC.
In a GRC, the CPUC approves annual revenue requirements for the first year (a “test year”) of the GRC period and typically authorizes the Utility to receive annual
increases in revenue requirements for the subsequent years of the GRC period (known as “attrition years”). For its 2023 test year, the Utility has requested revenue
requirements of $15.46 billion, an increase of $3.56 billion over the adopted 2020 GRC and 2019 GT&S revenue requirements for 2022 of $11.90 billion. The
GRC application further states that the Utility’s requested 2023 revenue requirements represent a 9.6% increase over its total revenue requirements for 2022
(including both amounts that are authorized and that are requested outside of the GRC and remain subject to the regulatory process). The requested weighted-
average GRC rate base for 2023 is approximately $48.52 billion, which corresponds to an increase of $9.35 billion over the authorized rate base for 2022 of $39.17
billion. The Utility also requested that the CPUC establish a ratemaking mechanism that would increase the Utility’s authorized GRC revenues in 2024, 2025, and
2026 by $930 million, $590 million, and $381 million, respectively. The Utility estimated its proposed revenue requirements for 2024, 2025, and 2026 would result
in revenue requirement increases of 2.4%, 1.9%, and 1.5%, compared to its total estimated revenue requirements for 2023, 2024, and 2025, respectively. Over the
2023-2026 GRC period, the Utility plans to make average annual capital investments of approximately $7.75 billion in gas distribution, transmission and storage,
electric distribution, and electric generation infrastructure, and to improve safety, reliability, and customer service.
83

The following table compares the Utility’s initial requested revenue requirements for 2023 with the comparable revenue requirements currently authorized for
2022, by both line of business and cost category:
Line of Business
Amounts requested in the
2023 GRC application
Amounts currently
authorized for 2022
Requested increase
compared to currently
authorized amounts
(in millions)
Gas distribution
$
2,870 
$
2,321 
$
550 
Gas transmission and storage
1,989 
1,662 
327 
Electric distribution
8,171 
5,514 
2,657 
Electric generation
2,431 
2,404 
26 
Total revenue requirements
$
15,461 
$
11,901 
$
3,560 
May not sum due to rounding.
These amounts include revenues from Decision (“D.”) 20-12-005 (the Utility’s 2020 GRC), D.19-09-025 (the Utility’s 2019 GT&S) adjusted for D.19-12-056 and Advice Letter (“AL”) 4275-
G/5887-E (Cost of Capital changes adopted for Long Term Debt and Common Stock) and AL 4367-G/6062-E (Excess Accumulated Deferred Income Taxes Pursuant to the 2017 Tax Act).
Also included are the 2022 adopted revenue requirements associated with the following previously separately-funded projects: AL 5322-E (Energy Storage), D.16-12-065 (Electric Vehicle
Charging Network Phase I), D.14-03-021 (Mobile Home Park to the Meter), D.20-11-035 (2019 CEMA), AL 4392-G/6100-E (WMBA and VMBA), AL 4444-G/6210-E (RTBA).
In the 2023 GRC application, the Utility proposed a series of safety, resiliency, and clean energy investments to further reduce wildfire risk and deliver safe,
reliable, and clean energy service. Among other things, the Utility proposed to invest a total of approximately $31 billion between 2023 and 2026 to reduce
wildfire risk; improve gas and electric system safety, reliability, and resiliency; increase the use of new, innovative technologies; and expand its clean energy
infrastructure.
In addition to coverage that may be available from the private insurance market, the Utility also proposed to use self-insurance as part of its wildfire insurance
program as follows: (1) the Utility’s recommended approach, a new self-insurance structure whereby the Utility would seek customer-funded self-insurance in the
amount of $250 million annually and traditional private insurance procurement for amounts between the accumulated self-insurance balance and $1.0 billion; or,
alternatively (2) continuing the currently authorized mechanism whereby the Utility seeks procurement of wildfire liability insurance instruments through the
private insurance market and is authorized to use any unspent authorized revenue requirements on self-insurance.
In addition, the Utility requested authorization to establish one new balancing account and one new memorandum account as follows:
•
Catastrophic Events Straight-Time Labor Balancing Account, a two-way account which would recover straight-time labor costs associated with
catastrophic events. These costs are currently recovered through the Catastrophic Events Memorandum Account process.
•
Helms Capacity Memorandum Account, which would allow the Utility to track and recover the actual costs associated with upgrading the Helms Pumped
Storage Facility through a future application.
The Utility did not seek recovery of compensation of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s officers within the scope of 17 Code of Federal Regulations 240.3b-7.
On October 1, 2021, the CPUC issued a scoping memo indicating that the CPUC will issue a decision on an initial track of the proceeding in the second quarter of
2023. The scoping memo also established a second track of the 2023 GRC to consider costs incurred from 2019 to 2021 that are recorded in balancing or
memorandum accounts for, among other work, wildfire mitigation and gas system safety improvements. The second track will review more than $500 million in
capital and $160 million in expense included in the Utility’s initial 2023 GRC application for the period from 2019 to 2020, plus additional costs recorded in
memorandum and balancing accounts in 2021. The scoping memo indicated that the CPUC will issue a decision on the second track in the third quarter of 2023.
The scoping memo also directed the Utility to file an update for its
undergrounding program in February 2022.
On November 5, 2021, the Utility filed a motion to revise the proceeding schedule.
Between August 2021 and January 2022, the Utility served updates to its 2023 GRC testimony that would, if approved, reduce the requested revenue requirement
in 2023 by approximately $181 million in the aggregate.
 (1)
 (2)
(1) 
(2) 
84

2020 General Rate Case
On December 3, 2020, the CPUC approved the final decision for the Utility’s 2020 GRC.
Revenue Requirements and Attrition Year Revenues
The final decision approved a 2020 authorized revenue requirement of $9.102 billion, effective January 1, 2020. The CPUC also approved the revenue
requirements for 2021 and 2022 as follows: an additional increase of $316 million in 2021 over the authorized 2020 revenue requirement, or a 3.5% increase, and
an additional increase of $364 million in 2022, or a 3.9% increase. The Utility is authorized to collect in rates the difference between the revenue requirement in
effect and the 2020 GRC decision-authorized revenue requirement for the period of January 1, 2020 to February 28, 2021 over the period of March 1, 2021 through
December 31, 2022.
The final decision also allows the Utility to recover the annual cost of excess liability insurance for coverage of up to $1.4 billion. An advice letter is required for
recovery of excess liability insurance costs for coverage exceeding $1.4 billion. The final decision also approved wildfire mitigation capital expenditures in the
Community Wildfire Safety Program of $603 million in 2020, $931 million in 2021 and $1.15 billion in 2022. In addition, the final decision requires a
reasonableness review and recovery of WMBA costs or unit costs for system hardening in excess of 115% of the adopted amounts and VMBA costs in excess of
120% of the adopted amounts through an application.
Rate Base and Capital Additions
The CPUC also adopted a rate base of $31.0 billion in 2021, or a 5.4% increase over 2020; and $33.0 billion in 2022, or a 6.3% increase over 2021. Consistent
with AB 1054, the decision provides for a total of $2.83 billion in forecast capital spend without an equity return for the period of August 2019 to December 2022,
which includes $931 million for 2021 and $1.15 billion for 2022.
Over the 2020-2022 GRC period, the decision provided average annual capital investments of approximately $4.5 billion in electric distribution, natural gas
distribution and electric generation infrastructure.
2019 Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Case
As previously disclosed, on September 12, 2019, the CPUC approved the final decision in the 2019 GT&S rate case of the Utility. The CPUC adopted revenue
requirements of $1.516 billion for 2021 and $1.580 billion for 2022, compared to the Utility’s request of $1.693 billion for 2021 and $1.679 billion for 2022.
On October 23, 2019, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC requesting the rehearing of the final decision. Specifically, issues identified by the Utility
include the adopted disallowance associated with vintage pipe replacement, reduction in the Utility’s expense forecast for in-line inspections, and establishment of
a memo account for Internal Corrosion Direct Assessment. On November 19, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision denying the Utility’s application for rehearing but
allowing the Utility to file an advice letter to remove the 2015 portion of the capital vintage pipe replacement disallowance. The advice letter was approved by the
CPUC on January 21, 2022.
Removing the 2015 value of $39.4 million from the disallowance reduced the total disallowed amount from $237.3 million to $197.9 million.
Cost of Capital Proceedings
On December 19, 2019, the CPUC approved a final decision in the 2020 cost of capital application (the “2020 cost of capital application”), maintaining the
Utility’s return on common equity at the 2019 level of 10.25% for the three-year period beginning January 1, 2020. The decision maintained the common equity
component of the Utility’s capital structure at 52% and reduced its preferred stock component from 1% to 0.5%. The decision also approved the cost of debt
requested by the Utility.
85

The Utility’s annual cost of capital adjustment mechanism, which allows for changes in the Utility’s authorized ROE and cost of debt, also remained unchanged by
the final 2020 cost of capital application decision. The mechanism provides that in any year in which the difference between (i) the average Moody’s utility bond
rates (as measured in the 12-month period from October through September (the index)) and (ii) 4.5% (the benchmark) exceeds 100 basis points, the Utility’s ROE
will be adjusted by one-half of such difference, and the cost of debt will be trued up to the most recent recorded cost of debt. The Utility is to initiate this
adjustment mechanism by filing an advice letter on or before October 15 of the year in which the mechanism triggered, to become effective on January 1 of the
next year.
On August 23, 2021, the Utility filed an off-cycle 2022 cost of capital application with the CPUC based on the extraordinary event of the COVID-19 pandemic and
related government response, which has decreased interest rates but has not reduced the cost of capital for electric utilities in general, and the Utility in particular,
to the same extent as the overall financial markets (the “2022 cost of capital application”). The 2022 cost of capital application requested that the CPUC authorize
the Utility's cost of capital for its electric generation, electric distribution, natural gas distribution, and natural gas transmission and storage rate base beginning on
January 1, 2022 for 2022, 2023, and 2024. The Utility requested that the CPUC approve the Utility’s proposed ratemaking capital structure (i.e., the relative
weightings of common equity, preferred equity, and debt for ratemaking), ROE, cost of preferred stock, and cost of debt. The Utility proposed to establish a cost of
long-term debt of 4.14%, a return on preferred stock of 5.52%, a ROE of 11%, and to retain the existing capital structure. The Utility also concurrently filed a
motion requesting that the revenue requirement for the 2022 cost of capital be recorded in memorandum accounts to be trued-up following a final decision in this
proceeding.
In September 2021, the cost of capital adjustment mechanism was triggered because the index was 117 basis points below the benchmark. As the 2022 cost of
capital application was pending, the Utility did not file the October 15, 2021 advice letter to adjust rates. Subsequently, on October 28, 2021, the CPUC ruled that
the 2022 cost of capital application did not suspend the adjustment mechanism as requested by the application. The ruling also required that the Utility comply with
the cost of capital mechanism by filing the information that would have been included in the October 15, 2021 advice letter in the 2022 cost of capital application
proceeding on November 8, 2021, which the Utility did.
On December 17, 2021, the CPUC issued a final decision authorizing the Utility’s request to establish memorandum accounts to track revenue requirement
changes starting on January 1, 2022 and leaving the cost of capital rates at current levels, subject to true-up based on the CPUC’s decision on the 2022 cost of
capital application.
On December 24, 2021, the CPUC issued a scoping memo in the 2022 cost of capital application limiting the scope of the Utility’s 2022 cost of capital application
to the 2022 cost of capital only. The scoping memo also affirmed that the Utility is to file a 2023 cost of capital application in April 2022 for the 2023 test year.
To set the 2022 cost of capital, the CPUC will consider (i) whether there are extraordinary circumstances that warrant a departure from the cost of capital
mechanism for 2022; and (ii) if so, whether to leave the cost of capital components at pre-2022 levels for the year 2022, or open a second phase to consider
alternative cost of capital proposals for the year 2022. The Utility’s position is that there are extraordinary circumstances that warrant a departure from the cost of
capital mechanism for 2022 and that the CPUC should leave the cost of capital components at pre-2022 levels for 2022.
If the CPUC determines that the 2022 cost of capital application establishes extraordinary circumstances that warrant a departure from the cost of capital
mechanism for 2022 and leaves the Utility’s cost of capital components at pre-2022 levels for 2022, the cost of long-term debt would be 4.17%, the return on
preferred stock would be 5.52%, and the ROE would be 10.25%. If the CPUC opens a second phase of the proceeding, the CPUC would set the cost of capital for
2022 based on alternative cost of capital proposals that would address the technical cost of capital material included within the Utility’s 2022 cost of capital
application.
If the CPUC determines that there are not extraordinary circumstances that warrant a departure from the cost of capital mechanism for 2022, the cost of capital
adjustment mechanism would operate and the cost of long-term debt would be 4.15%, the return on preferred stock would be 5.52%, and the ROE would be 9.67%.
The resulting decrease in the CPUC jurisdictional gas and electric revenue requirement would be approximately $163 million ($99 million electric and $64 million
gas).
The scoping memo called for briefing to be completed by March 25, 2022 but did not indicate timing for a PD or final decision.
86

2015 Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Case
On June 23, 2016, the CPUC approved a final phase one decision in the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case. The phase one decision excluded from rate base $696
million of 2011 to 2014 capital spending in excess of the amount adopted in the prior GT&S rate case. The decision permanently disallowed $120 million of that
amount and ordered that the remaining $576 million be subject to an audit overseen by the CPUC staff, with the possibility that the Utility may seek recovery in a
future proceeding. For more information regarding this proceeding, see Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Transmission Owner Rate Cases
Transmission Owner Rate Cases for 2015 and 2016 (the “TO16” and “TO17” rate cases, respectively)
As previously disclosed, on January 8, 2018, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals issued an opinion granting an appeal of the FERC’s decisions in the TO16 and
TO17 rate cases that had granted the Utility a 50-basis point ROE incentive adder for its continued participation in the CAISO. If the FERC concluded on remand
that the Utility should no longer be authorized to receive the 50 basis point ROE incentive adder, the Utility would incur a refund obligation of $1 million and $8.5
million for TO16 and TO17, respectively. Those rate case decisions were remanded to the FERC for further proceedings consistent with the Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals’ opinion.
On July 18, 2019, the FERC issued its order on remand reaffirming its prior grant of the Utility’s request for the 50-basis point ROE adder.
On March 17, 2020, the FERC issued its order denying requests for rehearing that were previously filed by several parties. On May 11, 2020, the CPUC and a
number of other parties filed a petition for review of the FERC’s orders in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. Oral argument was held on April 16, 2021.
Transmission Owner Rate Case for 2017 (the “TO18” rate case)
As previously disclosed, on July 29, 2016, the Utility filed its TO18 rate case with the FERC requesting a 2017 retail electric transmission revenue requirement of
$1.72 billion, a $387 million increase over the 2016 revenue requirement of $1.33 billion.  The forecasted network transmission rate base for 2017 was $6.7
billion.  The Utility sought a ROE of 10.9%, which included an incentive component of 50 basis points for the Utility’s continuing participation in the CAISO. 
On October 15, 2020, the FERC issued an order that, among other things, rejected the Utility’s direct assignment of common plant to FERC and required the
allocation of all common plant between CPUC and FERC jurisdiction be based on operating and maintenance labor ratios. The order reopened the record for the
limited purpose of allowing the participants to the proceeding an opportunity to present written evidence concerning the FERC’s revised ROE methodology
adopted in FERC Opinion No. 569-A, issued on May 21, 2020. Initial briefs and testimony were filed on December 14, 2020 and responses were filed on February
12, 2021.
On December 17, 2020 and June 17, 2021, the FERC issued orders denying requests for rehearing submitted by the Utility and intervenors. In 2021, the Utility
filed four appeals. The appeals related to two issues: (1) impact of the Tax Act on TO18 rates in January and February 2018 and (2) aspects of the rehearing order
other than the Tax Act. The appeals have been consolidated and are currently being held in abeyance until the FERC addresses the ROE issue.
As a result of an order denying rehearing on the common plant allocation, the Utility increased its Regulatory liabilities for amounts previously collected during the
TO18, TO19, and TO20 rate case periods from 2017 through the fourth quarter of 2021 by approximately $324 million. A portion of these common plant costs are
expected to be recovered at the CPUC in a separate application and as a result, as of December 31, 2021, the Utility has recorded approximately $197 million to
Regulatory assets.
Aside from the ultimate outcome of the common plant allocation, which is subject to further appellate briefing and a further FERC decision on ROE, that order is
not expected to result in a material impact on the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. Some of the issues that will be
decided in a final and unappealable TO18 decision, including the common plant allocation, will also be incorporated into the Utility’s TO19 and TO20 rate cases.
See “Transmission Owner Rate Case Revenue Subject to Refund” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
87

Transmission Owner Rate Case for 2018 (the “TO19” rate case)
As previously disclosed, on July 27, 2017, the Utility filed its TO19 rate case with the FERC. On December 20, 2018, the FERC issued an order approving an all-
party settlement filed by the Utility. As part of the settlement, the TO19 revenue requirement will be set at 98.85% of the revenue requirement for TO18 that will
be determined upon the issuance of a final, non-appealable TO18 decision. Additionally, if the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals were to determine that the Utility
was not entitled to the 50 basis point incentive adder for the Utility’s continued CAISO participation, then the Utility would be obligated to make a refund to
customers of approximately $25 million. See “Transmission Owner Rate Cases for 2015 and 2016” above for a discussion of the incentive adder. On December 20,
2018, the FERC issued an order approving the all-party settlement.
Transmission Owner Rate Case for 2019 (the “TO20” rate case)
As previously disclosed, on October 1, 2018, the Utility filed its TO20 rate case with the FERC requesting approval of a formula rate for the costs associated with
the Utility’s electric transmission facilities. On November 30, 2018, the FERC issued an order accepting the Utility’s October 2018 filing, subject to hearings and
refund, and established May 1, 2019 as the effective date for rate changes. The FERC also ordered that the hearings be held in abeyance pending settlement
discussions among the parties.
On March 31, 2020, the Utility filed a partial settlement with the FERC, which the FERC approved on August 17, 2020. On October 15, 2020, the Utility filed a
settlement with the FERC resolving all of the remaining issues in the formula rate proceedings, including the Utility’s ROE, capital structure, depreciation rates, as
well as certain other aspects of the Utility’s formula rate. Specifically, the settlement establishes an all-in ROE of 10.45%; a fixed capital structure of 49.75%
common stock, 49.75% debt, and 0.5% preferred stock; and fixed depreciation rates for various categories of transmission facilities (represented by individual
FERC accounts). The term of the settlement continues until December 31, 2023 and the Utility will be required to file a replacement rate filing to be effective on
January 1, 2024.
On December 30, 2020, the FERC approved the settlement without modifications.
Some of the issues that will be decided in a final and unappealable TO18 decision, including the common plant allocation, will also be incorporated into the
Utility’s TO19 and TO20 rate cases.
Other Regulatory Proceedings
Application to Sell General Office Complex
On September 30, 2020, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC to sell the SFGO located at 25 Beale Street, 45 Beale Street, 77 Beale Street, 50 Main
Street, 215 Market Street and 245 Market Street in downtown San Francisco, and to recover costs to relocate its staff at the SFGO to a new headquarters at the
Lakeside Building, and for appropriate ratemaking treatment of those transactions.
On May 21, 2021, the Utility entered into a purchase agreement with HNG Atlas US LP, to sell the SFGO for $800 million.
On May 26, 2021, the Utility filed an amended settlement agreement with the CPUC. Under the amended settlement, the parties agreed that (1) the Utility’s
headquarters strategy, including the move to the Lakeside Building, the sale of the SFGO, and the terms of the agreement to lease and the option to purchase the
Lakeside Building, is reasonable, (2) all of the net gain on sale of the SFGO will be distributed to customers over five years, beginning in 2022, and (3) the costs
associated with the Utility’s move to the Lakeside Building and development will be considered at later stages of the proceeding through a petition for modification
of the final decision in the proceeding.
The CPUC issued a final decision approving the purchase agreement and the ratemaking treatment proposed under the parties’ settlement on August 19, 2021, and
the sale closed on September 17, 2021. The final decision defers, until the petition for modification, determinations as to the amount of the Utility’s cost recovery
in connection with the anticipated purchase of the Lakeside Building and operating and capital expenses related to the transition to the Lakeside Building.
88

Application for Post-Emergence Securitization Transaction
On April 30, 2020, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC seeking authorization for a post-emergence transaction to recover $7.5 billion of 2017 wildfire
claims costs through securitization that is designed to be rate neutral to customers, with the proceeds used to pay or reimburse the Utility for the payment of
wildfire claims costs associated with 2017 Northern California wildfires. Among other uses, as a result of the proposed transaction, the Utility would retire $6.0
billion of Utility debt. Specifically, the application requested administration of the stress test methodology approved in the CHT OIR and a determination that $7.5
billion in 2017 catastrophic wildfire costs and expenses are stress test costs and eligible for securitization. In this context, a securitization refers to a financing
transaction where a special purpose financing vehicle issues new debt that is secured by the proceeds of a new recovery charge to Utility customers. The
application also proposed a customer credit designed to equal the bond charges over the life of the bonds, which would insulate customers from the charge on
customer bills associated with the bonds.
On April 23, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision finding that $7.5 billion of the Utility’s 2017 catastrophic wildfire costs and expenses are stress test costs that may
be financed through the issuance of recovery bonds pursuant to Public Utilities Code sections 850 et seq. and approving a structure for the transaction. As
requested, the decision authorizes the Utility to establish a customer credit trust funded by PG&E Corporation’s shareholders, that will provide a monthly credit to
customers that is anticipated to equal the securitized charges such that the securitization is designed to be rate neutral to customers. Subject to retention of the
CPUC’s existing jurisdiction, the decision adopts a transaction structure comprised of four elements (1) an initial shareholder contribution of $2.0 billion, with $1.0
billion to be contributed in 2022 and $1.0 billion to be contributed in 2024; (2) up to $7.59 billion of additional contributions funded by certain shareholder tax
benefits; (3) a single CPUC review of the balance of the customer credit trust in 2040, with a single contingent supplemental shareholder contribution, if needed,
up to $775 million in 2040; and (4) sharing with customers 25% of any surplus of shareholder assets in the customer credit trust at the end of the life of the trust.
Three parties filed applications for rehearing of the decision on May 3, 2021, and the Utility filed a response to those applications on May 14, 2021. On August 12,
2021, the CPUC issued a decision denying the applications for rehearing.
Separately, on January 6, 2021, the Utility filed an additional application requesting that the CPUC issue a financing order authorizing the issuance of one or more
series of recovery bonds in connection with the post-emergence transaction to finance, using securitization, the $7.5 billion of claims associated with the 2017
Northern California wildfires. On May 11, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision granting the Utility’s January 2021 application for a financing order authorizing the
issuance of $7.5 billion of recovery bonds in connection with the rate neutral securitization proceeding. Two parties filed applications for rehearing of the financing
order, and the Utility filed a response to those applications for rehearing on June 4, 2021. On August 12, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision denying the
applications for rehearing.
On September 10, 2021, TURN filed a petition for writ of review of the decision and financing order in state court. Responses to the petition were filed on October
15, 2021. TURN filed a reply in support of the petition on November 9, 2021.
Application for AB 1054 Securitization Transaction
AB 1054 provides that the first $5.0 billion expended in the aggregate by California’s three large electric IOUs on fire risk mitigation capital expenditures included
in their respective approved WMPs will be excluded from their respective equity rate bases. The $5.0 billion of capital expenditures has been allocated among the
large electric IOUs in accordance with their Wildfire Fund allocation metrics. The Utility’s allocation is $3.21 billion. (See Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8.) AB 1054 contemplates that such capital expenditures may be financed using a structure that securitizes a dedicated customer
charge.
On February 24, 2021 the Utility filed an application with the CPUC seeking authorization for a transaction to finance, using securitization, up to $1.19 billion of
fire risk mitigation capital expenditures that were or will be incurred by the Utility in 2020 and 2021, with the final amount to be financed based on recorded 2020
and 2021 Community Wildfire Safety Program capital expenditures incurred by the Utility prior to the securitization transaction.
The application requested that the CPUC issue a financing order authorizing one or more series of recovery bonds, determine that the issuance of the bonds and
collection through fixed recovery charges is just and reasonable, consistent with the public interest and would reduce rates on a present value basis compared to
traditional utility financing mechanisms, and authorize the Utility to collect a non-bypassable charge sufficient to pay debt service on the recovery bonds.  The
application also requested to exclude the securitized debt from the Utility’s ratemaking capital structure and to adjust its 2020 GRC revenue requirement following
the issuance of the recovery bonds. 
89

On June 24, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision granting the Utility’s application and authorizing the Utility to issue up to approximately $1.2 billion of recovery
bonds. On July 6, 2021, the financing order became final and non-appealable. On November 12, 2021, PG&E Recovery Funding LLC issued approximately $860
million of senior secured recovery bonds. The recovery bonds were issued in three tranches: (1) approximately $266 million with an interest rate of 1.46% and is
due July 15, 2033, (2) approximately $160 million with an interest rate of 2.28% and is due January 15, 2038, and (3) approximately $434 million with an interest
rate of 2.82% and is due July 15, 2048.    
2020-2022 Wildfire Mitigation Plan
As previously disclosed, on February 7, 2020, the Utility submitted its 2020 WMP and the related utility survey. The Utility’s 2020 WMP describes the Utility’s
wildfire safety programs, which are focused on three key areas: reducing the potential for fires to be started by electrical equipment, reducing the potential for fires
to spread, and minimizing the frequency, scope and duration of PSPS events, as well as providing historical data. The Utility’s 2020 WMP covers a three-year
period from 2020 to 2022 but is updated annually.
The Utility’s 2021 WMP was submitted on February 5, 2021. The 2021 WMP updated the 2020 WMP and addressed the Utility’s wildfire safety programs focused
on reducing the potential for catastrophic wildfires related to electrical equipment, reducing the potential for fires to spread and reducing the impact of PSPS
events.
On September 22, 2021, OEIS issued a final action statement approving the Utility’s 2021 WMP and on October 21, 2021, the CPUC ratified OEIS’s approval.
In 2021, the Utility notified the CPUC that it had missed inspections and other targets subject to the 2020 WMP. The Utility is undertaking a review of its electric
asset inspections. For more information, see “Electric Asset Inspections” below.
On December 16, 2021, the CPUC closed the WMP proceeding, noting that OEIS is now responsible for review and approval of the WMP.
OII to Examine the Late 2019 Public Safety Power Shutoff Events
On November 13, 2019, the CPUC issued an OII to determine “whether California’s IOUs prioritized safety and complied with the CPUC’s regulations and
requirements with respect to their PSPS events in late 2019.”
On June 7, 2021, the CPUC issued a final decision in the case that found each of the large electric IOUs to be noncompliant with CPUC-required guidelines in
certain of their 2019 PSPS events. The decision included a financial remedy and a number of corrective actions. The financial remedy consists of forgoing
collection of revenues from customers associated with electricity not sold during future PSPS events until it can be demonstrated that the utilities have made
improvements in assessing public harm when determining whether to initiate a PSPS event. The corrective actions involve the Utility’s processes, reporting, and
other aspects of its PSPS program. On July 7, 2021, the Acton Town Council filed an application to rehear the decision. Responses to the application for rehearing
were filed on July 22, 2021.
Integrated Resource Planning Procurement
On November 13, 2019, the CPUC issued a decision that takes a number of steps to address the potential for system RA shortages beginning in 2021. The decision
requires incremental procurement of system-level qualifying RA capacity of 3,300 MWs by all LSEs operating within the CAISO’s balancing area for the period
2021-2023, of which the Utility is responsible for 716.9 MWs for its bundled customer portion. The decision requires that at least 50% of LSE resource
responsibilities come online by August 1, 2021, at least 75% by August 1, 2022, and the remaining by August 1, 2023. Additionally, the decision directs the IOUs
to act as the backstop procurement agent for CCAs and energy service providers that choose not to voluntarily self-procure or that fail to meet their procurement
responsibilities after electing to self-provide their assigned MWs of system RA capacity under the decision.
The Utility procured its required RA capacity for the August 1, 2021 milestone from third parties through CPUC-approved contracts for lithium-ion battery energy
storage resources with terms ranging from 10-15 years. On December 22, 2020, the Utility filed an advice letter seeking CPUC approval of an additional group of
similar contracts that would satisfy the balance of the Utility’s procurement obligations for the August 1, 2022 and August 1, 2023 milestones. On April 15, 2021,
the CPUC approved the contracts.
90

On June 24, 2021, the CPUC adopted a mid-term reliability decision to address incremental electric system reliability needs between 2024 and 2026 due to, in part,
the pending retirements of Diablo Canyon and once-through-cooling natural gas plants in Southern California by requiring at least 11,500 MW of additional net
qualifying capacity to be procured by LSEs subject to the CPUC’s integrated resource planning authority. The decision sets procurement requirements of 2,000
MW by 2023, an additional 6,000 MW by 2024, an additional 1,500 MW by 2025, and an additional 2,000 MW by 2026. The decision sets the Utility’s share of
the procurement at 2,302 MW of incremental net qualifying capacity.
On January 21, 2022, the Utility filed an advice letter with the CPUC seeking approval of a group of nine long-term RA agreements to meet a portion of its
procurement requirements under the CPUC’s mid-term reliability decision. The agreements are each for a term of 15 years and collectively supply 1,598.7 MW of
lithium-ion energy storage capacity with some projects expected to be operational in 2023 and others in 2024.
OIR to Further Develop a Risk-Based Decision-Making Framework for Electric and Gas Utilities
On July 20, 2020, the CPUC initiated a rulemaking proceeding to consider ways to strengthen the risk-based decision-making framework that energy utilities use
to assess, manage, mitigate and minimize safety risks.
On November 4, 2021, the CPUC issued a final decision adopting 32 safety and operational metrics, which can serve as triggering events in the EOEP and
requiring the Utility to report on performance against these metrics on a semi-annual basis. The Utility is required to submit the first report by March 31, 2022. The
Utility will propose one- and five-year targets for each metric in such report.
OIR to Revisit Net Energy Metering Tariffs
On August 17, 2020, the CPUC initiated a rulemaking proceeding to develop a successor to the existing NEM tariffs. The successor tariff is being developed
pursuant to the requirements of AB 327. Under AB 327, the successor to the existing NEM tariffs should provide customer-generators with credit or compensation
for electricity generated by their renewable facilities based on the value of that generation to all customers and allow customer-sited renewable generation to grow
sustainably among different types of customers.
On December 13, 2021, the CPUC issued a PD that would reduce the compensation for new non-CARE NEM customers by about 80 percent for standalone solar
and about 60 percent for solar-paired storage. Commercial customer NEM compensation would be reduced by about 35 percent. Additionally, the PD would
reduce the legacy period for existing non-CARE NEM customers from 20 years to 15 years after which such customers would transition to the successor tariff.
Comments and reply comments on the PD were filed in January 2022. The PD has not yet been scheduled to be voted on by the CPUC.
OIR to Address Energy Utility Customer Debt Accumulated during the COVID-19 Pandemic
On February 11, 2021, the CPUC initiated a rulemaking proceeding to consider arrearage relief for utility customers with outstanding utility bills when the
moratorium on service disconnections ended. The OIR will evaluate a more global program beyond the currently approved arrearage management program focused
on low-income residential customers that is funded by the Utility’s customers. The OIR may consider various funding approaches for this expanded debt
forgiveness proposal, which could include shareholder funding.
On June 30, 2021, the CPUC issued a final decision directing the Utility and other IOUs to automatically enroll residential customers and small business customers
more than 60 days in arrears in payment plans. The decision also extended the moratorium on service disconnections for residential and small business, as well as
medium and large commercial and industrial customers, through September 30, 2021.
On November 19, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision authorizing IOUs to allocate payments made on past-due electric utility bills proportionally between utilities
and CCAs through September 2024.
Self-Reports to the CPUC
The Utility self-reports certain errors and omissions to the CPUC. The Utility could face penalties, enforcement actions, or other adverse legal or regulatory
consequences for these errors or omissions, including under the EOEP. The Utility is unable to predict the likelihood and the amount of potential fines or penalties,
if any, related to these matters.
91

Electric Asset Inspections
The Utility has notified the CPUC of various errors relating to inspections and maintenance of its electric assets or implementation of WMP initiatives. These
notices include missed inspections or the inability to locate records evidencing performance of inspections required under CPUC GOs 95 and 165 (including failure
to perform inspections in compliance with GO 165 of approximately 55,000 poles in 2020) and errors regarding reporting meeting targets set by the Utility’s 2020
WMP. In these notices, the Utility describes the failures and corrective actions the Utility is taking to remediate these issues and to prevent recurrence in the future.
Among other corrective measures, the Utility has developed short-term and longer-term systemic corrective actions to address these errors, including performing
enhanced inspections for poles with outdated or incomplete GO 165 inspection records and strengthening the Utility’s asset registry, as well as corrective actions
regarding reporting on the progress toward WMP targets.
The Utility continues to evaluate whether there are additional failures to comply with GOs 95 and 165 and the 2020 WMP, beyond those identified in submitted
self-reports. The Utility intends to update the CPUC upon completion of its reviews.
On November 21, 2021, the SED issued two citations to the Utility in relation to the Utility’s self-reports. One citation was for incomplete inspections performed
on distribution poles as required under GO 165, and the other citation was for the Utility’s failure to adequately inspect a transmission line. The citations resulted in
penalties of $2.5 million and $5 million, respectively, which the Utility paid in full on December 22, 2021.
Subsurface Electric Ducts
On October 21, 2021, the Utility notified the CPUC of inconsistent application of the requirements to locate and mark empty subsurface electric ducts in
accordance with Government Code section 4216(k), 4216(s) and 4216.3(a)(1)(A).
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY INITIATIVES
Assembly Bill 242
Assembly Bill 242, which was signed into law on September 23, 2021, expanded the definition of a “covered wildfire” from AB 1054 to also include those
wildfires determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused by an electrical corporation, and those wildfires asserted to have been caused by an electrical
corporation that result in a court-approved dismissal resulting from the settlement of third-party damage claims.
Assembly Bill 135
On July 16, 2021, the California governor approved AB 135, which established the CAPP. CAPP enables the IOUs to apply for a statewide total of approximately
$695 million to offset customer arrearages incurred during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Utility received approximately $300 million in January 2022 to reduce
the amounts owed by customer accounts in arrears. The amount of funding was determined by the California Department of Community Services and
Development, which is the agency responsible for administering the CAPP.
Vaccine Mandates
On September 9, 2021, President Biden issued an EO that would require certain COVID-19 precautions for government contractors and their subcontractors,
including mandatory employee vaccination. The requirements under the EO is currently stayed pending the outcome of ongoing litigation. The ultimate
implementation of the EO could result in workplace disruptions, employee attrition, and difficulty securing future labor needs.
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
The Utility’s operations are subject to extensive federal, state, and local laws and permits relating to the protection of the environment and the safety and health of
the Utility’s personnel and the public.  These laws and requirements relate to a broad range of the Utility’s activities, including the remediation of hazardous
wastes; the reporting and reduction of carbon dioxide and other GHG emissions; the discharge of pollutants into the air, water, and soil; the reporting of safety and
reliability measures for natural gas storage facilities; and the transportation, handling, storage, and disposal of spent nuclear fuel.  See Item 1A. Risk Factors,
“Environmental Regulation” in Item 1. and “Environmental Remediation Contingencies” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item
8.
92

RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
PG&E Corporation, mainly through its ownership of the Utility, and the Utility are exposed to risks associated with adverse changes in commodity prices, interest
rates, and counterparty credit. The Utility actively manages market risk through risk management programs designed to support business objectives, discourage
unauthorized risk-taking, reduce commodity cost volatility, and manage cash flows.  The Utility uses derivative instruments only for non-trading purposes (i.e.,
risk mitigation) and not for speculative purposes.
Commodity Price Risk
The Utility is exposed to commodity price risk as a result of its electricity and natural gas procurement activities, including the procurement of natural gas and
nuclear fuel necessary for electricity generation and natural gas procurement for core customers. The Utility’s risk management activities include the use of
physical and financial instruments such as forward contracts, futures, swaps, options, and other instruments and agreements. As long as the Utility can conclude
that it is probable that its reasonably incurred wholesale electricity procurement costs and natural gas costs are recoverable, fluctuations in electricity and natural
gas prices do not affect earnings. Such fluctuations, however, may impact cash flows. The Utility’s natural gas transportation and storage costs for core customers
are also fully recoverable through a ratemaking mechanism.
The Utility’s current authorized revenue requirement for natural gas transportation and storage service to non-core customers is not balancing account protected.
The Utility recovers these costs in its GRC through fixed reservation charges and volumetric charges from long-term contracts, resulting in price and volumetric
risk. The Utility uses value-at-risk to measure its shareholders’ exposure to these risks. The Utility’s value-at-risk was approximately $5 million and $14 million at
December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. for further discussion of price risk
management activities.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk sensitivity analysis is used to measure interest rate risk by computing estimated changes in cash flows as a result of assumed changes in market
interest rates. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, if interest rates changed by one percent for all PG&E Corporation and Utility variable rate long-term debt, short-
term debt, and cash investments, the pre-tax impact on net income over the next 12 months would be $76 million and $89 million, respectively, based on net
variable rate debt and other interest rate-sensitive instruments outstanding. See Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. for further
discussion of interest rates.
Energy Procurement Credit Risk
The Utility conducts business with counterparties mainly in the energy industry to purchase electricity or gas and related services, including the CAISO market,
other California IOUs, municipal utilities, energy trading companies, pipelines, financial institutions, electricity generation companies, and oil and natural gas
production companies located in the United States and Canada. If a counterparty fails to perform on its contractual obligation to deliver electricity or gas and
related services, then the Utility may find it necessary to procure electricity or gas at current market prices or seek alternate services, which may be higher than the
contract prices.
The Utility manages credit risk associated with its counterparties by assigning credit limits based on evaluations of their financial conditions, net worth, credit
ratings, and other credit criteria as deemed appropriate. Credit limits and credit quality are monitored periodically. The Utility executes many energy contracts
under master commodity enabling agreements that may require security. Security may be in the form of cash or letters of credit. The Utility may accept other forms
of performance assurance in the form of corporate guarantees of acceptable credit quality or other eligible securities (as deemed appropriate by the Utility).
Security or performance assurance may be required from the Utility or counterparties when current net receivables/payables and exposure exceed contractually
specified limits.
93

The following table summarizes the Utility’s energy procurement credit risk exposure to its counterparties:
Exposure
(in millions)
Number of 
Wholesale 
Customers or 
Counterparties 
>10%
Net Credit 
Exposure to 
Wholesale 
Customers or 
Counterparties 
>10% 
(in millions)
December 31, 2021
$
570 
1 
$
63 
December 31, 2020
$
250 
2 
$
57 
Exposure is the positive exposure maximum that equals mark-to-market value on physically and financially settled contracts, plus net receivables (payables) where netting is contractually
allowed minus collateral posted by counterparties and held by the Utility plus collateral posted by the Utility and held by the counterparties. For purposes of this table, parental guarantees are
not included as part of the calculation. Exposure amounts reported above do not include adjustments for time value or liquidity.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP involves the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the recorded
amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The
accounting policies described below are considered to be critical accounting estimates due, in part, to their complexity and because their application is relevant and
material to the financial position and results of operations of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, and because these policies require the use of material judgments
and estimates. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates and assumptions. These accounting estimates and their key characteristics are outlined
below.
Contributions to the Wildfire Fund
The Wildfire Fund is expected to be capitalized with (i) $10.5 billion of proceeds of bonds supported by a 15-year extension of the Department of Water Resources
charge to customers, (ii) $7.5 billion in initial contributions from California’s three large electric IOUs, and (iii) $300 million in annual contributions paid by
California’s three large electric IOUs for a 10-year period. The contributions from the IOUs will be effectively borne by their respective shareholders, as they will
not be permitted to recover these costs through rates. The costs of the initial and annual contributions are allocated among the IOUs pursuant to a “Wildfire Fund
allocation metric” set forth in AB 1054 based on land area in the applicable IOU’s service territory classified as HFTDs and adjusted to account for risk mitigation
efforts. The Utility’s Wildfire Fund allocation metric is 64.2% (representing an initial contribution of approximately $4.8 billion and annual contributions of
approximately $193 million).
On the Emergence Date, PG&E Corporation and the Utility contributed, in accordance with AB 1054, an initial contribution of approximately $4.8 billion and first
annual contribution of approximately $193 million to the Wildfire Fund to secure participation of the Utility therein. The other large electric IOUs made their
initial contributions to the Wildfire Fund in September 2019. On December 30, 2020 and 2021, the Utility made its second and third annual contributions of
$193 million each to the Wildfire Fund. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have seven remaining annual contributions of $193 million
(based on the current Wildfire Fund allocation metric). PG&E Corporation and the Utility account for the contributions to the Wildfire Fund similarly to prepaid
insurance with expense being allocated to periods ratably based on an estimated period of coverage.
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded $193 million in Other current liabilities, $1.1 billion in Other non-current liabilities,
$461 million in current assets - Wildfire fund asset, and $5.3 billion in non-current assets - Wildfire fund asset in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. During the
years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Utility recorded amortization and accretion expense of $517 million and $413 million, respectively. The
amortization of the asset, accretion of the liability, and acceleration of the amortization of the asset is reflected in Wildfire Fund expense in the Consolidated
Statements of Income. Expected contributions recorded in Wildfire Fund asset on the Consolidated Balance Sheets are discounted to the present value using the 10-
year U.S. treasury rate at the date PG&E Corporation and the Utility satisfied all the eligibility requirements to participate in the Wildfire Fund. A useful life of 15
years is being used to amortize the Wildfire Fund asset.
 (1) 
(1) 
94

AB 1054 did not specify a period of coverage; therefore, this accounting treatment is subject to significant accounting judgments and estimates. In estimating the
period of coverage, PG&E Corporation and the Utility use a Monte Carlo simulation that began with 12 years of historical, publicly available fire-loss data from
wildfires caused by electrical equipment, and subsequently plan to add an additional year of data each following year. The period of historic fire-loss data and the
effectiveness of mitigation efforts by the California electric utility companies are significant assumptions used to estimate the useful life. These assumptions along
with the other assumptions below create a high degree of uncertainty related to the estimated useful life of the Wildfire Fund. The simulation creates annual
distributions of potential losses due to fires that could be attributed to the participating electric utilities. Starting with a five-year period of historical data, with
average annual statewide claims or settlements of approximately $6.5 billion, compared to approximately $2.9 billion for the 12-year historical data, would have
decreased the amortization period to six years. As of December 31, 2021, a 10% change to the assumption around current and future mitigation effort effectiveness
would increase the amortization period by three years assuming greater effectiveness and would decrease the amortization period by two years assuming less
effectiveness.
Other assumptions used to estimate the useful life include the estimated cost of wildfires caused by other electric utilities, the amount at which wildfire claims
would be settled, the likely adjudication of the CPUC in cases of electric utility-caused wildfires and determination of any amounts required to be reimbursed to the
Wildfire Fund, the impacts of climate change, the level of future insurance coverage held by the electric utilities, the FERC-allocable portion of loss recovery, and
the future transmission and distribution equity rate base growth of other electric utilities. Significant changes in any of these estimates could materially impact the
amortization period.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility evaluate all assumptions quarterly and upon claims being made from the Wildfire Fund for catastrophic wildfires, and the
expected life of the Wildfire Fund will be adjusted as required. The Wildfire Fund is available to other participating utilities in California and the amount of claims
that a participating utility incurs is not limited to their individual contribution amounts. PG&E Corporation and the Utility assess the Wildfire Fund asset for
acceleration of the amortization of the asset in the event that a participating utility’s electrical equipment is found to be the substantial cause of a catastrophic
wildfire. Timing of any such acceleration of the amortization of the asset could lag as the emergence of sufficient cause and claims information can take many
quarters and could be limited to public disclosure of the participating electric utility, if ignition were to occur outside the Utility’s service territory. There were fires
in the Utility’s and other participating utilities’ services territories since July 12, 2019, including fires for which the cause is currently unknown, which may in the
future be determined to be covered by the Wildfire Fund. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded $150 million in Other noncurrent
assets for Wildfire Fund receivables related to the 2021 Dixie fire and $43 million of accelerated amortization, reflected in Wildfire Fund expense.
For more information, see “Initial and Annual Contributions to the Wildfire Fund Established Pursuant to AB 1054” in Note 3 and “Wildfire Fund under AB 1054”
in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Loss Contingencies
As discussed below, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recorded material accruals for various wildfire-related, enforcement and legal matters, and
environmental remediation liabilities. PG&E Corporation and the Utility have also recorded insurance receivables for third-party claims.
Wildfire-Related Liabilities
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are subject to potential liabilities related to wildfires.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a wildfire-related liability when
they determine that a loss is probable and they can reasonably estimate the loss or a range of losses. The provision is based on the lower end of the range, unless an
amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount.
95

Potential liabilities related to wildfires depend on various factors, including negotiations and settlements or the cause of each fire, contributing causes of the fires
(including alternative potential origins, weather and climate related issues), the number, size and type of structures damaged or destroyed, the contents of such
structures and other personal property damage, the number and types of trees damaged or destroyed, attorneys’ fees for claimants, the nature and extent of any
personal injuries, including the loss of lives, the extent to which future claims arise, the amount of fire suppression and clean-up costs, other damages the Utility
may be responsible for if found negligent, and the amount of any penalties or fines that may be imposed by governmental entities. There are a number of unknown
facts and legal considerations that may impact the amount of any potential liability, including the total scope and nature of claims that may be asserted against
PG&E Corporation or the Utility. For example, the Utility’s wildfire-related accruals have changed in the past as new facts and information became available to the
Utility, including the availability of new evidence and additional information about the scope and nature of damages.
The process for estimating wildfire-related liabilities requires management to exercise significant judgment based on a number of assumptions and subjective
factors, including the factors identified above and estimates based on currently available information and prior experience with wildfires.  See Note 14 of the Notes
to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Enforcement and Litigation Matters
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are subject to various laws and regulations and, in the normal course of business, are named as parties in a number of claims and
lawsuits. In addition, penalties may be incurred for failure to comply with federal, state, or local laws and regulations. PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a
provision for a loss contingency when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. PG&E Corporation
and the Utility evaluate the range of reasonably estimated losses and record a provision based on the lower end of the range, unless an amount within the range is a
better estimate than any other amount. The assessment of whether a loss is probable or reasonably possible, and whether the loss or a range of loss is estimable,
often involves a series of complex judgments about future events. Loss contingencies are reviewed quarterly and estimates are adjusted to reflect the impact of all
known information, such as negotiations, discovery, settlements and payments, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and other information and events pertaining to a
particular matter. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s provision for loss and expense excludes anticipated legal costs, which are expensed as incurred. Actual
results may differ materially from these estimates and assumptions. See Note 14 and “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 15 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Loss Recoveries
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recovery mechanisms available for wildfire liabilities including from insurance, through rates, and from the Wildfire Fund.
The Utility has liability insurance from various insurers, which provides coverage for third-party claims. PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a receivable for
a recovery when it is deemed probable that recovery of a recorded loss will occur and they can reasonably estimate the amount or its range.  The assessment of
whether recovery is probable or reasonably possible, and whether the recovery or a range of recoveries is estimable, often involves a series of complex judgments
about future events.  Loss recoveries are reviewed quarterly and estimates are adjusted to reflect the impact of all known information, including contractual liability
insurance policy coverage, advice of legal counsel, past experience with similar events, conversations with the Wildfire Fund administrators, the CPUC and FERC,
and other information and events pertaining to a particular matter. See “Loss Recoveries” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item
8.
Environmental Remediation Liabilities
The Utility is subject to loss contingencies pursuant to federal and California environmental laws and regulations that in the future may require the Utility to pay
for environmental remediation at sites where it has been, or may be, a potentially responsible party. Such contingencies may exist for the remediation of hazardous
substances at various potential sites, including former MGP sites, power plant sites, gas compressor stations, and sites used by the Utility for the storage, recycling,
or disposal of potentially hazardous materials, even if the Utility did not deposit those substances on the site.
96

The Utility generally commences the environmental remediation assessment process upon notification from federal or state agencies, or other parties, of a potential
site requiring remedial action. (In some instances, the Utility may initiate action to determine its remediation liability for sites that it no longer owns in cooperation
with regulatory agencies. For example, the Utility has a program related to certain former MGP sites.) Based on such notification, the Utility completes an
assessment of the potential site and evaluates whether it is probable that a remediation liability has been incurred. The Utility records an environmental remediation
liability when site assessments indicate remediation is probable and it can reasonably estimate the loss or a range of possible losses. Given the complexities of the
legal and regulatory environment and the inherent uncertainties involved in the early stages of a remediation project, the process for estimating remediation
liabilities is subjective and requires significant judgment. Key factors evaluated in developing cost estimates include the extent and types of hazardous substances
at a potential site, the range of technologies that can be used for remediation, the determination of the Utility’s liability in proportion to other responsible parties,
and the extent to which such costs are recoverable from third parties.
When possible, the Utility estimates costs using site-specific information, but also considers historical experience for costs incurred at similar sites depending on
the level of information available. Estimated costs are composed of the direct costs of the remediation effort and the costs of compensation for employees who are
expected to devote a significant amount of time directly to the remediation effort. These estimated costs include remedial site investigations, remediation actions,
operations and maintenance activities, post remediation monitoring, and the costs of technologies that are expected to be approved to remediate the site.
Remediation efforts for a particular site generally extend over a period of several years. During this period, the laws governing the remediation process may
change, as well as site conditions, thereby possibly affecting the cost of the remediation effort.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Utility’s accruals for undiscounted gross environmental liabilities were $1.3 billion each. The Utility’s undiscounted future
costs could increase to as much as $2.2 billion if the extent of contamination or necessary remediation is greater than anticipated or if the other potentially
responsible parties are not financially able to contribute to these costs, and could increase further if the Utility chooses to remediate beyond regulatory
requirements. Although the Utility has provided for known environmental obligations that are probable and reasonably estimable, estimated costs may vary
significantly from actual costs, and the amount of additional future costs may be material to results of operations in the period in which they are recognized.
Regulatory Accounting
As a regulated entity, the Utility records regulatory assets and liabilities for amounts that are deemed probable of recovery from, or refund to, customers. Despite
the ongoing losses related to wildfires (see Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.), there is no actual or anticipated change in the
cost of service regulation of the Utility’s operations. Therefore, the Utility continues to apply the accounting ASC 980, Regulated Operations. These amounts
would otherwise be recorded to expense or income under GAAP. Refer to “Regulation and Regulated Operations” in Note 3 as well as Note 4 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility reported regulatory assets (including current regulatory
balancing accounts receivable) of $12.7 billion and regulatory liabilities (including current regulatory balancing accounts payable) of $13.8 billion.
Determining probability requires significant judgment by management and includes, but is not limited to, consideration of testimony presented in regulatory
hearings, proposed regulatory decisions, final regulatory orders, and the strength or status of applications for rehearing or state court appeals. For some of the
Utility’s regulatory assets, including utility retained generation, the Utility has determined that the costs are recoverable based on specific approval from the
CPUC. The Utility also records a regulatory asset when a mechanism is in place to recover current expenditures and historical experience indicates that recovery of
incurred costs is probable, such as the regulatory assets for pension benefits; deferred income tax; price risk management; and unamortized loss, net of gain, on
reacquired debt. If the Utility determined that it is no longer probable that regulatory assets would be recovered or reflected in future rates, or if the Utility ceased
to be subject to rate regulation, the regulatory assets would be charged against income in the period in which that determination was made. If regulatory accounting
did not apply, the Utility’s future financial results could become more volatile as compared to historical financial results due to the differences in the timing of
expense or revenue recognition.
97

A portion of the Utility's regulatory asset balances relate to items which could not be anticipated by the Utility during CPUC GRC rate requests resulting from
catastrophic events, changes in regulation, or extraordinary changes in operating practices. The Utility may seek authority to track incremental costs in a
memorandum account and the CPUC may authorize recovery of costs tracked in memorandum accounts if the costs are deemed incremental and prudently
incurred. These accounts, which include the CEMA, WEMA, FHPMA, FRMMA, WMPMA, VMBA, WMBA, and RTBA among others, allow the Utility to track
the costs associated with work related to disaster and wildfire response, and other wildfire prevention-related costs. In addition, the CPPMA and RUBA accounts
track costs incurred to implement the CPUC’s Emergency Authorization and Order Directing Utilities to Implement Emergency Customer Protections to Support
California Customers During the COVID-19 Pandemic. While the Utility generally believes such costs are recoverable, rate recovery requires CPUC authorization
in separate proceedings or through a GRC. For more information, see “Regulatory Matters - Application for Recovery of Costs Recorded in the Wildfire Expense
Memorandum Account” and “Regulatory Matters - Catastrophic Event Memorandum Accounts and Applications” above.
Additionally, SB 901 provides a mechanism for the CPUC to potentially allow recovery in future rates, through a securitization mechanism, of wildfire-related
costs found to be just and reasonable by the CPUC and, only for the 2017 Northern California wildfires, any amounts in excess of the CHT. The Utility must
evaluate the likelihood of recovery in future rates each period. If the criteria are met at a later date, the Utility would recognize a regulatory asset and a related gain
in the consolidated income statement in the period in which it is determined that the likelihood of recovery is probable.
In addition, regulatory accounting standards require recognition of a loss if it becomes probable that capital expenditures will be disallowed for ratemaking
purposes and if a reasonable estimate of the amount of the disallowance can be made. Such assessments require significant judgment by management regarding
probability of recovery, as described above, and the ultimate cost of construction of capital assets. The Utility records a loss to the extent capital costs are expected
to exceed the amount to be recovered.  The Utility’s capital forecasts involve a series of complex judgments regarding detailed project plans, estimates included in
third-party contracts, historical cost experience for similar projects, permitting requirements, environmental compliance standards, and a variety of other factors. 
Asset Retirement Obligations
PG&E Corporation and the Utility account for an ARO at fair value in the period during which the legal obligation is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value
and its settlement date can be made. At the time of recording an ARO, the associated asset retirement costs are capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the
related long-lived asset. The Utility recognizes a regulatory asset or liability for the timing differences between the recognition of expenses and costs recovered
through the ratemaking process. See Notes 3 and 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
To estimate its liability, the Utility uses a discounted cash flow model based upon significant estimates and assumptions about future decommissioning costs,
inflation rates, and the estimated date of decommissioning. The estimated future cash flows are discounted using a credit-adjusted risk-free rate that reflects the risk
associated with the decommissioning obligation.
At December 31, 2021, the Utility’s recorded ARO for the estimated cost of retiring these long-lived assets was approximately $5.3 billion. Changes in these
estimates and assumptions could materially affect the amount of the recorded ARO for these assets.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
PG&E Corporation and the Utility sponsor a non-contributory defined benefit pension plan for eligible employees as well as contributory postretirement health
care and medical plans for eligible retirees and their eligible dependents, and non-contributory postretirement life insurance plans for eligible employees and
retirees. Adjustments to the pension and other benefit obligation are based on the differences between actuarial assumptions and actual plan results. These amounts
are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and amortized into income on a gradual basis. The differences between pension benefit expense
recognized in accordance with GAAP and amounts recognized for ratemaking purposes are recorded as regulatory assets or liabilities as amounts are probable of
recovery through rates. To the extent the other benefits are in an overfunded position, the Utility records a regulatory liability. See Note 4 of the Notes to the
Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
98

The pension and other postretirement benefit obligations are calculated using actuarial models as of the December 31 measurement date. The significant actuarial
assumptions used in determining pension and other benefit obligations include the discount rate, the average rate of future compensation increases, the health care
cost trend rate and the expected return on plan assets. PG&E Corporation and the Utility review these assumptions on an annual basis and adjust them as necessary.
While PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe that the assumptions used are appropriate, significant differences in actual experience, plan changes or
amendments, or significant changes in assumptions may materially affect the recorded pension and other postretirement benefit obligations and future plan
expenses. See Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
In establishing health care cost assumptions, PG&E Corporation and the Utility consider recent cost trends and projections from industry experts. This evaluation
suggests that current rates of inflation are expected to continue in the near term. In recognition of continued high inflation in health care costs and given the design
of PG&E Corporation’s plans, the assumed health care cost trend rate for 2022 was 6.0%, gradually decreasing to the ultimate trend rate of approximately 4.5% in
2028 and beyond.
Expected rates of return on plan assets were developed by estimating future stock and bond returns and then applying these returns to the target asset allocations of
the employee benefit plan trusts, resulting in a weighted average rate of return on plan assets. Returns on fixed-income debt investments were projected based on
real maturity and credit spreads added to a long-term inflation rate. Returns on equity investments were projected based on estimates of dividend yield and real
earnings growth added to a long-term inflation rate. For the Utility’s defined benefit pension plan, the assumed return of 5.5% compares to a ten-year actual return
of 9.6%.
The rate used to discount pension benefits and other benefits was based on a yield curve developed from market data of approximately 817 Aa-grade non-callable
bonds at December 31, 2021. This yield curve has discount rates that vary based on the duration of the obligations. The estimated future cash flows for the pension
and other postretirement benefit obligations were matched to the corresponding rates on the yield curve to derive a weighted average discount rate.
The following reflects the sensitivity of pension costs and projected benefit obligation to changes in certain actuarial assumptions:
(in millions)
Increase 
(Decrease) in 
Assumption
Increase in 2021 Pension
Costs
Increase in Projected
Benefit Obligation at
December 31, 2021
Discount rate
(0.50) % $
111 
$
1,872 
Rate of return on plan assets
(0.50) %
103 
— 
Rate of increase in compensation
0.50 %
51 
403 
The following reflects the sensitivity of other postretirement benefit costs and accumulated benefit obligation to changes in certain actuarial assumptions:
(in millions)
Increase 
(Decrease) in 
Assumption
Increase in 2021
Other Postretirement
Benefit Costs
Increase in Accumulated
Benefit Obligation at
December 31, 2021
Health care cost trend rate
0.50 % $
9 
$
58 
Discount rate
(0.50) %
12 
138 
Rate of return on plan assets
(0.50) %
15 
— 
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
Information responding to Item 7A is set forth under the heading “Risk Management Activities,” in MD&A in Item 7 and in Note 10: Derivatives and Note 11:
Fair Value Measurements of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
99

ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
PG&E CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
(in millions, except per share amounts) 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Operating Revenues
 
 
 
Electric
$
15,131 
$
13,858 
$
12,740 
Natural gas
5,511 
4,611 
4,389 
Total operating revenues
20,642 
18,469 
17,129 
Operating Expenses
 
 
 
Cost of electricity
3,232 
3,116 
3,095 
Cost of natural gas
1,149 
782 
734 
Operating and maintenance
10,200 
8,684 
8,725 
Wildfire-related claims, net of recoveries
258 
251 
11,435 
Wildfire fund expense
517 
413 
— 
Depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning
3,403 
3,468 
3,234 
Total operating expenses
18,759 
16,714 
27,223 
Operating Income (Loss)
1,883 
1,755 
(10,094)
Interest income
20 
39 
82 
Interest expense
(1,601)
(1,260)
(934)
Other income, net
457 
483 
250 
Reorganization items, net
(11)
(1,959)
(346)
Income (Loss) Before Income Taxes
748 
(942)
(11,042)
Income tax provision (benefit)
836 
362 
(3,400)
Net Loss
(88)
(1,304)
(7,642)
Preferred stock dividend requirement of subsidiary
14 
14 
14 
Loss Attributable to Common Shareholders
$
(102)
$
(1,318)
$
(7,656)
Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding, Basic
1,985 
1,257 
528 
Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding, Diluted
1,985 
1,257 
528 
Net Loss Per Common Share, Basic
$
(0.05)
$
(1.05)
$
(14.50)
Net Loss Per Common Share, Diluted
$
(0.05)
$
(1.05)
$
(14.50)
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
100

PG&E CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
(in millions) 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Net Loss
$
(88)
$
(1,304)
$
(7,642)
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
 
 
 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plans obligations (net of taxes of $3, $7, and $0, at
respective dates)
7 
(17)
(1)
Total other comprehensive income (loss)
7 
(17)
(1)
Comprehensive Loss
(81)
(1,321)
(7,643)
Preferred stock dividend requirement of subsidiary
14 
14 
14 
Comprehensive Loss Attributable to Common Shareholders
$
(95)
$
(1,335)
$
(7,657)
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
101

PG&E CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions) 
 
Balance at December 31,
 
2021
2020
ASSETS
 
 
Current Assets
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
291 
$
484 
Restricted Cash
16 
143 
Accounts receivable
Customers (net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $171 million and $146 million at respective dates)
(includes $2.06 billion and $1.63 billion related to VIEs, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $171 million and
$143 million at respective dates)
2,345 
1,883 
Accrued unbilled revenue (includes $1.09 billion and $959 million related to VIEs at respective dates)
1,207 
1,083 
Regulatory balancing accounts
2,999 
2,001 
Other
1,784 
1,172 
Regulatory assets
496 
410 
Inventories
Gas stored underground and fuel oil
44 
95 
Materials and supplies
552 
533 
Wildfire fund asset
461 
464 
Other
882 
1,334 
Total current assets
11,077 
9,602 
Property, Plant, and Equipment
 
 
Electric
69,482 
66,982 
Gas
25,979 
24,135 
Construction work in progress
3,479 
2,757 
Financing lease and other
20 
20 
Total property, plant, and equipment
98,960 
93,894 
Accumulated depreciation
(29,134)
(27,758)
Net property, plant, and equipment
69,826 
66,136 
Other Noncurrent Assets
 
 
Regulatory assets
9,207 
8,978 
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
3,798 
3,538 
Operating lease right of use asset
1,234 
1,741 
Wildfire fund asset
5,313 
5,816 
Income taxes receivable
9 
67 
Other (includes net noncurrent accounts receivable of $187 million and $0 related to VIEs, net of noncurrent allowance
for doubtful accounts of $15 million and $0 at respective dates)
2,863 
1,978 
Total other noncurrent assets
22,424 
22,118 
TOTAL ASSETS
$
103,327 
$
97,856 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
102

PG&E CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions, except share amounts) 
 
Balance at December 31,
 
2021
2020
LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
 
 
Current Liabilities
 
 
Short-term borrowings
$
2,184 
$
3,547 
Long-term debt, classified as current (includes $18 million and $0 related to VIEs at respective dates)
4,481 
28 
Accounts payable
Trade creditors
2,855 
2,402 
Regulatory balancing accounts
1,121 
1,245 
Other
679 
580 
Operating lease liabilities
468 
533 
Disputed claims and customer refunds
— 
242 
Interest payable
481 
498 
Wildfire-related claims
2,722 
2,250 
Other
2,436 
2,256 
Total current liabilities
17,427 
13,581 
Noncurrent Liabilities
 
 
Long-term debt (includes $1.82 billion and $1.0 billion related to VIEs at respective dates)
38,225 
37,288 
Regulatory liabilities
11,999 
10,424 
Pension and other postretirement benefits
860 
2,444 
Asset retirement obligations
5,298 
6,412 
Deferred income taxes
3,177 
1,398 
Operating lease liabilities
810 
1,208 
Other
4,308 
3,848 
Total noncurrent liabilities
64,677 
63,022 
Contingencies and Commitments (Notes 14 and 15)
Equity
 
 
Shareholders' Equity
 
 
Common stock, no par value, authorized 3,600,000,000 and 3,600,000,000 shares at respective dates; 1,985,400,540
and 1,984,678,673 shares outstanding at respective dates
35,129 
30,224 
Treasury Stock, at cost; 477,743,590 and 0 shares at respective dates
(4,854)
— 
Reinvested earnings
(9,284)
(9,196)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(20)
(27)
Total shareholders' equity
20,971 
21,001 
Noncontrolling Interest - Preferred Stock of Subsidiary
252 
252 
Total equity
21,223 
21,253 
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND EQUITY
$
103,327 
$
97,856 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
103

PG&E CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in millions) 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
 
 
 
Net income (loss)
$
(88)
$
(1,304)
$
(7,642)
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning
3,403 
3,468 
3,234 
Bad Debt Expense
154 
150 
46 
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
(133)
(140)
(79)
Deferred income taxes and tax credits, net
1,783 
1,097 
(2,948)
Reorganization items, net (Note 2)
(73)
1,458 
108 
Wildfire fund expense
517 
413 
— 
Disallowed capital expenditures
— 
17 
581 
Other
248 
249 
161 
Effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Accounts receivable
(589)
(1,182)
(104)
Wildfire-related insurance receivable
(723)
1,564 
35 
Inventories
(32)
6 
(80)
Accounts payable
117 
58 
516 
Wildfire-related claims
472 
(16,525)
(114)
Income taxes receivable/payable
— 
— 
23 
Other current assets and liabilities
244 
(1,079)
77 
Regulatory assets, liabilities, and balancing accounts, net
(2,266)
(2,451)
(1,417)
Liabilities subject to compromise
— 
413 
12,222 
Contributions to Wildfire fund
(193)
(5,200)
— 
Other noncurrent assets and liabilities
(579)
(142)
197 
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
2,262 
(19,130)
4,816 
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
 
 
 
Capital expenditures
(7,689)
(7,690)
(6,313)
Proceeds from sale of the SFGO
749 
— 
— 
Proceeds from sales and maturities of nuclear decommissioning trust investments
1,678 
1,518 
956 
Purchases of nuclear decommissioning trust investments
(1,702)
(1,590)
(1,032)
Other
59 
14 
11 
Net cash used in investing activities
(6,905)
(7,748)
(6,378)
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
 
 
 
Proceeds from debtor-in-possession credit facility
— 
500 
1,850 
Repayments of debtor-in-possession credit facility
— 
(2,000)
(350)
Debtor-in-possession credit facility debt issuance costs
— 
(6)
(113)
Bridge facility financing fees
— 
(73)
— 
Borrowings under credit facilities
9,730 
8,554 
— 
Repayments under credit facilities
(9,976)
(3,949)
— 
Credit facilities financing fees
(9)
(22)
— 
Short-term debt financing, net of issuance costs of $1, $2, and $0 at respective dates
300 
1,448 
— 
104

Short-term debt matured
(1,450)
— 
— 
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, net of premium, discount and issuance
    costs of $43, $178, and $0 at respective dates
5,474 
13,497 
— 
Repayment of long-term debt
(87)
(764)
— 
Proceeds from sale of future revenue from transmission tower license sales, net of fees
370 
— 
— 
Exchanged debt financing fees
— 
(103)
— 
Common stock issued
— 
7,582 
85 
Equity Units issued
— 
1,304 
— 
Other
(29)
(40)
(8)
Net cash provided by financing activities
4,323 
25,928 
1,464 
Net change in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash
(320)
(950)
(98)
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash at January 1
627 
1,577 
1,675 
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash at December 31
$
307 
$
627 
$
1,577 
Less: Restricted cash and restricted cash equivalents
(16)
(143)
(7)
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
$
291 
$
484 
$
1,570 
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information
 
 
 
Cash paid for:
 
 
 
Interest, net of amounts capitalized
$
(1,404)
$
(1,563)
$
(10)
Income taxes, net
99 
— 
— 
Supplemental disclosures of noncash investing and financing activities
 
 
 
Capital expenditures financed through accounts payable
$
1,311 
$
515 
$
826 
Operating lease liabilities arising from obtaining ROU assets
100 
13 
2,816 
Common stock issued in satisfaction of liabilities
— 
8,276 
— 
Increase to PG&E Corporation common stock and treasury stock in connection with the Share
Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement
4,854 
— 
— 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
105

PG&E CORPORATION
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EQUITY
(in millions, except share amounts) 
Common Stock
Treasury Stock
Reinvested 
Earnings
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive Income
(Loss)
Total 
Shareholders' 
Equity
Non- 
controlling 
Interest - 
Preferred 
Stock  of 
Subsidiary
Total 
Equity
Shares
Amount
Shares
Amount
Balance at December 31, 2018
520,338,710 
$
12,910 
— 
$
— 
$
(250)
$
(9)
$
12,651 
$
252 
$
12,903 
Net loss
— 
— 
— 
— 
(7,642)
— 
(7,642)
— 
(7,642)
Other Comprehensive loss
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(1)
(1)
— 
(1)
Common stock issued, net
8,898,031 
85 
— 
— 
— 
— 
85 
— 
85 
Stock-based compensation
amortization
— 
43 
— 
— 
— 
— 
43 
— 
43 
Balance at December 31, 2019
529,236,741 
$
13,038 
— 
$
— 
$
(7,892)
$
(10)
$
5,136 
$
252 
$
5,388 
Net loss
— 
— 
— 
— 
(1,304)
— 
(1,304)
— 
(1,304)
Other comprehensive loss
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
(17)
(17)
— 
(17)
Common stock issued, net
1,455,441,932 
15,854 
— 
— 
— 
— 
15,854 
— 
15,854 
Equity units issued
— 
1,304 
— 
— 
— 
— 
1,304 
— 
1,304 
Stock-based compensation
amortization
— 
28 
— 
— 
— 
— 
28 
— 
28 
Balance at December 31, 2020
1,984,678,673 
$
30,224 
— 
$
— 
$
(9,196)
$
(27)
$
21,001 
$
252 
$
21,253 
Net loss
— 
— 
— 
— 
(88)
— 
(88)
— 
(88)
Other comprehensive income
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
7 
7 
— 
7 
Common stock issued, net 
721,867 
4,854 
— 
— 
— 
— 
4,854 
— 
4,854 
Treasury stock acquired
— 
— 
477,743,590 
(4,854)
— 
— 
(4,854)
— 
(4,854)
Stock-based compensation
amortization
— 
51 
— 
— 
— 
— 
51 
— 
51 
Balance at December 31, 2021
1,985,400,540 
$
35,129 
477,743,590 
$
(4,854)
$
(9,284)
$
(20)
$
20,971 
$
252 
$
21,223 
Excludes 477,743,590 shares of common stock issued to ShareCo. For more information, see Note 6 below.
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
(1)
(1) 
106

PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
(in millions) 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Operating Revenues
 
 
 
Electric
$
15,131 
$
13,858 
$
12,740 
Natural gas
5,511 
4,611 
4,389 
Total operating revenues
20,642 
18,469 
17,129 
Operating Expenses
 
 
 
Cost of electricity
3,232 
3,116 
3,095 
Cost of natural gas
1,149 
782 
734 
Operating and maintenance
10,194 
8,707 
8,750 
Wildfire-related claims, net of recoveries
258 
251 
11,435 
Wildfire fund expense
517 
413 
— 
Depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning
3,403 
3,469 
3,233 
Total operating expenses
18,753 
16,738 
27,247 
Operating Income (Loss)
1,889 
1,731 
(10,118)
Interest income
22 
39 
82 
Interest expense
(1,373)
(1,111)
(912)
Other income, net
512 
470 
239 
Reorganization items, net
(12)
(310)
(320)
Income (Loss) Before Income Taxes
1,038 
819 
(11,029)
Income tax provision (benefit)
900 
408 
(3,407)
Net Income (Loss)
138 
411 
(7,622)
Preferred stock dividend requirement
14 
14 
14 
Income (Loss) Available for Common Stock
$
124 
$
397 
$
(7,636)
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
107

PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
(in millions) 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Net Income (Loss)
$
138 
$
411 
$
(7,622)
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
 
 
 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plans obligations (net of taxes
    of $1, $2, and $1, at respective dates)
(4)
(6)
2 
Total other comprehensive income (loss)
(4)
(6)
2 
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
$
134 
$
405 
$
(7,620)
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
108

PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions) 
 
Balance at December 31,
 
2021
2020
ASSETS
 
 
Current Assets
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
165 
$
261 
Restricted Cash
16 
143 
Accounts receivable
Customers (net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $171 million and $146 million at respective dates)
(includes $2.06 billion and $1.63 billion related to VIEs, net of allowance for doubtful accounts of $171 million
and $143 million at respective dates)
2,345 
1,883 
Accrued unbilled revenue (includes $1.09 billion and $959 million related to VIEs at respective dates)
1,207 
1,083 
Regulatory balancing accounts
2,999 
2,001 
Other
1,932 
1,180 
Regulatory assets
496 
410 
Inventories
Gas stored underground and fuel oil
44 
95 
Materials and supplies
552 
533 
Wildfire fund asset
461 
464 
Other
869 
1,321 
Total current assets
11,086 
9,374 
Property, Plant, and Equipment
 
 
Electric
69,482 
66,982 
Gas
25,979 
24,135 
Construction work in progress
3,480 
2,757 
Financing lease
18 
18 
Total property, plant, and equipment
98,959 
93,892 
Accumulated depreciation
(29,131)
(27,756)
Net property, plant, and equipment
69,828 
66,136 
Other Noncurrent Assets
 
 
Regulatory assets
9,207 
8,978 
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
3,798 
3,538 
Operating lease right of use asset
1,232 
1,736 
Wildfire fund asset
5,313 
5,816 
Income taxes receivable
7 
66 
Other (includes net noncurrent accounts receivable of $187 million and $0 related to VIEs, net of noncurrent
allowance for doubtful accounts of $15 million and $0 at respective dates)
2,706 
1,818 
Total other noncurrent assets
22,263 
21,952 
TOTAL ASSETS
$
103,177 
$
97,462 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
109

PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS
(in millions, except share amounts) 
 
Balance at December 31,
 
2021
2020
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
 
 
Current Liabilities
 
 
Short-term borrowings
$
2,184 
$
3,547 
Long-term debt, classified as current (includes $18 million and $0 related to VIEs at respective dates)
4,455 
— 
Accounts payable
Trade creditors
2,853 
2,366 
Regulatory balancing accounts
1,121 
1,245 
Other
648 
624 
Operating lease liabilities
467 
530 
Disputed claims and customer refunds
— 
242 
Interest payable
430 
444 
Wildfire-related claims
2,722 
2,250 
Other
2,430 
2,248 
Total current liabilities
17,310 
13,496 
Noncurrent Liabilities
 
 
Long-term debt (includes $1.82 billion and $1.0 billion related to VIEs at respective dates)
33,632 
32,664 
Regulatory liabilities
11,999 
10,424 
Pension and other postretirement benefits
764 
2,328 
Asset retirement obligations
5,298 
6,412 
Deferred income taxes
3,409 
1,570 
Operating lease liabilities
810 
1,206 
Other
4,345 
3,886 
Total noncurrent liabilities
60,257 
58,490 
Contingencies and Commitments (Notes 14 and 15)
Shareholders' Equity
 
 
Preferred stock
258 
258 
Common stock, $5 par value, authorized 800,000,000 shares; 264,374,809 shares
    outstanding at respective dates
1,322 
1,322 
Additional paid-in capital
28,286 
28,286 
Reinvested earnings
(4,247)
(4,385)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(9)
(5)
Total shareholders' equity
25,610 
25,476 
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS' EQUITY
$
103,177 
$
97,462 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
110

PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in millions) 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
 
 
 
Net income (loss)
$
138 
$
411 
$
(7,622)
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning
3,403 
3,469 
3,233 
Bad Debt Expense
154 
150 
46 
Allowance for equity funds used during construction
(133)
(140)
(79)
Deferred income taxes and tax credits, net
1,846 
1,141 
(2,952)
Reorganization items, net (Note 2)
(41)
(90)
97 
Wildfire fund expense
517 
413 
— 
Disallowed capital expenditures
— 
17 
581 
Other
172 
220 
121 
Effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities:
Accounts receivable
(584)
(1,160)
(132)
Wildfire-related insurance receivable
(723)
1,564 
35 
Inventories
(32)
6 
(80)
Accounts payable
44 
(24)
579 
Wildfire-related claims
472 
(16,525)
(114)
Income taxes receivable/payable
— 
— 
5 
Other current assets and liabilities
251 
(1,141)
101 
Regulatory assets, liabilities, and balancing accounts, net
(2,266)
(2,451)
(1,417)
Liabilities subject to compromise
— 
401 
12,194 
Contributions to Wildfire fund
(193)
(5,200)
— 
Other noncurrent assets and liabilities
(577)
(108)
214 
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
2,448 
(19,047)
4,810 
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
 
 
 
Capital expenditures
(7,689)
(7,690)
(6,313)
Proceeds from sale of the SFGO
749 
— 
— 
Proceeds from sales and maturities of nuclear decommissioning trust investments
1,678 
1,518 
956 
Purchases of nuclear decommissioning trust investments
(1,702)
(1,590)
(1,032)
Intercompany note to PG&E Corporation
(145)
— 
— 
Other
59 
14 
11 
Net cash used in investing activities
(7,050)
(7,748)
(6,378)
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
 
 
 
Proceeds from debtor-in-possession credit facility
— 
500 
1,850 
Repayments of debtor-in-possession credit facility
— 
(2,000)
(350)
Debtor-in-possession credit facility debt issuance costs
— 
(6)
(97)
Bridge facility financing fees
— 
(33)
— 
Borrowings under credit facilities
9,730 
8,554 
— 
Repayments under credit facilities
(9,976)
(3,949)
— 
Credit facilities financing fees
(9)
(22)
— 
111

Short-term debt financing, net of issuance costs of $1, $2, and $0 at respective dates
300 
1,448 
— 
Short-term debt matured
(1,450)
— 
— 
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, net of premium, discount and issuance
    costs of $43, $88, and $0 at respective dates
5,474 
8,837 
— 
Repayment of long-term debt
(59)
(100)
— 
Proceeds from sale of future revenue from transmission tower license sales, net of fees
370 
— 
— 
Exchanged debt financing fees
— 
(103)
— 
Equity contribution from PG&E Corporation
— 
12,986 
— 
Other
(1)
(42)
(8)
Net cash provided by financing activities
4,379 
26,070 
1,395 
Net change in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash
(223)
(725)
(173)
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash at January 1
404 
1,129 
1,302 
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash at December 31
$
181 
$
404 
$
1,129 
Less: Restricted cash and restricted cash equivalents
(16)
(143)
(7)
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
$
165 
$
261 
$
1,122 
  
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information
 
 
 
Cash paid for:
 
 
 
Interest, net of amounts capitalized
$
(1,198)
$
(1,458)
$
(7)
Income taxes, net
99 
— 
— 
Supplemental disclosures of noncash investing and financing activities
Capital expenditures financed through accounts payable
$
1,311 
$
515 
$
826 
Operating lease liabilities arising from obtaining ROU assets
100 
13 
2,807 
Common stock equity infusion from PG&E Corporation used to satisfy liabilities
— 
6,750 
— 
 See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
112

PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
(in millions) 
Preferred 
Stock
Common 
Stock
Additional 
Paid-in 
Capital
Reinvested 
Earnings
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income (Loss)
Total 
Shareholders' 
Equity
Balance at December 31, 2018
$
258 
$
1,322 
$
8,550 
$
2,826 
$
(1)
$
12,955 
Net loss
— 
— 
— 
(7,622)
— 
(7,622)
Other comprehensive income
— 
— 
— 
— 
2 
2 
Balance at December 31, 2019
$
258 
$
1,322 
$
8,550 
$
(4,796)
$
1 
$
5,335 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
411 
— 
411 
Other comprehensive loss
— 
— 
— 
— 
(6)
(6)
Equity Contribution
— 
— 
19,736 
— 
— 
19,736 
Balance at December 31, 2020
$
258 
$
1,322 
$
28,286 
$
(4,385)
$
(5)
$
25,476 
Net income
— 
— 
— 
138 
— 
138 
Other comprehensive loss
— 
— 
— 
— 
(4)
(4)
Balance at December 31, 2021
$
258 
$
1,322 
$
28,286 
$
(4,247)
$
(9)
$
25,610 
See accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
113

NOTES TO THE CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1: ORGANIZATION AND BASIS OF PRESENTATION
Organization and Basis of Presentation
PG&E Corporation is a holding company whose primary operating subsidiary is Pacific Gas and Electric Company, a public utility serving northern and central
California. The Utility generates revenues mainly through the sale and delivery of electricity and natural gas to customers. The Utility is primarily regulated by the
CPUC and the FERC. In addition, the NRC oversees the licensing, construction, operation, and decommissioning of the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities.
This is a combined annual report of PG&E Corporation and the Utility. PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of PG&E
Corporation, the Utility, and other wholly owned and controlled subsidiaries. The Utility’s Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of the Utility
and its wholly owned and controlled subsidiaries. All intercompany transactions have been eliminated in consolidation. The Notes to the Consolidated Financial
Statements apply to both PG&E Corporation and the Utility. PG&E Corporation and the Utility assess financial performance and allocate resources on a
consolidated basis (i.e., the companies operate in one segment).
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared in conformity with GAAP and in accordance with the reporting requirements of Form
10-K. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets,
liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions relate to the
Utility’s regulatory assets and liabilities, wildfire-related liabilities, legal and regulatory contingencies, the Wildfire Fund, environmental remediation liabilities,
AROs, wildfire-related receivables, and pension and other post-retirement benefit plan obligations. Management believes that its estimates and assumptions
reflected in the Consolidated Financial Statements are appropriate and reasonable. A change in management’s estimates or assumptions could result in an
adjustment that would have a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows during
the period in which such change occurred.
NOTE 2: BANKRUPTCY FILING
Chapter 11 Proceedings
On the Petition Date, PG&E Corporation and the Utility commenced the Chapter 11 Cases with the Bankruptcy Court. Prior to the Emergence Date, PG&E
Corporation and the Utility continued to operate their business as debtors-in-possession under the jurisdiction of the Bankruptcy Court and in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Bankruptcy Code and orders of the Bankruptcy Court.
On June 20, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court entered the Confirmation Order confirming the Plan filed on June 19, 2020. PG&E Corporation and the Utility emerged
from Chapter 11 on the Emergence Date of July 1, 2020.
Except as otherwise set forth in the Plan, the Confirmation Order or another order of the Bankruptcy Court, substantially all pre-petition liabilities were discharged
under the Plan.
Unresolved Chapter 11 Claims
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have received over 100,000 proofs of claim since the Petition Date, of which approximately 80,000 were channeled to a trust for
the benefit of holders of certain subrogation claims (the “Subrogation Wildfire Trust”) and Fire Victim Trust. The claims channeled to the Subrogation Wildfire
Trust and Fire Victim Trust will be resolved by such trusts, and PG&E Corporation and the Utility have no further liability in connection with such claims. PG&E
Corporation and the Utility continue their review and analysis of certain remaining claims, including asserted litigation claims, trade creditor claims, along with
other tax and regulatory claims, and therefore the ultimate liability of PG&E Corporation or the Utility for such claims may differ from the amounts asserted in
such claims. Allowed claims are paid in accordance with the Plan and the Confirmation Order. Amounts expected to be allowed are reflected as current liabilities
in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
114

Holders of certain claims may assert that they are entitled under the Plan or the Bankruptcy Code to pursue, or continue to pursue, their claims against PG&E
Corporation and the Utility on or after the Emergence Date, including claims arising from or relating to indemnification or contribution claims, including with
respect to the wildfire that began on November 8, 2018 near the city of Paradise, Butte County, California (the “2018 Camp fire”), the 2017 Northern California
wildfires, and the wildfire that began September 9, 2015 in Amador and Calaveras counties in Northern California (the “2015 Butte fire”).
In addition, Subordinated Debt Claims and HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims (each as defined in Note 14 below) continue to be pursued against PG&E
Corporation and the Utility in the claims reconciliation process in the Bankruptcy Court, and claims against certain former directors and current and former
officers, as well as certain underwriters, are being pursued in the purported securities class action that is further described in Note 14 under the heading “Securities
Class Action Litigation.”
In addition to filing objections in the Bankruptcy Court to claims with respect to which PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not believe they have liability, PG&E
Corporation and the Utility are working to resolve certain disputed general unsecured claims before a panel of mediators. On November 4, 2021, the Bankruptcy
Court entered an order extending the deadline for PG&E Corporation and the Utility to object to claims to June 21, 2022, except for a claim filed by the California
Department of Water Resources, for which the Bankruptcy Court set an objection deadline of March 23, 2022.
Various electricity suppliers filed claims in the Utility’s 2001 prior proceeding filed under Chapter 11 of the Bankruptcy Code seeking payment for energy
supplied to the Utility’s customers between May 2000 and June 2001. While the FERC and judicial proceedings were pending, the Utility pursued settlements with
electricity suppliers and entered into a number of settlement agreements with various electricity suppliers to resolve some of these disputed claims and recover on
the Utility’s refund claims against these electricity suppliers. After the Utility received $145 million from the California Power Exchange and various escrows that
were established as part of the disputed claims settlements in December 2021, the Utility filed at the Bankruptcy Court to close out its 2001 bankruptcy case. On
December 22, 2021, the Bankruptcy Court granted the motion for entry of final decree and closed the 2001 bankruptcy case. As of December 31, 2021, the
Consolidated Balance Sheets reflected $0 in net claims within Disputed claims and customer refunds compared to $242 million as of December 31, 2020. The
Utility expects to refund current regulatory liabilities of $422 million, reflected in Current liabilities – other on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, $145 million of
which would be funded from the amounts received from the California Power Exchange and various escrows discussed above.
Reorganization Items, Net
Reorganization items, net, represent amounts incurred after the Petition Date as a direct result of the Chapter 11 Cases and are comprised of professional fees and
financing costs, net of interest income and other. Cash paid for reorganization items, net was $31 million and $53 million for PG&E Corporation and the Utility,
respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $102 million and $400 million for PG&E Corporation and the Utility, respectively, during
2020.
Reorganization items, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the following:
Year Ended December 31, 2021
(in millions)
Utility
PG&E Corporation
PG&E Corporation
Consolidated
Debtor-in-possession financing costs
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
Legal and other
21 
(1)
20 
Interest and other
(9)
— 
(9)
Total reorganization items, net
$
12 
$
(1)
$
11 
PG&E Corporation amounts reflected under the column “PG&E Corporation” exclude the accounts of the Utility.
 (1)
(1) 
115

Reorganization items, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 include the following:
Year Ended December 31, 2020
(in millions)
Utility
PG&E Corporation
PG&E Corporation
Consolidated
Debtor-in-possession financing costs
$
6 
$
— 
$
6 
Legal and other 
318 
1,651 
1,969 
Interest income
(14)
(2)
(16)
Total reorganization items, net
$
310 
$
1,649 
$
1,959 
PG&E Corporation amounts reflected under the column “PG&E Corporation” exclude the accounts of the Utility.
 Amount includes $1.5 billion in equity backstop premium expense and bridge loan facility fees.
Reorganization items, net from the Petition Date through December 31, 2019 include the following:
Petition Date Through December 31, 2019
(in millions)
Utility
PG&E Corporation
PG&E Corporation
Consolidated
Debtor-in-possession financing costs
$
97 
$
17 
$
114 
Legal and other
273 
19 
292 
Interest income
(50)
(10)
(60)
Total reorganization items, net
$
320 
$
26 
$
346 
PG&E Corporation amounts reflected under the column “PG&E Corporation” exclude the accounts of the Utility.
NOTE 3: SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Regulation and Regulated Operations
The Utility follows accounting principles for rate-regulated entities and collects rates from customers to recover “revenue requirements” that have been authorized
by the CPUC or the FERC based on the Utility’s cost of providing service.  The Utility’s ability to recover a significant portion of its authorized revenue
requirements through rates is generally independent, or “decoupled,” from the volume of the Utility’s electricity and natural gas sales.  The Utility records assets
and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be recorded under GAAP for nonregulated entities.  The Utility capitalizes and
records, as regulatory assets, costs that would otherwise be charged to expense if it is probable that the incurred costs will be recovered through future rates. 
Regulatory assets are amortized over the future periods in which the costs are recovered.  If costs expected to be incurred in the future are currently being
recovered through rates, the Utility records those expected future costs as regulatory liabilities.  Amounts that are probable of being credited or refunded to
customers in the future are also recorded as regulatory liabilities.
The Utility also records a regulatory balancing account asset or liability for differences between customer billings and authorized revenue requirements that are
probable of recovery or refund.  In addition, the Utility records a regulatory balancing account asset or liability for differences between incurred costs and customer
billings or authorized revenue meant to recover those costs, to the extent that these differences are probable of recovery or refund.  These differences have no
impact on net income.  See “Revenue Recognition” below.
Management continues to believe the use of regulatory accounting is applicable and that all regulatory assets and liabilities are recoverable or refundable.  To the
extent that portions of the Utility’s operations cease to be subject to cost of service rate regulation, or recovery is no longer probable as a result of changes in
regulation or other reasons, the related regulatory assets and liabilities are written off.
Cash, Cash Equivalents, and Restricted Cash
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less.  Cash equivalents are stated at
fair value.  As of December 31, 2020, the Utility also held restricted cash that primarily consisted of cash held in escrow to be used to pay bankruptcy related
professional fees.
 (1)
(2)
(1) 
(2)
 (1)
(1) 
116

Revenue Recognition
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
The Utility recognizes revenues when electricity and natural gas services are delivered.  The Utility records unbilled revenues for the estimated amount of energy
delivered to customers but not yet billed at the end of the period.  Unbilled revenues are included in accounts receivable on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.  Rates
charged to customers are based on CPUC and FERC authorized revenue requirements. Revenues can vary significantly from period to period because of
seasonality, weather, and customer usage patterns.
Regulatory Balancing Account Revenue
The CPUC authorizes most of the Utility’s revenues in the Utility’s GRCs, which occur every four years.  The Utility's ability to recover revenue requirements
authorized by the CPUC in these rate cases is independent or “decoupled” from the volume of the Utility's sales of electricity and natural gas services. The Utility
recognizes revenues that have been authorized for rate recovery, are objectively determinable and probable of recovery, and are expected to be collected within 24
months.  Generally, electric and natural gas operating revenue is recognized ratably over the year. The Utility records a balancing account asset or liability for
differences between customer billings and authorized revenue requirements that are probable of recovery or refund.
The Utility also collects additional revenue requirements to recover costs that the CPUC has authorized the Utility to pass on to customers, including costs to
purchase electricity and natural gas, and to fund public purpose, demand response, and customer energy efficiency programs.  In general, the revenue recognition
criteria for pass-through costs billed to customers are met at the time the costs are incurred. The Utility records a regulatory balancing account asset or liability for
differences between incurred costs and customer billings or authorized revenue meant to recover those costs, to the extent that these differences are probable of
recovery or refund. As a result, these differences have no impact on net income.
The following table presents the Utility’s revenues disaggregated by type of customer:
Year Ended
(in millions)
2021
2020
Electric
Revenue from contracts with customers
   Residential
$
6,089 $
5,523 
   Commercial
5,042 
4,722 
   Industrial
1,493 
1,530 
   Agricultural
1,565 
1,471 
   Public street and highway lighting
73 
69 
   Other 
(84)
(130)
      Total revenue from contracts with customers - electric
14,178 
13,185 
Regulatory balancing accounts 
953 
673 
Total electric operating revenue
$
15,131 $
13,858 
Natural gas
Revenue from contracts with customers
   Residential
$
2,759 $
2,517 
   Commercial
713 
597 
   Transportation service only
1,346 
1,211 
   Other 
140 
61 
      Total revenue from contracts with customers - gas
4,958 
4,386 
Regulatory balancing accounts 
553 
225 
Total natural gas operating revenue
5,511 
4,611 
Total operating revenues
$
20,642 $
18,469 
This activity is primarily related to the change in unbilled revenue and amounts subject to refund, partially offset by other miscellaneous revenue items.
These amounts represent revenues authorized to be billed or refunded to customers.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1) 
(2) 
117

Financial Assets Measured at Amortized Cost – Credit Losses
PG&E Corporation and the Utility use the current expected credit loss model to estimate the expected lifetime credit loss on financial assets measured at amortized
cost. PG&E Corporation and the Utility evaluate credit risk in their portfolio of financial assets quarterly. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the
Utility have identified the following significant categories of financial assets.
Trade Receivables
Trade receivables are represented by customer accounts. PG&E Corporation and the Utility record an allowance for doubtful accounts to recognize an estimate of
expected lifetime credit losses. The allowance is determined on a collective basis based on the historical amounts written-off and an assessment of customer
collectability. Furthermore, economic conditions are evaluated as part of the estimate of expected lifetime credit losses using an analysis of regional unemployment
rates.
As of December 31, 2021, the allowance also included the estimated impact of the CAPP which offers financial assistance from the State of California for eligible
customers in the form of a credit to the customer’s bill. The Utility recorded a reduction to the allowance for doubtful accounts of approximately $207 million in
the fourth quarter of 2021 as a result of the expected CAPP funding, which was received on January 27, 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, the Utility recorded $209 million of long-term accounts receivables as a result of the CPUC’s June 30, 2021 final decision on bill debt
relief which offers financial assistance for eligible customers in the form of a 24-month payment plan.
As of December 31, 2021, expected credit losses of $154 million were recorded in Operating and maintenance expense on the Consolidated Statements of Income
for credit losses associated with trade and other receivables. The portion of expected credit losses that are deemed probable of recovery are deferred to the RUBA,
CPPMA and a FERC regulatory asset. At December 31, 2021, the RUBA current balancing accounts receivable balance was $127 million, and CPPMA and FERC
long-term regulatory asset balances were $30 million and $12 million, respectively.
Other Receivables and Available-For-Sale Debt Securities
Insurance receivables are related to the liability insurance policies PG&E Corporation and the Utility carry. Insurance receivable risk is related to each insurance
carrier’s risk of defaulting on their individual policies. Wildfire fund receivables are the funds available from the statewide fund established under AB 1054 for
payment of eligible claims related to the 2021 Dixie fire that exceed $1.0 billion and available insurance coverage. For more information, see Note 14 below.
Wildfire fund receivables risk is related to the Wildfire Fund’s durability, which is a measurement of the claim-paying capacity. Lastly, PG&E Corporation and the
Utility are required to determine if the fair value is below the amortized cost basis for its available-for-sale debt securities. An impairment may exist if there is an
intent to sell or a requirement to sell before recovery of the amortized basis. If such an impairment exists, then PG&E Corporation and the Utility must determine
whether a portion of the impairment is a result of expected credit loss.
As of December 31, 2021, expected credit losses for insurance receivables, Wildfire Fund receivables, and available-for-sale debt securities were immaterial.
Inventories
Inventories are carried at weighted-average cost and include natural gas stored underground as well as materials and supplies.  Natural gas stored underground is
recorded to inventory when injected and then expensed as the gas is withdrawn for distribution to customers or to be used as fuel for electric generation.  Materials
and supplies are recorded to inventory when purchased and expensed or capitalized to plant, as appropriate, when consumed or installed.
Emission Allowances
The Utility purchases GHG emission allowances to satisfy its compliance obligations. Associated costs are recorded as inventory and included in current assets –
other and other noncurrent assets – other on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Costs are carried at weighted-average and are recoverable through rates.
118

Property, Plant, and Equipment
Property, plant, and equipment are reported at the lower of their historical cost less accumulated depreciation or fair value.  Historical costs include labor and
materials, construction overhead, and AFUDC.  See “AFUDC” below.  The Utility’s estimated service lives of its property, plant, and equipment were as follows: 
 
Estimated Service
Balance at December 31,
(in millions, except estimated service lives)
Lives (years)
2021
2020
Electricity generating facilities 
5 to 75
$
11,217 $
12,505 
Electricity distribution facilities
10 to 70
37,723 
34,902 
Electricity transmission facilities
15 to 75
15,516 
14,414 
Natural gas distribution facilities
20 to 60
14,100 
12,962 
Natural gas transmission and storage facilities
5 to 66
9,067 
8,293 
Financing lease
18 
18 
Construction work in progress
3,480 
2,757 
General plant and other
5 to 50
7,838 
8,041 
Total property, plant, and equipment
98,959 
93,892 
Accumulated depreciation
(29,131)
(27,756)
Net property, plant, and equipment 
$
69,828 $
66,136 
Balance includes nuclear fuel inventories. Stored nuclear fuel inventory is stated at weighted-average cost. Nuclear fuel in the reactor is expensed as it is used based on the amount of energy
output. See Note 15 below.
 Includes $850 million of fire risk mitigation-related property, plant, and equipment securitized in accordance with AB 1054. See Note 5 below.
The Utility depreciates property, plant, and equipment using the composite, or group, method of depreciation, in which a single depreciation rate is applied to the
gross investment balance in a particular class of property, with the exception of its securitized property, plant and equipment, which is depreciated over the life of
the bond and a pattern consistent with principal payments.  This method approximates the straight-line method of depreciation over the useful lives of property,
plant, and equipment.  The Utility’s composite depreciation rates were 3.82% in 2021, 3.76% in 2020, and 3.80% in 2019.  The useful lives of the Utility’s
property, plant, and equipment are authorized by the CPUC and the FERC, and the depreciation expense is recovered through rates charged to customers. 
Depreciation expense includes a component for the original cost of assets and a component for estimated cost of future removal, net of any salvage value at
retirement.  Upon retirement, the original cost of the retired assets, net of salvage value, is charged against accumulated depreciation.  The cost of repairs and
maintenance, including planned major maintenance activities and minor replacements of property, is charged to operating and maintenance expense as incurred.
AFUDC
AFUDC represents the estimated costs of debt (i.e., interest) and equity funds used to finance regulated plant additions before they go into service and is
capitalized as part of the cost of construction.  AFUDC is recoverable through rates over the life of the related property once the property is placed in service. 
AFUDC related to the cost of debt is recorded as a reduction to interest expense.  AFUDC related to the cost of equity is recorded in other income.  The Utility
recorded AFUDC related to debt and equity, respectively, of $56 million and $133 million during 2021, $35 million and $140 million during 2020, and $55 million
and $79 million during 2019.
Asset Retirement Obligations
The following table summarizes the changes in ARO liability during 2021 and 2020, including nuclear decommissioning obligations: 
(in millions)
2021
2020
ARO liability at beginning of year
$
6,412 
$
5,854 
Liabilities incurred in the current period
— 
268 
Revision in estimated cash flows
(1,378)
53 
Accretion
287 
265 
Liabilities settled
(23)
(28)
ARO liability at end of year
$
5,298 
$
6,412 
(1)
(2)
(1) 
(2)
119

The Utility has not recorded a liability related to certain AROs for assets that are expected to operate in perpetuity.  As the Utility cannot estimate a settlement date
or range of potential settlement dates for these assets, reasonable estimates of fair value cannot be made.  As such, ARO liabilities are not recorded for retirement
activities associated with substations, certain hydroelectric facilities; removal of lead-based paint in some facilities and certain communications equipment from
leased property; and restoration of land to the conditions under certain agreements.
Nuclear Decommissioning Obligation
Detailed studies of the cost to decommission the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities are generally conducted every three years in conjunction with the Nuclear
Decommissioning Cost Triennial Proceeding.  In December 2021, the Utility submitted its updated decommissioning cost estimate to the CPUC and
correspondingly decreased its ARO liabilities by $1.4 billion. The adjustment was a result of a decrease in estimated costs based on refinements to the site-specific
decommissioning analysis. The decommissioning cost estimates are based on the plant location and cost characteristics for the Utility's nuclear power plants. 
Actual decommissioning costs may vary from these estimates as a result of changes in assumptions such as decommissioning dates; regulatory requirements;
technology; and costs of labor, materials, and equipment.  The Utility recovers its revenue requirements for decommissioning costs through rates through a non-
bypassable charge that the Utility expects will continue until those costs are fully recovered.
The total nuclear decommissioning obligation accrued was $3.9 billion and $5.1 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.  The estimated undiscounted
nuclear decommissioning cost for the Utility’s nuclear power plants was $7.6 billion and $10.6 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Disallowance of Plant Costs
PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a charge when it is both probable that costs incurred or projected to be incurred for recently completed plant will not be
recoverable through rates charged to customers and the amount of disallowance can be reasonably estimated.
Nuclear Decommissioning Trusts
The Utility’s nuclear generation facilities consist of two units at Diablo Canyon and one retired facility at Humboldt Bay.  Nuclear decommissioning requires the
safe removal of a nuclear generation facility from service and the reduction of residual radioactivity to a level that permits termination of the NRC license and
release of the property for unrestricted use.  The Utility's nuclear decommissioning costs are recovered through rates and are held in trusts until authorized for
release by the CPUC. 
The Utility classifies its debt investments held in the nuclear decommissioning trusts as available-for-sale. Since the Utility’s nuclear decommissioning trust assets
are managed by external investment managers, the Utility does not have the ability to sell its investments at its discretion.  Therefore, all unrealized losses are
considered other-than-temporary impairments. Gains or losses on the nuclear decommissioning trust investments are refundable or recoverable, respectively, from
customers through rates.  Therefore, trust earnings are deferred and included in the regulatory liability for recoveries in excess of the ARO.  There is no impact on
the Utility’s earnings or accumulated other comprehensive income.  The cost of debt and equity securities sold by the trust is determined by specific identification.
Variable Interest Entities
A VIE is an entity that does not have sufficient equity at risk to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support from other parties, or whose
equity investors lack any characteristics of a controlling financial interest.  An enterprise that has a controlling financial interest in a VIE is a primary beneficiary
and is required to consolidate the VIE.  
120

Consolidated VIEs
Receivables Securitization Program
The SPV created in connection with the Receivables Securitization Program (as defined below in Note 5 below) in October 2020 is a bankruptcy remote, limited
liability company wholly owned by the Utility, and its assets are not available to creditors of PG&E Corporation or the Utility. Pursuant to the Receivables
Securitization Program, the Utility sells certain of its receivables and certain related rights to payment and obligations of the Utility with respect to such
receivables, and certain other related rights to the SPV, which, in turn, obtains loans secured by the receivables from financial institutions (the “Lenders”).
Amounts received from the Lenders, the pledged receivables and the corresponding debt are included in Accounts receivable, Other noncurrent assets, and Long-
term debt, respectively, on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate principal amount of the loans made by the Lenders cannot
exceed $1.0 billion outstanding at any time. On September 15, 2021, the Receivables Securitization Program was amended and extended to September 15, 2023.
The SPV is considered a VIE because its equity capitalization is insufficient to support its activities. The most significant activities that impact the economic
performance of the SPV are decisions made to manage receivables. The Utility is considered the primary beneficiary and consolidates the SPV as it makes these
decisions. No additional financial support was provided to the SPV during the year ended December 31, 2021 or is expected to be provided in the future that was
not previously contractually required. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the SPV had net accounts receivable of $3.3 billion and $2.6 billion, respectively, and
outstanding borrowings of $974 million and $1.0 billion, respectively, under the Receivables Securitization Program.
AB 1054 Securitization
PG&E Recovery Funding LLC is a bankruptcy remote, limited liability company wholly owned by the Utility, and its assets are not available to creditors of PG&E
Corporation or the Utility. Pursuant to the Financing Order for AB 1054, the Utility sold its right to receive revenues from the non-bypassable wildfire hardening
fixed recovery charge (“Recovery Property”) to PG&E Recovery Funding LLC, which, in turn, issued recovery bonds secured by the Recovery Property. On
November 12, 2021, PG&E Recovery Funding LLC issued approximately $860 million of senior secured recovery bonds. The recovery bonds were issued in three
tranches: (1) approximately $266 million with an interest rate of 1.46% and is due July 15, 2033, (2) approximately $160 million with an interest rate of 2.28% and
is due January 15, 2038, and (3) approximately $434 million with an interest rate of 2.82% and is due July 15, 2048. The recovery bonds are scheduled to pay
principal and interest semi-annually on January 15 and July 15 of each year. The final scheduled payment date is July 15, 2046. Amounts owed to bond-holders are
included in Long-term debt and Long-term debt, classified as current, on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
PG&E Recovery Funding LLC is considered a VIE because its equity capitalization is insufficient to support its operations. The most significant activities that
impact the economic performance of PG&E Recovery Funding LLC are decisions made by the servicer of the Recovery Property. The Utility is considered the
primary beneficiary and consolidates PG&E Recovery Funding LLC as it acts in this role as servicer. No additional financial support was provided to PG&E
Recovery Funding LLC during the year ended December 31, 2021 or is expected to be provided in the future that was not previously contractually required. As of
December 31, 2021, PG&E Recovery Funding LLC has outstanding borrowings of $860 million.
Non-Consolidated VIEs
Some of the counterparties to the Utility’s power purchase agreements are considered VIEs.  Each of these VIEs was designed to own a power plant that would
generate electricity for sale to the Utility.  To determine whether the Utility was the primary beneficiary of any of these VIEs at December 31, 2021, it assessed
whether it absorbs any of the VIE’s expected losses or receives any portion of the VIE’s expected residual returns under the terms of the power purchase
agreement, analyzed the variability in the VIE’s gross margin, and considered whether it had any decision-making rights associated with the activities that are most
significant to the VIE’s performance, such as dispatch rights and operating and maintenance activities.  The Utility’s financial obligation is limited to the amount
the Utility pays for delivered electricity and capacity.  The Utility did not have any decision-making rights associated with any of the activities that are most
significant to the economic performance of any of these VIEs.  Since the Utility was not the primary beneficiary of any of these VIEs at December 31, 2021, it did
not consolidate any of them.
121

Initial and Annual Contributions to the Wildfire Fund Established Pursuant to AB 1054
The Wildfire Fund is expected to be capitalized with (i) $10.5 billion of proceeds of bonds supported by a 15-year extension of the Department of Water Resources
charge to customers, (ii) $7.5 billion in initial contributions from California’s three large electric IOUs and (iii) $300 million in annual contributions paid by
California’s three large electric IOUs for a 10-year period. The contributions from the IOUs will be effectively borne by their respective shareholders, as they will
not be permitted to recover these costs through rates. The costs of the initial and annual contributions are allocated among the IOUs pursuant to a “Wildfire Fund
allocation metric” set forth in AB 1054 based on land area in the applicable IOU’s service territory classified as HFTDs and adjusted to account for risk mitigation
efforts. The Utility’s Wildfire Fund allocation metric is 64.2% (representing an initial contribution of approximately $4.8 billion and annual contributions of
approximately $193 million).
On the Emergence Date, PG&E Corporation and the Utility contributed, in accordance with AB 1054, an initial contribution of approximately $4.8 billion and first
annual contribution of approximately $193 million to the Wildfire Fund to secure participation of the Utility therein. San Diego Gas & Electric Company and
Southern California Edison made their initial contributions to the Wildfire Fund in September 2019. On December 30, 2020 and 2021, the Utility made its second
and third annual contributions of $193 million each to the Wildfire Fund. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have seven remaining
annual contributions of $193 million (based on the current Wildfire Fund allocation metric). PG&E Corporation and the Utility account for the contributions to the
Wildfire Fund similarly to prepaid insurance with expense being allocated to periods ratably based on an estimated period of coverage.
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded $193 million in Other current liabilities, $1.1 billion in Other non-current liabilities,
$461 million in current assets - Wildfire fund asset, and $5.3 billion in non-current assets - Wildfire fund asset in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. As of
December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Utility recorded amortization and accretion expense of $517 million and $413 million, respectively. The
amortization of the asset, accretion of the liability, and acceleration of the amortization of the asset is reflected in Wildfire Fund expense in the Consolidated
Statements of Income. Expected contributions recorded in Wildfire Fund asset on the Consolidated Balance Sheets are discounted to the present value using the 10-
year U.S. treasury rate at the date PG&E Corporation and the Utility satisfied all the eligibility requirements to participate in the Wildfire Fund. A useful life of 15
years is being used to amortize the Wildfire Fund asset.
AB 1054 did not specify a period of coverage; therefore, this accounting treatment is subject to significant accounting judgments and estimates. In estimating the
period of coverage, PG&E Corporation and the Utility use a Monte Carlo simulation that began with 12 years of historical, publicly available fire-loss data from
wildfires caused by electrical equipment, and subsequently plan to add an additional year of data each following year. The period of historic fire-loss data and the
effectiveness of mitigation efforts by the California electric utility companies are significant assumptions used to estimate the useful life. These assumptions along
with the other assumptions below create a high degree of uncertainty related to the estimated useful life of the Wildfire Fund. The simulation creates annual
distributions of potential losses due to fires that could be attributed to the participating electric utilities. Starting with a five-year period of historical data, with
average annual statewide claims or settlements of approximately $6.5 billion, compared to approximately $2.9 billion for the 12-year historical data, would have
decreased the amortization period to six years. As of December 31, 2021, a 10% change to the assumption around current and future mitigation effort effectiveness
would increase the amortization period by three years assuming greater effectiveness and would decrease the amortization period by two years assuming less
effectiveness.
Other assumptions used to estimate the useful life include the estimated cost of wildfires caused by other electric utilities, the amount at which wildfire claims
would be settled, the likely adjudication of the CPUC in cases of electric utility-caused wildfires and determination of any amounts required to be reimbursed to the
Wildfire Fund, the impacts of climate change, the level of future insurance coverage held by the electric utilities, the FERC-allocable portion of loss recovery, and
the future transmission and distribution equity rate base growth of other electric utilities. Significant changes in any of these estimates could materially impact the
amortization period.
122

PG&E Corporation and the Utility evaluate all assumptions quarterly, and upon claims being made from the Wildfire Fund for catastrophic wildfires, and the
expected life of the Wildfire Fund will be adjusted as required. The Wildfire Fund is available to other participating utilities in California, and the amount of claims
that a participating utility incurs is not limited to their individual contribution amounts. PG&E Corporation and the Utility assess the Wildfire Fund asset for
acceleration of the amortization of the asset in the event that a participating utility’s electrical equipment is found to be the substantial cause of a catastrophic
wildfire. Timing of any such acceleration of the amortization of the asset could lag as the emergence of sufficient cause and claims information can take many
quarters and could be limited to public disclosure of the participating electric utility, if ignition were to occur outside the Utility’s service territory. There were fires
in the Utility’s and other participating utilities’ services territories since July 12, 2019, including fires for which the cause is currently unknown, which may in the
future be determined to be covered by the Wildfire Fund. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded $150 million in Other noncurrent
assets for Wildfire Fund receivables related to the 2021 Dixie fire and $43 million of accelerated amortization, reflected in Wildfire Fund expense.
Other Accounting Policies
For other accounting policies impacting PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated Financial Statements, see “Income Taxes” in Note 9, “Derivatives” in
Note 10, “Fair Value Measurements” in Note 11, and “Contingencies and Commitments” in Notes 14 and 15 below.
Reporting of Amounts Reclassified Out of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
The changes, net of income tax, in PG&E Corporation’s accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of the
following: 
(in millions, net of income tax)
Pension 
Benefits
Other 
Benefits
Total
Beginning balance
$
(39)
$
17 
$
(22)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications:
Unrecognized net actuarial gain (net of taxes of $391 and $53, respectively)
1,007 
137 
1,144 
Regulatory account transfer (net of taxes of $390 and $53, respectively)
(1,003)
(136)
(1,139)
Amounts reclassified from other comprehensive income:
Amortization of prior service cost (net of taxes of $2 and $4, respectively)
(4)
10 
6 
Amortization of net actuarial (gain) loss (net of taxes of $2 and $9, respectively)
4 
(24)
(20)
Regulatory account transfer (net of taxes of $1 and $5, respectively)
2 
14 
16 
Net current period other comprehensive income
6 
1 
7 
Ending balance
$
(33)
$
18 
$
(15)
These components are included in the computation of net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit costs.  See Note 12 below for additional details. 
The changes, net of income tax, in PG&E Corporation’s accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of the
following:
(in millions, net of income tax)
Pension 
Benefits
Other 
Benefits
Total
Beginning balance
$
(22)
$
17 
$
(5)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications:
Unrecognized net actuarial gain (loss) (net of taxes of $162 and $66, respectively)
(417)
170 
(247)
Regulatory account transfer (net of taxes of $155 and $66, respectively)
400 
(170)
230 
Amounts reclassified from other comprehensive income:
Amortization of prior service cost (net of taxes of $2 and $4, respectively)
(4)
10 
6 
Amortization of net actuarial (gain) loss (net of taxes of $1 and $6, respectively)
2 
(15)
(13)
Regulatory account transfer (net of taxes of $1 and $2, respectively)
2 
5 
7 
Net current period other comprehensive loss
(17)
— 
(17)
Ending balance
$
(39)
$
17 
$
(22)
These components are included in the computation of net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit costs.  See Note 12 below for additional details.
 (1)
 (1)
 (1)
(1) 
 (1)
(1)
 (1)
(1) 
123

Recognition of Lease Assets and Liabilities
A lease exists when an arrangement allows the lessee to control the use of an identified asset for a stated period in exchange for payments. This determination is
made at inception of the arrangement. All leases must be recognized as a ROU asset and a lease liability on the balance sheet of the lessee. The ROU asset reflects
the lessee’s right to use the underlying asset for the lease term and the lease liability reflects the obligation to make the lease payments. PG&E Corporation and the
Utility have elected not to separate lease and non-lease components.
The Utility estimates the ROU assets and lease liabilities at net present value using its incremental secured borrowing rates, unless the implicit discount rate in the
leasing arrangement can be ascertained. The incremental secured borrowing rate is based on observed market data and other information available at the lease
commencement date. The ROU assets and lease liabilities only include the fixed lease payments for arrangements with terms greater than 12 months. These
amounts are presented within the supplemental disclosures of noncash activities on the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Renewal and termination options
only impact the lease term if it is reasonably certain that they will be exercised. PG&E Corporation recognizes lease expense on a straight-line basis over the lease
term. The Utility recognizes lease expense in conformity with ratemaking.
Operating leases are included in operating lease ROU assets and current and noncurrent operating lease liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Financing
leases are included in property, plant, and equipment, other current liabilities, and other noncurrent liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Financing leases
were immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Utility made total cash payments, including fixed and variable, of $2.4 billion and $2.5 billion, respectively,
for operating leases which are presented within operating activities on the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. The fixed cash payments for the principal
portion of the financing lease liabilities are immaterial and continue to be included within financing activities on the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Any
variable lease payments for financing leases are included in operating activities on the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
The majority of the Utility’s ROU assets and lease liabilities relate to various power purchase agreements. These power purchase agreements primarily consist of
generation plants leased to meet customer demand plus applicable reserve margins. Operating lease variable costs include amounts from renewable energy power
purchase agreements where payments are based on certain contingent external factors such as wind, hydro, solar, biogas, and biomass power generation. See
“Third-Party Power Purchase Agreements” in Note 15 below. PG&E Corporation and the Utility have also recorded ROU assets and lease liabilities related to
property and land arrangements.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Utility’s operating leases had a weighted average remaining lease term of 6.04 years and 5.7 years and a weighted average
discount rate of 6.1% and 6.2%, respectively.
The following table shows the lease expense recognized for the fixed and variable component of the Utility’s lease obligations:
Year Ended December 31,
(in millions)
2021
2020
Operating lease fixed cost
$
578 
$
679 
Operating lease variable cost
1,782 
1,852 
Total operating lease costs
$
2,360 
$
2,531 
124

At December 31, 2021, the Utility’s future expected operating lease payments were as follows:
(in millions)
December 31, 2021
2022
$
533 
2023
276 
2024
118 
2025
111 
2026
105 
Thereafter
444 
Total lease payments
1,587 
Less imputed interest
(310)
Total
$
1,277 
Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless Licenses
On February 16, 2021, the Utility granted to a subsidiary of SBA Communications Corporation (such subsidiary, “SBA”) an exclusive license enabling SBA to
sublicense and market wireless communications equipment attachment locations (“Cell Sites”) on more than 700 of the Utility’s electric transmission towers,
telecommunications towers, monopoles, buildings or other structures (collectively, the “Effective Date Towers”) to wireless telecommunication carriers
(“Carriers”) for attachment of wireless communications equipment, as contemplated by a Master Transaction Agreement (the “Transaction Agreement”) dated
February 2, 2021, between the Utility and SBA. Pursuant to the Transaction Agreement, the Utility also assigned to SBA license agreements between the Utility
and Carriers for substantially all of the existing Cell Sites on the Effective Date Towers.
The exclusive license was granted pursuant to a Master Multi-Site License Agreement (the “License Agreement”) between the Utility and SBA. The term of the
License Agreement is for 100 years. The Utility has the right to terminate the license for individual Cell Sites for certain regulatory or utility operational reasons,
with a corresponding payment to SBA. Pursuant to the License Agreement, SBA is entitled to the sublicensing revenue generated by new sublicenses of Cell Sites
on the Effective Date Towers, subject to the Utility’s right to a percentage of such sublicensing revenue.
The Utility and SBA also entered into a Master Transmission Tower Site License Agreement (the “Tower Site Agreement”), pursuant to which SBA received the
exclusive rights to sublicense and market additional attachment locations on up to 28,000 of the Utility’s other electric transmission towers to Carriers for
attachment of wireless communications equipment. The Tower Site Agreement provides for a split of license fees from Carriers between the Utility and SBA. The
Tower Site Agreement has a licensing period of up to 15 years, depending on SBA’s achievement of certain performance metrics, and any sites licensed during
such licensing period will continue to be subject to the Tower Site Agreement for the same term as the License Agreement.
In addition, the Utility and SBA entered into a Pipeline Cell Site Transaction Agreement pursuant to which the Utility and SBA established terms and conditions
for adding additional cell sites under the License Agreement. Pipeline Cell Sites are locations where the Utility was in the process of locating a new Cell Site for a
wireless carrier at the close of the transaction.
In exchange for the exclusive license and entry into the License Agreement, SBA paid the Utility $946 million of the purchase price at the closing. On August 15,
2021, the post-closing period ended, and the final purchase price was $947 million, pursuant to the terms of the Transaction Agreement.
The Utility recorded approximately $370 million of the $947 million sales proceeds as a financing obligation, as this portion of the proceeds for existing Cell Sites
represents a sale of future revenues. The Utility recorded approximately $106 million of the $947 million sales proceeds as a contract liability (deferred revenue),
as a portion of proceeds with respect to the sublicensing of Cell Sites, as well as the Tower Site Agreement, represents an upfront payment for access to space on
the Utility’s assets. The Utility utilized a third-party discounted cash flow model based on business assumptions and estimates to determine the allocation of the
purchase price between the financing obligation and deferred revenue. The financing obligation and deferred revenue are included in Other noncurrent liabilities on
the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
The Utility recorded the remaining approximately $471 million ($455 million of which was noncurrent) of the sale proceeds to regulatory liabilities, for the portion
that is probable to be returned to customers in accordance with existing revenue sharing practices.
125

The financing obligation is amortized through Electric operating revenue and Interest expense on the Consolidated Statements of Income using the effective
interest method and the deferred revenue balance is amortized through Electric operating revenue ratably over the 100-year term.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
Income Taxes
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which amends the existing
guidance to reduce complexity relating to Income Tax disclosures. PG&E Corporation and the Utility adopted this ASU on January 1, 2021. There was no material
impact on PG&E Corporation’s or the Utility’s Consolidated Financial Statements and the related disclosures resulting from the adoption of this ASU.
Government Assistance
In November 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-10, Government Assistance (Topic 832): Disclosures by Business Entities about Government Assistance,
which increases the transparency of government assistance including the disclosure of (1) the types of assistance, (2) an entity’s accounting for the assistance, and
(3) the effect of the assistance on an entity’s financial statements. PG&E Corporation and the Utility adopted this ASU as of December 31, 2021. There was no
material impact on PG&E Corporation’s or the Utility’s Consolidated Financial Statements and the related disclosures resulting from the adoption of this ASU.
Accounting Standards Issued But Not Yet Adopted
Debt
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts
in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, which simplifies the accounting for
certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, including convertible instruments and contracts on an entity’s own equity. This ASU
became effective for PG&E Corporation and the Utility on January 1, 2022 and will not have a material impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements and the
related disclosures.
126

NOTE 4: REGULATORY ASSETS, LIABILITIES, AND BALANCING ACCOUNTS
Regulatory Assets
Long-term regulatory assets are comprised of the following: 
 
Balance at December 31,
Recovery 
Period
(in millions)
2021
2020
Pension benefits
$
708 
$
2,245 
Indefinitely
Environmental compliance costs
1,089 
1,112 
32 years
Utility retained generation
133 
181 
6 years
Price risk management
216 
204 
19 years
Unamortized loss, net of gain, on reacquired debt
37 
49 
23 years
Catastrophic event memorandum account 
1,119 
842 
1 - 3 years
Wildfire expense memorandum account 
347 
400 
TBD years
Fire hazard prevention memorandum account 
75 
137 
1 - 3 years
Fire risk mitigation memorandum account
44 
66 
1 - 3 years
Wildfire mitigation plan memorandum account 
424 
390 
1 - 3 years
Deferred income taxes 
1,849 
908 
51 years
Insurance premium costs 
207 
294 
3 - 4 years
Wildfire mitigation balancing account 
273 
156 
1 - 3 years
General rate case memorandum accounts 
— 
376 
1 - 2 years
Vegetation management balancing account 
1,411 
592 
1 - 3 years
COVID-19 pandemic protection memorandum accounts 
49 
84 
TBD years
Other
1,226 
942 
Various
Total long-term regulatory assets
$
9,207 
$
8,978 
 
Payments into the pension and other benefits plans are based on annual contribution requirements. As these annual requirements continue indefinitely into the future, the Utility expects to
continuously recover pension benefits.
In connection with the settlement agreement entered into among PG&E Corporation, the Utility, and the CPUC in 2003 to resolve the Utility’s 2001 proceeding under Chapter 11, the CPUC
authorized the Utility to recover $1.2 billion of costs related to the Utility’s retained generation assets.  The individual components of these regulatory assets are being amortized over the
respective lives of the underlying generation facilities, consistent with the period over which the related revenues are recognized. 
Includes costs of responding to catastrophic events that have been declared a disaster or state of emergency by competent federal or state authorities. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020,
$49 million in COVID-19 related costs was recorded to CEMA regulatory assets. Recovery of CEMA costs is subject to CPUC review and approval.
 Balance as of December 31, 2021 represents incremental wildfire claims and outside legal expenses related to the 2021 Dixie fire. Balance as of December 31, 2020 is comprised of
incremental wildfire liability insurance premium costs for the period July 26, 2017 through December 31, 2019. Recovery of WEMA costs is subject to CPUC review and approval.
Includes costs associated with the implementation of regulations and requirements adopted to protect the public from potential fire hazards associated with overhead power line facilities and
nearby aerial communication facilities that have not been previously authorized in another proceeding. Recovery of FHPMA costs is subject to CPUC review and approval.
Includes costs associated with the 2019 WMP for the period January 1, 2019 through June 4, 2019 and other incremental costs associated with fire risk mitigation. Recovery of FRMMA costs
is subject to CPUC review and approval.
 Includes costs associated with the 2019 WMP for the period June 5, 2019 through December 31, 2019 and the 2020 WMP for the period of January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and
the 2021 WMP for the period of January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021. Recovery of WMPMA costs is subject to CPUC review and approval.
 Represents cumulative differences between amounts recognized for ratemaking purposes and expense recognized in accordance with GAAP.
Represents excess liability insurance premium costs recorded to RTBA and adjustment mechanism for costs determined in other proceedings, as authorized in the 2020 GRC and 2019 GT&S
rate cases, respectively.
Includes costs associated with certain wildfire mitigation activities for the period January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2021. Noncurrent balance represents costs above 115% of adopted
revenue requirements, which are subject to CPUC review and approval.
The GRC memorandum accounts record the difference between the gas and electric revenue requirements in effect on January 1, 2020 and through February 28, 2021 as authorized by the
CPUC in December 2020. These amounts will be recovered through rates over 22 months, beginning March 1, 2021.
Represents costs from routine vegetation management and EVM activities previously recorded in the FRMMA/WMPMA, and tree mortality and fire risk reduction work previously recorded
in CEMA for the period January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2021. Recovery of VMBA costs above 120% of adopted revenue requirements is subject to CPUC review and approval.
 (1)
 (2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
 (6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4)
(5) 
(6) 
(7)
(8)
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
127

 On April 16, 2020, the CPUC passed a resolution that established the CPPMA to recover costs associated with customer protections, including higher uncollectible costs related to a
moratorium on electric and gas service disconnections for residential and small business customers. The CPPMA applies only to certain residential and small business customers and was
approved on July 27, 2020 with an effective date of March 4, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility had recorded an under-collection of $30 million, representing incremental bad debt
expense over what was collected in rates for the period the CPPMA was in effect. The remaining $19 million is associated with program costs and higher accounts receivable financing costs.
Recovery of CPPMA costs is subject to CPUC review and approval.
In general, regulatory assets represent the cumulative differences between amounts recognized for ratemaking purposes and expense or accumulated other
comprehensive income (loss) recognized in accordance with GAAP. Additionally, the Utility does not earn a return on regulatory assets if the related costs do not
accrue interest. Accordingly, the Utility earns a return on its regulatory assets for retained generation, and regulatory assets for unamortized loss, net of gain, on
reacquired debt.
Regulatory Liabilities
Long-term regulatory liabilities are comprised of the following: 
 
Balance at December 31,
(in millions)
2021
2020
Cost of removal obligations 
$
7,306 
$
6,905 
Recoveries in excess of AROs
388 
458 
Public purpose programs 
946 
948 
Employee benefit plans
1,229 
995 
Transmission tower wireless licenses 
446 
— 
SFGO sale 
343 
— 
Other
1,341 
1,118 
Total long-term regulatory liabilities
$
11,999 
$
10,424 
Represents the cumulative differences between the recorded costs to remove assets and amounts collected in rates for expected costs to remove assets.
Represents the cumulative differences between ARO expenses and amounts collected in rates.  Decommissioning costs related to the Utility’s nuclear facilities are recovered through rates and
are placed in nuclear decommissioning trusts.  This regulatory liability also represents the deferral of realized and unrealized gains and losses on these nuclear decommissioning trust
investments.  See Note 11 below.
 Represents amounts received from customers designated for public purpose program costs expected to be incurred beyond the next 12 months, primarily related to energy efficiency programs.
 Represents cumulative differences between incurred costs and amounts collected in rates for post-retirement medical, post-retirement life and long-term disability plans.
 Represents the portion of the net proceeds received from the sale of transmission tower wireless licenses that will be returned to customers. Of the $446 million, $311 million and $135
million will be refunded to FERC and CPUC jurisdiction customers, respectively. See Note 3 above.
 Represents the noncurrent portion of the net gain on the sale of the SFGO, which closed on September 17, 2021, that will be distributed to customers over a five-year period, beginning in
2022.
Regulatory Balancing Accounts
The Utility tracks (1) differences between the Utility’s authorized revenue requirement and customer billings, and (2) differences between incurred costs and
customer billings.  To the extent these differences are probable of recovery or refund over the next 12 months, the Utility records a current regulatory balancing
account receivable or payable.  Regulatory balancing accounts that the Utility expects to collect or refund over a period exceeding 12 months are recorded as other
noncurrent assets – regulatory assets or noncurrent liabilities – regulatory liabilities, respectively, in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.  These differences do not
have an impact on net income.  Balancing accounts fluctuate during the year based on seasonal electric and gas usage and the timing of when costs are incurred and
customer revenues are collected.
(13)
(1)
 (2)
(3)
 (4)
(5)
(6)
(1) 
(2) 
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
128

Current regulatory balancing accounts receivable and payable are comprised of the following:
Receivable 
Balance at December 31,
(in millions)
2021
2020
Gas distribution and transmission
$
— 
$
102 
Energy procurement
310 
413 
Public purpose programs
321 
292 
Fire hazard prevention memorandum account
50 
121 
Fire risk mitigation memorandum account
14 
33 
Wildfire mitigation plan memorandum account
67 
161 
Wildfire mitigation balancing account
91 
27 
General rate case memorandum accounts
468 
313 
Vegetation management balancing account
127 
115 
Insurance premium costs
605 
135 
Wildfire expense memorandum account
440 
— 
Residential uncollectibles balancing accounts
127 
— 
Other
379 
289 
Total regulatory balancing accounts receivable
$
2,999 
$
2,001 
Payable 
Balance at December 31,
(in millions)
2021
2020
Electric distribution
$
121 
$
55 
Electric transmission
24 
267 
Gas distribution and transmission
83 
76 
Energy procurement
211 
158 
Public purpose programs
259 
410 
Nuclear decommissioning adjustment mechanism
137 
— 
Other
286 
279 
Total regulatory balancing accounts payable
$
1,121 
$
1,245 
The electric distribution and utility generation accounts track the collection of revenue requirements approved in the GRC. The electric transmission accounts track
recovery of costs related to the transmission of electricity approved in the FERC TO rate cases. The gas distribution and transmission accounts track the collection
of revenue requirements approved in the GRC and the GT&S rate case.  Energy procurement balancing accounts track recovery of costs related to the procurement
of electricity, including any environmental compliance-related activities.  Public purpose programs balancing accounts are primarily used to record and recover
authorized revenue requirements for CPUC-mandated programs such as energy efficiency. The FHPMA tracks costs that protect the public from potential fire
hazards. The FRMMA and WMPMA balances track costs that are recoverable within 12 months as requested in the 2020 WMCE application. The WMBA tracks
costs associated with wildfire mitigation revenue requirement activities. The GRC memorandum accounts track the difference between the revenue requirements in
effect on January 1, 2021 and the revenue requirements authorized in the final decision for the 2020 GRC. The VMBA tracks routine and EVM activities. The
insurance premium costs track the current portion of incremental excess liability insurance costs recorded to RTBA and adjustment mechanism for costs
determined in other proceedings, as authorized in the 2020 GRC and 2019 GT&S rate cases, respectively. In addition to insurance premium costs recorded in
Regulatory balancing accounts receivable and in Long-term regulatory assets above, at December 31, 2021, there was $82 million in insurance premium costs
recorded in Current regulatory assets. The WEMA balancing accounts track insurance premium costs paid by the Utility between July 26, 2017 through December
31, 2019 that are incremental to those authorized in the 2017 GRC. On October 21, 2021, the CPUC adopted a final decision approving a settlement agreement
among the Utility and other active parties that authorized the Utility to recover $445.5 million over a 12-month period beginning January 1, 2022. The RUBA
tracks costs associated with customer protections, including higher uncollectible costs related to a moratorium on electric and gas service disconnections for
residential customers. The nuclear decommissioning adjustment mechanism tracks costs related to the closure of the Diablo Canyon power plant.
129

NOTE 5: DEBT
Credit Facilities
The following table summarizes PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s outstanding borrowings and availability under their credit facilities at December 31, 2021: 
(in millions)
Termination 
Date
Maximum Facility
Limit
Loans
Outstanding
Letters of Credit
Outstanding
Facility 
Availability
Utility revolving credit facility
June 2026
$
4,000 
$
1,885 
$
692 
$
1,423 
Utility term loan credit facility
October 2022 
1,441 
1,441 
— 
— 
Utility receivables securitization program 
September 2023
1,000 
974 
— 
— 
PG&E Corporation revolving credit facility
June 2024
500 
— 
— 
500 
Total credit facilities
$
6,941 
$
4,300 
$
692 
$
1,923 
 Includes a $1.5 billion letter of credit sublimit.
On February 8, 2022, the Utility amended the Utility Term Loan Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend the maturity date of the 18-Month Tranche Loans to January 1, 2023 for
those lenders who consented to such extension; the 18-Month Tranche Loans of the non-consenting lenders in an amount equal to $142.5 million were paid in full as of February 8, 2022.
On October 5, 2020, the Utility entered into an accounts receivable securitization program (the “Receivables Securitization Program”), providing for the sale of a portion of the Utility's
accounts receivable to the SPV, a limited liability company wholly owned by the Utility. On September 15, 2021, the Receivables Securitization Program was amended and extended to
September 15, 2023. For more information, see “Variable Interest Entities” in Note 3 above.
The amount the Utility may borrow under the Receivables Securitization Program is limited to the lesser of the facility limit and the facility availability. The facility availability may vary
based on the amount of accounts receivable that the Utility owns that are eligible for sale to the SPV and the portion of those accounts receivable that are sold to the SPV that are eligible for
advances by the lenders under the Receivables Securitization Program. As of December 31, 2021, the Receivables Securitization Program had a maximum borrowing base of $974 million
and was fully drawn.
Utility
As previously disclosed, on July 1, 2020, the Utility entered into a $3.5 billion revolving credit agreement (the “Utility Revolving Credit Agreement”) with
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and Citibank, N.A. as co-administrative agents, and Citibank, N.A., as designated agent. The Utility Revolving Credit Agreement had
an initial maturity date of July 1, 2023, subject to two one-year extensions at the option of the Utility.
As previously disclosed, on June 22, 2021, the Utility amended the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement to, among other things, (i) increase the aggregate
commitments provided by the lenders thereunder to $4.0 billion, (ii) extend the maturity date of such agreement to June 22, 2026 (subject to two one-year
extensions at the option of the Utility), and (iii) provide for reduced interest rates and commitment fee rates based on the credit rating of the Utility.
As previously disclosed, on July 1, 2020, the Utility entered into a $3.0 billion term loan credit agreement (the “Utility Term Loan Credit Agreement”) comprised
of 364-day tranche loans in the aggregate principal amount of $1.5 billion (the “364-Day Tranche Loans”) and 18-month tranche loans in the aggregate principal
amount of $1.5 billion (the “18-Month Tranche Loans”). As previously disclosed, the 364-Day Tranche Loans were paid in full on March 11, 2021. The 18-Month
Tranche Loans had an initial maturity date of January 1, 2022. The Utility borrowed the entire amount of the Utility 364-Day Term Loan Facility and the Utility
18-Month Term Loan Facility on July 1, 2020. The proceeds were used to fund transactions contemplated under the Plan.
On October 29, 2021 and on December 31, 2021, the Utility amended the Utility Term Loan Credit Agreement to, among other things, extend the maturity date of
the 18-Month Tranche Loans to October 1, 2022. On February 8, 2022, the Utility amended the Utility Term Loan Credit Agreement to, among other things,
extend the maturity date of the 18-Month Tranche Loans to January 1, 2023 for those lenders who consented to such extension; the 18-Month Tranche Loans of the
non-consenting lenders in an amount equal to $142.5 million were paid in full as of February 8, 2022. To the extent that any 18-Month Tranche Loans remain
outstanding on April 1, 2022, a fee will be due and owing to the lenders holding such 18-Month Tranche Loans.
(1)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(4)
(1)
(2 
(3) 
(4) 
130

PG&E Corporation
As previously disclosed, on July 1, 2020, PG&E Corporation entered into a $500 million revolving credit agreement (the “Corporation Revolving Credit
Agreement”). The Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement had a maturity date of July 1, 2023, (subject to two one-year extensions at the option of PG&E
Corporation). Any future proceeds from the loans under the Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement will be used to finance working capital needs, capital
expenditures and other general corporate purposes of PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries.
As previously disclosed, on June 22, 2021, PG&E Corporation amended the Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement to, among other things, (i) extend the
maturity date of such agreement to June 22, 2024 (subject to two one-year extensions at the option of PG&E Corporation) and (ii) modify both the interest rate
pricing grid and commitment fee pricing grid.
PG&E Corporation’s obligations under the Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement are secured by a pledge of PG&E Corporation’s ownership interest in 100%
of the shares of common stock of the Utility.
Intercompany Note Payable
On August 11, 2021, PG&E Corporation borrowed $145 million from the Utility under an interest bearing 364-day intercompany note due August 10, 2022. The
intercompany note includes usual and customary provisions for notes of this type. The interest rate on the loan is a variable rate equal to the interest rate applicable
to loans under the Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement. Interest is due on the last business day of each month, commencing on August 31, 2021. The proceeds
were borrowed to fund debt service obligations of PG&E Corporation. As of December 31, 2021, the intercompany note is reflected in Accounts receivable - other
on the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheet and is eliminated upon consolidation of PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Balance Sheet.
AB 1054
AB 1054 provides that certain capital expenditures may be financed using a structure that securitizes a dedicated customer charge. On February 24, 2021, the
Utility filed an application with the CPUC seeking authorization, pursuant to AB 1054, for a transaction to finance, using securitization, up to $1.19 billion of fire
risk mitigation capital expenditures that have been or will be incurred by the Utility in 2020 and 2021, with the final amount to be financed based on the capital
expenditures incurred by the Utility prior to the securitization transaction. On June 24, 2021, the CPUC issued a financing order authorizing the issuance of up to
approximately $1.2 billion of recovery bonds to recover up to $1.19 billion of fire risk mitigation capital expenditures plus an estimated $13.3 million in related
upfront financing costs. On July 6, 2021, the financing order became final and non-appealable.
On November 12, 2021, PG&E Recovery Funding LLC issued approximately $860 million of senior secured recovery bonds. The recovery bonds were issued in
three tranches: (1) approximately $266 million with an interest rate of 1.46% and is due July 15, 2033, (2) approximately $160 million with an interest rate of
2.28% and is due January 15, 2038, and (3) approximately $434 million with an interest rate of 2.82% and is due July 15, 2048. The net proceeds were used to fund
fire risk mitigation capital expenditures that have been incurred by the Utility and incurred by PG&E Corporation on behalf of the Utility in 2020 and 2021.
For more information on PG&E Recovery Fund LLC, see “Variable Interest Entities” in Note 3 above.
SB 901
SB 901, signed into law on September 21, 2018, requires the CPUC to establish a CHT, directing the CPUC to limit certain disallowances in the aggregate, so that
they do not exceed the maximum amount that the Utility can pay without harming customers or materially impacting its ability to provide adequate and safe
service. SB 901 also authorizes the CPUC to issue a financing order that permits recovery, through the issuance of recovery bonds (also referred to as
“securitization”), of wildfire-related costs found to be just and reasonable by the CPUC and, only for the 2017 Northern California wildfires, any amounts in excess
of the CHT.
131

Pursuant to SB 901 and the CPUC’s methodology adopted in the CHT OIR, on April 30, 2020, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC seeking authorization
for a post-emergence transaction to finance, using securitization, $7.5 billion of 2017 wildfire claims costs and create a corresponding customer credit trust that is
designed to not impact amounts billed to customers, with the proceeds of the securitization used to pay or reimburse the Utility for the payment of wildfire claims
costs associated with the 2017 Northern California wildfires. In connection with the proposed transaction, the Utility would retire $6.0 billion of Utility debt. On
April 23, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision finding that $7.5 billion of the Utility’s 2017 catastrophic wildfire costs and expenses are stress test costs that may be
financed through the issuance of recovery bonds pursuant to Public Utilities Code sections 850 et seq. The decision is being challenged by TURN.
Short-Term Debt Issuance
On November 15, 2021, the Utility completed the sale of $300 million aggregate principal amount of Floating Rate First Mortgage Bonds due November 14, 2022.
The proceeds, along with the long-term debt proceeds from the First Mortgage Bonds also issued on November 15, 2021, were used for the repayment of the
$1.45 billion aggregate principal amount of the Utility’s Floating Rate First Mortgage Bonds due November 15, 2021.
Long-Term Debt Issuances and Redemptions
Utility
In March 2021, the Utility issued (i) $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.367% First Mortgage Bonds due March 10, 2023, (ii) $450 million aggregate
principal amount of 3.25% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1, 2031, and (iii) $450 million aggregate principal amount of 4.20% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1,
2041. The proceeds were used for (i) the prepayment of all of the $1.5 billion 364-day term loan facility (maturing June 30, 2021) outstanding under the Utility’s
Term Loan Credit Agreement, (ii) the repayment of all of the borrowings outstanding under the Utility’s revolving credit facility pursuant to the Utility Revolving
Credit Agreement and (iii) general corporate purposes.
In June 2021, the Utility issued $800 million aggregate principal amount of 3.0% First Mortgage Bonds due June 15, 2028. The proceeds were used for general
corporate purposes, including the repayment of borrowings under the Utility’s revolving credit facility pursuant to the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement.
On November 15, 2021, the Utility completed the sale of (i) $900 million aggregate principal amount of 1.70% First Mortgage Bonds due November 15, 2023 and
(ii) an additional $550 million aggregate principal amount of 3.25% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1, 2031 (the “2031 Bonds”). The 2031 Bonds are part of the
same series of debt securities issued by the Utility in March 2021. The proceeds were used for the repayment of the $1.45 billion aggregate principal amount of the
Utility’s Floating Rate First Mortgage Bonds due November 15, 2021. The Utility used the remaining net proceeds for general corporate purposes, including the
repayment of approximately $300 million of borrowings outstanding under the Utility’s revolving credit facility pursuant to the Utility Revolving Credit
Agreement.
132

The following table summarizes PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s long-term debt:
Balance at
(in millions)
Contractual Interest Rates
December 31, 2021
December 31, 2020
PG&E Corporation
Term Loan - Stated Maturity: 2025
variable rate 
$
2,709 
$
2,709 
Senior Secured Notes due 2028
5.00%
1,000 
1,000 
Senior Secured Notes due 2030
5.25%
1,000 
1,000 
Less: current portion, net of debt issuance costs
(26)
— 
Unamortized discount, net of premium and debt issuance costs
(90)
(85)
Total PG&E Corporation Long-Term Debt
4,593 
4,624 
Utility
First Mortgage Bonds - Stated Maturity:
2022
variable rate 
500 
500 
2022
1.75%
2,500 
2,500 
2023
1.37% - 4.25%
3,575 
1,175 
2024
3.40% - 3.75%
800 
800 
2025
3.45% - 3.50%
1,475 
1,475 
2026
2.95% - 3.15%
2,551 
2,551 
2027
2.10% - 3.30%
2,550 
2,550 
2028
3.00% - 4.65%
1,975 
1,175 
2030
4.55%
3,100 
3,100 
2031
2.50% - 3.25%
3,000 
2,000 
2040
3.30% - 4.50%
2,951 
2,951 
2041
4.20% - 4.50%
700 
250 
2042
3.75% - 4.45%
750 
750 
2043
4.60%
375 
375 
2044
4.75%
675 
675 
2045
4.30%
600 
600 
2046
4.00% - 4.25%
1,050 
1,050 
2047
3.95%
850 
850 
2050
3.50% - 4.95%
5,025 
5,025 
Less: current portion, net of debt issuance costs
(2,996)
— 
Unamortized discount, net of premium and debt issuance costs
(190)
(182)
Total Utility First Mortgage Bonds
31,816 
30,170 
Recovery Bonds
1.46% - 2.82%
860 
— 
         Less: current portion
(18)
— 
Credit Facilities
Receivables securitization program - Stated Maturity: 2023
variable rate 
974 
1,000 
18-month Term Loan - Stated Maturity: 2022
variable rate 
1,441 
1,500 
Less: current portion
(1,441)
— 
Unamortized discount, net of premium and debt issuance costs
— 
(6)
Total Utility Long-Term Debt
33,632 
32,664 
Total PG&E Corporation Consolidated Long-Term Debt
$
38,225 
$
37,288 
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the contractual LIBOR-based interest rate on the term loan was 3.50% and 5.50%, respectively.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the contractual LIBOR-based interest rate on $500 million of the first mortgage bonds was 1.69% and 1.70%, respectively.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the contractual LIBOR-based interest rate on the receivables securitization program was 1.30% and 1.57%, respectively.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the contractual LIBOR-based interest rate on the term loan was 2.38% and 2.44%, respectively.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
133

Contractual Repayment Schedule
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s combined stated long-term debt principal repayment amounts at December 31, 2021 are reflected in the table below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(in millions, except interest rates)
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Thereafter
Total
PG&E Corporation
Average fixed interest rate
— %
— %
— %
— %
— %
5.13 %
5.13 %
Fixed rate obligations
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
2,000 
$
2,000 
Variable interest rate as of December 31,
2021
3.50 %
3.50 %
3.50 %
3.50 %
— %
— %
3.50 %
Variable rate obligations
$
28 
$
28 
$
28 
$
2,625 
$
— 
$
— 
$
2,709 
Utility
Average fixed interest rate
1.75 %
2.26 %
3.60 %
3.47 %
3.10 %
3.90 %
3.49 %
Fixed rate obligations
$
2,500 
$
3,575 
$
800 
$
1,475 
$
2,551 
$
23,601 
$
34,502 
Variable interest rate as of December 31,
2021
2.20 %
various 
— %
— %
— %
— %
various 
Variable rate obligations
$
1,941 
$
974 
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
2,915 
Total consolidated debt
$
4,469 
$
4,577 
$
828 
$
4,100 
$
2,551 
$
25,601 
$
42,126 
At December 31, 2021, the average interest rates for the Receivables Securitization Program, the first mortgage bonds due 2022 and the 18-month term loan were 1.30%, 1.69% and 2.38%
respectively.
NOTE 6: COMMON STOCK AND SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION
PG&E Corporation had 1,985,400,540 shares of common stock outstanding at December 31, 2021, which excludes 477,743,590 shares of common stock issued to
ShareCo.  PG&E Corporation held all of the Utility’s outstanding common stock at December 31, 2021.
Equity Offerings
During 2020, PG&E Corporation issued approximately 16 million PG&E Corporation equity units. The equity units represent the right of the unitholders to
receive, on the settlement date, between 138 million and 168 million shares of PG&E Corporation common stock. The common stock received will be based on the
value of PG&E Corporation common stock over a measurement period specified in the equity units purchase contracts and subject to certain adjustments as
provided therein. The settlement date of the equity unit purchase contracts is August 16, 2023, subject to acceleration or postponement as provided in the purchase
contracts.
At the Market Equity Distribution Program
On April 30, 2021, PG&E Corporation entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (“Equity Distribution Agreement”) with Barclays Capital Inc., BofA
Securities, Inc., Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, as sales agents and as forward sellers (in such capacities as applicable, the
“Agents” and the “Forward Sellers,” respectively), and Barclays Bank PLC, Bank of America, N.A., Credit Suisse Capital LLC and Wells Fargo Bank, National
Association, as forward purchasers (the “Forward Purchasers”), establishing an at the market equity distribution program, pursuant to which PG&E Corporation,
through the Agents, may offer and sell from time to time shares of PG&E Corporation’s common stock having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $400 million.
PG&E Corporation has no obligation to offer or sell any of its common stock under the Equity Distribution Agreement and may at any time suspend offers under
the Equity Distribution Agreement.
The Equity Distribution Agreement provides that, in addition to the issuance and sale of shares of common stock by PG&E Corporation to or through the Agents,
PG&E Corporation may enter into forward sale agreements (collectively, the “Forward Sale Agreements”) pursuant to which the relevant Forward Purchaser will
borrow shares from third parties and, through its affiliated Forward Seller, offer a number of shares of common stock equal to the number of shares of common
stock underlying the particular Forward Sale Agreement.
(1)
(1)
(1) 
134

During the year ended December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation did not sell any shares pursuant to the Equity Distribution Agreement or any Forward Sale
Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, there was $400 million available under PG&E Corporation’s at the market equity distribution program for future offerings.
Ownership Restrictions in PG&E Corporation’s Amended Articles
Under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code, if a corporation (or a consolidated group) undergoes an “ownership change,” net operating loss carryforwards
and other tax attributes may be subject to certain limitations (which could limit PG&E Corporation or the Utility’s ability to use these DTAs to offset taxable
income). In general, an ownership change occurs if the aggregate stock ownership of certain shareholders (generally five percent shareholders, applying certain
look-through and aggregation rules) increases by more than 50% over such shareholders’ lowest percentage ownership during the testing period (generally three
years). The Amended Articles limit Transfers (as defined in the Amended Articles) that increase a person’s or entity’s (including certain groups of persons)
ownership of PG&E Corporation’s equity securities to 4.75% or more prior to the Restriction Release Date (as defined in the Amended Articles) without approval
by the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation.
On July 8, 2021, PG&E Corporation, the Utility, ShareCo and the Fire Victim Trust entered into an agreement (the “Share Exchange and Tax Matters
Agreement”), pursuant to which PG&E Corporation and the Utility made a “grantor trust” election for the Fire Victim Trust effective retroactively to the inception
of the Fire Victim Trust. As a result of the grantor trust election, shares of PG&E Corporation common stock owned by the Fire Victim Trust are treated as held by
the Utility and, in turn attributed to PG&E Corporation for income tax purposes. Consequently, any shares owned by the Fire Victim Trust, along with any shares
owned by the Utility directly, are effectively excluded from the total number of outstanding equity securities when calculating a person’s Percentage Stock
Ownership (as defined in the Amended Articles) for purposes of the 4.75% ownership limitation in the Amended Articles. Shares owned by ShareCo are also
effectively excluded because ShareCo is a disregarded entity for income tax purposes. For example, although PG&E Corporation had 2,463,891,104 shares
outstanding as of February 4, 2022, only 1,548,403,924 shares (that is, the number of outstanding shares of common stock less the number of shares held by the
Fire Victim Trust, the Utility and ShareCo) count as outstanding for purposes of the ownership restrictions in the Amended Articles. As such, based on the total
number of outstanding equity securities and assuming the Fire Victim Trust has not sold any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, a person’s effective
Percentage Stock Ownership limitation for purposes of the Amended Articles as of February 4, 2022 was 2.98% of the outstanding shares. As of December 31,
2021, to the knowledge of PG&E Corporation, the Fire Victim Trust had not sold any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock. On January 31, 2022, the Fire
Victim Trust initiated an exchange of 40,000,000 Plan Shares for an equal number of New Shares in the manner contemplated by the Share Exchange and Tax
Matters Agreement and announced that it had entered into a transaction for the sale of these shares.
As of the date of this report, it is more likely than not that PG&E Corporation has not undergone an ownership change and consequently, its net operating loss
carryforwards and other tax attributes are not limited by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement
In accordance with the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement, the grantor trust election has been filed.
With the grantor trust election, the Utility’s tax deductions occur as and when the Fire Victim Trust pays the fire victims rather than when the Utility transferred
cash and other property (including PG&E Corporation common stock) to the Fire Victim Trust. For PG&E Corporation common stock transferred to the Fire
Victim Trust, the amount of the tax deduction will be impacted by the price at which the Fire Victim Trust sells the shares, rather than the price at the time such
shares were transferred to the Fire Victim Trust.
135

Under the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement, the parties agreed to exchange the 477,743,590 shares of PG&E Corporation common stock issued to the
Fire Victim Trust pursuant to the Plan (the “Plan Shares”) for an equal number of newly-issued shares of PG&E Corporation common stock (the “New Shares”).
Accordingly, on July 9, 2021, PG&E Corporation issued 477,743,590 New Shares to ShareCo, which has the sole purpose of holding the New Shares in a
designated brokerage account to facilitate the exchange process. When the Fire Victim Trust desires to sell any or all of its Plan Shares, the Fire Victim Trust may
exchange any number of Plan Shares for a corresponding number of New Shares on a share-for-share basis (without any further consideration payable by either
party) and thereafter promptly dispose of the New Shares in one or more transactions with one or more third parties. In the event that the Fire Victim Trust is
unable to timely dispose of New Shares under certain circumstances (such shares, the “Nonconforming New Shares”), PG&E Corporation has authorized up to
250,000,000 additional shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, which may be transferred by ShareCo to the Fire Victim Trust on behalf of the Utility, in
exchange for the Nonconforming New Shares, following the same procedures as for an exchange of Plan Shares for New Shares. The Plan Shares and any Non-
Conforming New Shares exchanged will be held thereafter by the Utility. In the event that the Fire Victim Trust disposes of any share of PG&E Corporation’s
common stock subject to the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement without complying with the terms of the agreement, the Fire Victim Trust may be
required to make a payment to the Utility designed to compensate the Utility for adverse tax consequences arising from nonconforming sale transactions.
Upon PG&E Corporation’s issuance of the New Shares to ShareCo, PG&E Corporation’s common stock increased by $4.85 billion, the fair value of the shares on
July 9, 2021. The increase to common stock is fully offset by the fair value of treasury stock recorded. The issuance of the New Shares did not have an impact on
the total number of outstanding common shares as the New Shares are currently held by ShareCo and as such, there was no impact on basic or diluted EPS for the
year ended December 31, 2021.
When the Fire Victim Trust notifies the Utility that it intends to sell shares, ShareCo (on behalf of the Utility) will transfer the New Shares to the Fire Victim Trust,
and the Fire Victim Trust will transfer the Plan Shares to the Utility. The Utility has no plan or intention to dispose of the Plan Shares at any time. As shares are
exchanged with the Fire Victim Trust, the Utility will record the cost of shares and PG&E Corporation’s investment under additional paid in capital and PG&E
Corporation’s common stock and treasury stock will decrease by the fair value per share established on July 9, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, none of the 250,000,000 reserved shares had been issued.
Dividends
On December 20, 2017, the Boards of Directors of PG&E Corporation and the Utility suspended quarterly cash dividends on both PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s common stock, beginning the fourth quarter of 2017, as well as the Utility’s preferred stock, beginning the three-month period ending January 31, 2018.
On March 20, 2020, PG&E Corporation and the Utility filed a Case Resolution Contingency Process Motion with the Bankruptcy Court that includes a dividend
restriction for PG&E Corporation. According to the dividend restriction, PG&E Corporation “will not pay common dividends until it has recognized $6.2 billion in
non-GAAP core earnings following the Effective Date” of the Plan. The Bankruptcy Court entered the order approving the motion on April 9, 2020.
In addition, the Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement requires that PG&E Corporation (1) maintain a ratio of total consolidated debt to consolidated
capitalization of no greater than 70% as of the end of each fiscal quarter and (2) if revolving loans are outstanding as of the end of a fiscal quarter, a ratio of
adjusted cash to fixed charges, as of the end of such fiscal quarter, of at least 150% prior to the date that PG&E Corporation first declares a cash dividend on its
common stock and at least 100% thereafter.
Under the Utility’s Articles of Incorporation, the Utility cannot pay common stock dividends unless all cumulative preferred dividends on the Utility’s preferred
stock have been paid.  As of January 31, 2022, there were $59.1 million of such cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock. Additionally, the
CPUC requires the Utility to maintain a capital structure composed of at least 52% equity on average. On May 28, 2020, the CPUC approved a final decision in the
Chapter 11 Proceedings OII, which, among other things, grants the Utility a temporary, five-year waiver from compliance with its authorized capital structure for
the financing in place upon the Utility’s emergence from Chapter 11.  
136

Subject to the foregoing restrictions, any decision to declare and pay dividends in the future will be made at the discretion of the Boards of Directors and will
depend on, among other things, results of operations, financial condition, cash requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors that the Boards of Directors
may deem relevant. On February 8, 2022, the Board of Directors of the Utility authorized the payment of all cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s
preferred stock as of January 31, 2022 totaling $59.1 million, payable on May 13, 2022, to holders of record on April 29, 2022 and declared a dividend on the
Utility’s preferred stock totaling $3.5 million that will be accrued during the three-month period ending April 30, 2022, payable on May 15, 2022, to holders of
record on April 29, 2022. It is uncertain when PG&E Corporation and the Utility will commence the payment of dividends on their common stock.
Long-Term Incentive Plan
The LTIP permits various forms of share-based incentive awards, including stock options, restricted stock units, performance shares, and other share-based awards,
to eligible employees of PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries.  Non-employee directors of PG&E Corporation are also eligible to receive certain share-based
awards.  A maximum of 91 million shares of PG&E Corporation common stock (subject to certain adjustments) has been reserved for issuance under the LTIP, of
which 58,552,722 shares were available for future awards at December 31, 2021.
The following table provides a summary of total share-based compensation expense recognized by PG&E Corporation for share-based incentive awards for 2021:
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
Stock Options
$
— 
$
3 
$
7 
Restricted stock units
35 
15 
21 
Performance shares
21 
17 
22 
Total compensation expense (pre-tax)
$
56 
$
35 
$
50 
Total compensation expense (after-tax)
$
40 
$
25 
$
35 
Share-based compensation costs are generally not capitalized.  There was no material difference between PG&E Corporation and the Utility for the information
disclosed above.
Stock Options
The exercise price of stock options granted under the LTIP and all other outstanding stock options is equal to the market price of PG&E Corporation’s common
stock on the date of grant.  Stock options generally have a 10-year term and vest over three years of continuous service, subject to accelerated vesting in certain
circumstances. As of December 31, 2021, there were no unrecognized compensation costs related to nonvested stock options for PG&E Corporation.
The fair value of each stock option on the date of grant is estimated using the Black-Scholes valuation method. No stock options were granted in 2021 and 2020.  
Expected volatilities are based on historical volatility of PG&E Corporation’s common stock.  The expected dividend payment is the dividend yield at the date of
grant.  The risk-free interest rate for periods within the contractual term of the stock option is based on the U.S. Treasury rates in effect at the date of grant.  The
expected life of stock options is derived from historical data that estimates stock option exercises and employee departure behavior.
There was no tax benefit recognized from stock options for the year ended December 31, 2021.
137

The following table summarizes stock option activity for PG&E Corporation and the Utility for 2021:
Number of 
Stock Options
Weighted Average
Grant- 
Date Fair Value
Weighted Average
Remaining Contractual
Term
Aggregate Intrinsic
Value
Outstanding at January 1
2,221,247 
$
7.45 
$
— 
Granted
— 
— 
— 
Exercised
— 
— 
— 
Forfeited or expired
(25,413)
10.23 
— 
Outstanding at December 31
2,195,834 
7.42 
4.33
— 
Vested or expected to vest at December 31
2,195,834 
7.42 
4.33
— 
Exercisable at December 31
2,195,834 
$
7.42 
4.33 $
— 
Represents additional payout of existing stock option grants.
Restricted Stock Units
Restricted stock units granted after 2014 generally vest equally over three years. Vested restricted stock units are settled in shares of PG&E Corporation common
stock accompanied by cash payments to settle any dividend equivalents associated with the vested restricted stock units.  Compensation expense is generally
recognized ratably over the vesting period based on grant-date fair value.  The weighted average grant-date fair value for restricted stock units granted during 2021,
2020, and 2019 was $11.01, $9.25, and $18.57, respectively.  The total fair value of restricted stock units that vested during 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $19 million,
$31 million, and $42 million, respectively.  The tax detriment from restricted stock units that vested in 2021 was $11 million.  In general, forfeitures are recorded
ratably over the vesting period, using historical averages and adjusted to actuals when vesting occurs.  As of December 31, 2021, $81 million of total unrecognized
compensation costs related to nonvested restricted stock units was expected to be recognized over the remaining weighted average period of 2.19 years.
The following table summarizes restricted stock unit activity for 2021:
Number of 
Restricted Stock Units
Weighted Average Grant- 
Date Fair Value
Nonvested at January 1
890,353 
$
23.05 
Granted
10,352,117 
11.01 
Vested
(743,672)
25.20 
Forfeited
(408,423)
11.67 
Nonvested at December 31
10,090,375 
$
11.00 
Performance Shares
Performance shares generally will vest three years after the grant date.  Following vesting, performance shares are settled in shares of common stock based on
either PG&E Corporation’s total shareholder return relative to a specified group of industry peer companies over a three-year performance period (“TSR”) or an
internal PG&E Corporation metric (subject in some instances to a multiplier based on TSR).  Dividend equivalents, if any, are paid in cash based on the amount of
common stock to which the recipients are entitled. 
Compensation expense attributable to performance shares is generally recognized ratably over the applicable three-year period based on the grant-date fair value
determined using a Monte Carlo simulation valuation model for the TSR-based awards or the grant-date market value of PG&E Corporation common stock for
internal metric based awards.  The weighted average grant-date fair value for performance shares granted during 2021, 2020, and 2019 was $11.83, $9.62, and
$15.39 respectively.  The tax detriment from performance shares that vested in 2021 was $19 million.  In general, forfeitures are recorded ratably over the vesting
period, using historical averages and adjusted to actuals when vesting occurs.  As of December 31, 2021, $50 million of total unrecognized compensation costs
related to nonvested performance shares was expected to be recognized over the remaining weighted average period of 1.47 years.
 (1)
(1) 
138

The following table summarizes activity for performance shares in 2021:
Number of 
Performance Shares
Weighted Average Grant- 
Date Fair Value
Nonvested at January 1
7,288,782 
$
9.16 
Granted
2,714,645 
11.83 
Vested
— 
— 
Forfeited
(1,436,418)
11.35 
Nonvested at December 31
8,567,009 
$
9.64 
Includes performance shares that expired with zero value as performance targets were not met.
NOTE 7: PREFERRED STOCK
PG&E Corporation has authorized 400 million shares of preferred stock, none of which is outstanding.
The Utility has authorized 75 million shares of first preferred stock, with a par value of $25 per share, and 10 million shares of $100 first preferred stock, with a par
value of $100 per share.  At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Utility’s preferred stock outstanding included $145 million of shares with interest rates between 5%
and 6% designated as nonredeemable preferred stock and $113 million of shares with interest rates between 4.36% and 5% that are redeemable between $25.75
and $27.25 per share, respectively.  The Utility’s preferred stock outstanding are not subject to mandatory redemption. No shares of $100 first preferred stock are
outstanding.
On December 31, 2021, annual dividends on the Utility’s nonredeemable preferred stock ranged from $1.25 to $1.50 per share.  The Utility’s redeemable preferred
stock is subject to redemption at the Utility’s option, in whole or in part, if the Utility pays the specified redemption price plus accumulated and unpaid dividends
through the redemption date.  At December 31, 2021, annual dividends on redeemable preferred stock ranged from $1.09 to $1.25 per share.
Dividends on all Utility preferred stock are cumulative.  All shares of preferred stock have voting rights and an equal preference in dividend and liquidation rights. 
Upon liquidation or dissolution of the Utility, holders of preferred stock would be entitled to the par value of such shares plus all accumulated and unpaid
dividends, as specified for the class and series. On February 8, 2022, the Board of Directors of the Utility authorized the payment of all cumulative and unpaid
dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock as of January 31, 2022 totaling $59.1 million, payable on May 13, 2022, to holders of record on April 29, 2022 and
declared a dividend on the Utility’s preferred stock totaling $3.5 million that will be accrued during the three-month period ending April 30, 2022, payable on May
15, 2022, to holders of record on April 29, 2022.
NOTE 8: EARNINGS PER SHARE
PG&E Corporation’s basic EPS is calculated by dividing the income (loss) available for common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares
outstanding.  PG&E Corporation applies the treasury stock method of reflecting the dilutive effect of outstanding share-based compensation in the calculation of
diluted EPS.  The following is a reconciliation of PG&E Corporation’s income (loss) available for common shareholders and weighted average common shares
outstanding for calculating diluted EPS for 2021, 2020, and 2019. 
 
Year Ended December 31,
(in millions, except per share amounts)
2021
2020
2019
Loss attributable to common shareholders
$
(102)
$
(1,318)
$
(7,656)
Weighted average common shares outstanding, basic
1,985 
1,257 
528 
Add incremental shares from assumed conversions:
Employee share-based compensation
— 
— 
— 
Equity Units
— 
— 
— 
Weighted average common share outstanding, diluted
1,985 
1,257 
528 
Total Loss per common share, diluted
$
(0.05)
$
(1.05)
$
(14.50)
For each of the periods presented above, the calculation of outstanding common shares on a diluted basis excluded an insignificant amount of options and
securities that were antidilutive.
 (1)
(1) 
139

NOTE 9: INCOME TAXES
PG&E Corporation and the Utility use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes.  The income tax provision includes current and deferred
income taxes resulting from operations during the year. PG&E Corporation and the Utility estimate current period tax expense in addition to calculating DTAs and
liabilities.  DTAs and liabilities result from temporary tax and accounting timing differences, such as those arising from depreciation expense.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize a tax benefit if it is more likely than not that a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return will be
sustained upon examination by taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position.  The tax benefit recognized in the financial statements is measured
based on the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement.  As such, the difference between a tax position taken or
expected to be taken in a tax return in future periods and the benefit recognized and measured pursuant to this guidance in the financial statements represents an
unrecognized tax benefit. 
Investment tax credits are deferred and amortized to income over time.  PG&E Corporation amortizes its investment tax credits over the projected investment
recovery period.  The Utility amortizes its investment tax credits over the life of the related property in accordance with regulatory treatment.
PG&E Corporation files a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return that includes the Utility and domestic subsidiaries in which its ownership is 80% or more. 
PG&E Corporation files a combined state income tax return in California.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility are parties to a tax-sharing agreement under which
the Utility determines its income tax provision (benefit) on a stand-alone basis. 
The significant components of income tax provision (benefit) by taxing jurisdiction were as follows:
 
PG&E Corporation
Utility
 
Year Ended December 31,
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
2021
2020
2019
Current:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal
$
— 
$
(26)
$
1 
$
— 
$
(26)
$
4 
State
1 
(34)
101 
— 
(34)
94 
Deferred:
Federal
543 
258 
(2,361)
588 
290 
(2,363)
State
296 
171 
(1,136)
316 
185 
(1,137)
Tax credits
(4)
(7)
(5)
(4)
(7)
(5)
Income tax provision (benefit)
$
836 
$
362 
$
(3,400)
$
900 
$
408 
$
(3,407)
140

The following tables describe net deferred income tax assets and liabilities:
 
PG&E Corporation
Utility
 
Year Ended December 31,
(in millions)
2021
2020
2021
2020
Deferred income tax assets:
 
 
 
 
Tax carryforwards
$
5,628 
$
7,641 
$
5,425 
$
7,529 
Compensation
185 
187 
108 
109 
Wildfire-related claims
1,723 
544 
1,723 
544 
Operating lease liability
346 
489 
346 
488 
Transmission tower wireless licenses
266 
— 
266 
— 
Other
278 
212 
293 
219 
Total deferred income tax assets
$
8,426 
$
9,073 
$
8,161 
$
8,889 
Deferred income tax liabilities:
 
 
 
 
Property related basis differences
8,847 
8,311 
8,835 
8,300 
Regulatory balancing accounts
1,193 
763 
1,193 
763 
Debt financing costs
501 
526 
501 
526 
Operating lease right of use asset
346 
489 
346 
488 
Income tax regulatory asset 
517 
254 
517 
254 
Other
199 
128 
178 
128 
Total deferred income tax liabilities
$
11,603 
$
10,471 
$
11,570 
$
10,459 
Total net deferred income tax liabilities
$
3,177 
$
1,398 
$
3,409 
$
1,570 
Amounts primarily relate to wildfire-related claims, net of estimated insurance recoveries, and legal and other costs related to various wildfires that have occurred in PG&E Corporation’s and
the Utility’s service territory over the past several years.
Amounts include benefits, environmental reserve, and customer advances for construction. 
Represents the tax gross up portion of the deferred income tax for the cumulative differences between amounts recognized for ratemaking purposes and amounts recognized for tax, including
the impact of changes in net deferred taxes associated with a lower federal income tax rate as a result of the Tax Act.
Amount primarily includes an environmental reserve.
 (1)
 (2)
(3)
 (4)
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
141

The following table reconciles income tax expense at the federal statutory rate to the income tax provision:
 
PG&E Corporation
Utility
 
Year Ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
2021
2020
2019
Federal statutory income tax rate
21.0 %
21.0 %
21.0 %
21.0 %
21.0 %
21.0 %
Increase (decrease) in income tax rate resulting from:
State income tax (net of federal benefit)
31.3 
(15.3)
7.5 
24.1 
19.1 
7.5 
Effect of regulatory treatment of fixed asset
differences
(71.5)
39.0 
2.8 
(51.6)
(44.9)
2.8 
Tax credits
(1.7)
1.5 
0.1 
(1.2)
(1.7)
0.1 
Fire Victim Trust
127.3 
(44.9)
— 
91.9 
51.7 
— 
Bankruptcy and emergence
— 
(37.6)
— 
— 
2.4 
— 
   Other, net 
5.3 
(2.1)
(0.6)
2.6 
2.2 
(0.5)
Effective tax rate
111.7 %
(38.4)%
30.8 %
86.8 %
49.8 %
30.9 %
Includes the effect of state flow-through ratemaking treatment.
 Includes the effect of federal flow-through ratemaking treatment for certain property-related costs.  For these temporary tax differences, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize the
deferred tax impact in the current period and record offsetting regulatory assets and liabilities.  Therefore, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s effective tax rates are impacted as these
differences arise and reverse.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize such differences as regulatory assets or liabilities as it is probable that these amounts will be recovered from or
returned to customers in future rates.  In 2021, 2020, and 2019, the amounts also reflect the impact of the amortization of excess deferred tax benefits to be refunded to customers as a result of
the Tax Act passed in December 2017.
The Utility includes an adjustment for a DTA write-off associated with the grantor trust election for the Fire Victim Trust in 2021 and an adjustment for the DTA write-off for difference
between the liability recorded related to the TCC RSA and the ultimate value of PG&E Corporation stock contributed to the Fire Victim Trust in 2020. PG&E Corporation includes the same
adjustment as the Utility in 2021 and 2020 as well as a permanent non-deductible equity backstop premium expense in 2020. This combined with a pre-tax loss and a pre-tax income for
PG&E Corporation and the Utility, respectively in 2020, accounts for the remaining difference.
 These amounts primarily represent the impact of tax audit settlements and non-tax deductible penalty costs in 2021 and 2020.
Unrecognized Tax Benefits
The following table reconciles the changes in unrecognized tax benefits: 
 
PG&E Corporation
Utility
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
2021
2020
2019
Balance at beginning of year
$
437 
$
420 
$
377 
$
437 
$
420 
$
377 
Reductions for tax position taken during a prior year
(23)
(43)
(1)
(23)
(43)
(1)
Additions for tax position taken during the current year
85 
60 
44 
85 
60 
44 
Settlements
(1)
— 
— 
(1)
— 
— 
Balance at end of year
$
498 
$
437 
$
420 
$
498 
$
437 
$
420 
The component of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would affect the effective tax rate at December 31, 2021 for PG&E Corporation and the Utility
was $30 million.
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s unrecognized tax benefits are not likely to change significantly within the next 12 months.
Interest income, interest expense and penalties associated with income taxes are reflected in income tax expense on the Consolidated Statements of Income.  For
the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, these amounts were immaterial.
 (1)
 (2)
 (3)
(4)
(1) 
(2)
(3) 
(4)
142

Tax Settlements
PG&E Corporation’s tax returns have been accepted through 2015 for federal income tax purposes, except for a few matters, the most significant of which relate to
deductible repair costs for gas transmission and distribution lines of business and tax deductions claimed for regulatory fines and fees assessed as part of the
penalty decision issued in 2015 for the San Bruno natural gas explosion in September of 2010.
PG&E Corporation’s tax returns have been accepted through 2014 for California income tax purposes. Tax years 2015 and thereafter remain subject to
examination by the State of California.
Carryforwards
The following table describes PG&E Corporation’s operating loss and tax credit carryforward balances: 
(in millions)
December 31, 2021
Expiration 
Year
Federal:
 
 
Net operating loss carryforward - Pre-2018
$
3,600 
2031 - 2036
Net operating loss carryforward - Post-2017
17,467 
N/A
Tax credit carryforward
144 
2029 - 2041
State:
Net operating loss carryforward
$
18,853 
2039 - 2041
Tax credit carryforward
122 
Various
PG&E Corporation does not believe that the Chapter 11 Cases resulted in loss of or limitation on the utilization of any of the tax carryforwards. PG&E Corporation
will continue to monitor the status of tax carryforwards.
Other Tax Matters
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s unrecognized tax benefits are not likely to change significantly within the next 12 months. At December 31, 2021, it is
reasonably possible that within the next 12 months, unrecognized tax benefits will decrease. The amount is not expected to be material.
As of the date of this report, it is more likely than not that PG&E Corporation has not undergone an ownership change, and consequently, its net operating loss
carryforwards and other tax attributes are not limited by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code.
In March 2020, Congress passed, and the President signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act. Under the CARES Act,
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have deferred the payment of 2020 payroll taxes for the remainder of the year to 2021 and 2022. Half of the payment was paid
in 2021.
During June 2020, the State of California enacted AB 85, which increases taxes on corporations over a three-year period beginning in 2020 by suspension of the
net operating loss deduction and a limit of $5 million per year on business tax credits. PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not anticipate any material impacts to
PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Financial Statements due to this legislation.
143

Additionally, as a result of the grantor trust election, the Utility’s tax deductions occur when the Fire Victim Trust pays the fire victims, rather than when the
Utility transferred cash and other property (including PG&E Corporation common stock) to the Fire Victim Trust. Therefore, $5.4 billion of cash and $4.54 billion
of PG&E Corporation common stock, in the aggregate $10.0 billion, that were transferred to the Fire Victim Trust in 2020, will not be deductible for tax purposes
by the Utility until the Fire Victim Trust pays the fire victims. Furthermore, the activities of the Fire Victim Trust are treated as activities of the Utility for tax
purposes. PG&E Corporation’s net operating loss has decreased by approximately $10.0 billion, which will be offset by payments made by the Fire Victim Trust to
the fire victims (which totaled approximately $1.67 billion in 2021) and the net activities of the Fire Victim Trust to date. Additionally, there was a $1.3 billion
charge, net of tax, decreasing net DTAs for the payment made to the Fire Victim Trust in PG&E Corporation common stock on its Consolidated Financial
Statements for activity through December 31, 2020. PG&E Corporation will recognize income tax benefits and the corresponding DTA as the Fire Victim Trust
sells shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, and the amounts of such benefits and assets will be impacted by the price at which the Fire Victim Trust sells the
shares, rather than the price at the time such shares were transferred to the Fire Victim Trust. As of December 31, 2021, to the knowledge of PG&E Corporation,
the Fire Victim Trust had not sold any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, resulting in no tax impact in PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s
consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. On January 31, 2022, the Fire Victim Trust initiated an exchange of 40,000,000 Plan
Shares for an equal number of New Shares in the manner contemplated by the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement and announced that it had entered into
a transaction for the sale of these shares. For more information, see Note 6 above.
NOTE 10: DERIVATIVES
Use of Derivative Instruments
The Utility is exposed to commodity price risk as a result of its electricity and natural gas procurement activities. Procurement costs are recovered through rates.
The Utility uses both derivative and non-derivative contracts to manage volatility in customer rates due to fluctuating commodity prices. Derivatives include
contracts, such as power purchase agreements, forwards, futures, swaps, options, and CRRs that are traded either on an exchange or over-the-counter.
Derivatives are presented in the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets and recorded at fair value and on a net basis in accordance with master netting arrangements
for each counterparty. The fair value of derivative instruments is further offset by cash collateral paid or received where the right of offset and the intention to
offset exist.
Price risk management activities that meet the definition of derivatives are recorded at fair value on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. These instruments are not
held for speculative purposes and are subject to certain regulatory requirements. The Utility expects to fully recover through rates all costs related to derivatives
under the applicable ratemaking mechanism in place as long as the Utility’s price risk management activities are carried out in accordance with CPUC directives.
Therefore, all unrealized gains and losses associated with the change in fair value of these derivatives are deferred and recorded within the Utility’s regulatory
assets and liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Net realized gains or losses on commodity derivatives are recorded in the cost of electricity or the cost of
natural gas with corresponding increases or decreases to regulatory balancing accounts for recovery from or refund to customers.
The Utility elects the normal purchase and sale exception for eligible derivatives. Eligible derivatives are those that require physical delivery in quantities that are
expected to be used by the Utility over a reasonable period in the normal course of business, and do not contain pricing provisions unrelated to the commodity
delivered.  These items are not reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. 
144

Volume of Derivative Activity
The volumes of the Utility’s outstanding derivatives were as follows: 
 
 
Contract Volume
At December 31,
Underlying Product
Instruments
2021
2020
Natural Gas 
 (MMBtus 
)
Forwards, Futures and Swaps
173,361,635 
146,642,863 
 Options
14,420,000 
14,140,000 
Electricity (Megawatt-hours)
Forwards, Futures and Swaps
10,283,639 
9,435,830 
Options
288,000 
— 
 Congestion Revenue Rights 
239,857,610 
266,091,470 
Amounts shown are for the combined positions of the electric fuels and core gas supply portfolios.
 Million British Thermal Units.
 CRRs are financial instruments that enable the holders to manage variability in electric energy congestion charges due to transmission grid limitations.
Presentation of Derivative Instruments in the Financial Statements
At December 31, 2021, the Utility’s outstanding derivative balances were as follows: 
 
Commodity Risk
(in millions)
Gross Derivative 
Balance
Netting
Cash Collateral
Total Derivative 
Balance
Current assets – other
$
58 
$
(9)
$
152 
$
201 
Other noncurrent assets – other
169 
— 
— 
169 
Current liabilities – other
(53)
9 
18 
(26)
Noncurrent liabilities – other
(216)
— 
— 
(216)
Total commodity risk
$
(42)
$
— 
$
170 
$
128 
At December 31, 2020, the Utility’s outstanding derivative balances were as follows:
 
Commodity Risk
(in millions)
Gross Derivative 
Balance
Netting
Cash Collateral
Total Derivative 
Balance
Current assets – other
$
33 
$
— 
$
115 
$
148 
Other noncurrent assets – other
136 
— 
— 
136 
Current liabilities – other
(38)
— 
15 
(23)
Noncurrent liabilities – other
(204)
— 
10 
(194)
Total commodity risk
$
(73)
$
— 
$
140 
$
67 
Cash inflows and outflows associated with derivatives are included in operating cash flows on the Utility’s Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Some of the Utility’s derivatives instruments, including power purchase agreements, contain collateral posting provisions tied to the Utility’s credit rating from
each of the major credit rating agencies, also known as a credit-risk-related contingent feature. Multiple credit agencies continue to rate the Utility below
investment grade, which results in the Utility posting additional collateral. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility satisfied or has otherwise addressed its obligations
related to the credit-risk related contingency features.
NOTE 11: FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
PG&E Corporation and the Utility measure their cash equivalents, trust assets, and price risk management instruments at fair value.  A three-tier fair value
hierarchy is established that prioritizes the inputs to valuation methodologies used to measure fair value:
•
Level 1 – Observable inputs that reflect quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1) 
(2)
(3)
145

•
Level 2 – Other inputs that are directly or indirectly observable in the marketplace.
•
Level 3 – Unobservable inputs which are supported by little or no market activities.
The fair value hierarchy requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value.
Assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis for PG&E Corporation and the Utility are summarized below.  Assets held in rabbi trusts are held
by PG&E Corporation and not the Utility.
 
Fair Value Measurements
 
 At December 31, 2021
(in millions)
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Netting
Total
Assets:
 
 
 
 
 
Short-term investments
$
289 
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
289 
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
Short-term investments
22 
— 
— 
— 
22 
Global equity securities
2,504 
— 
— 
— 
2,504 
Fixed-income securities
1,158 
866 
— 
— 
2,024 
Assets measured at NAV
— 
— 
— 
— 
31 
Total nuclear decommissioning trusts
3,684 
866 
— 
— 
4,581 
Price risk management instruments (Note 10)
 
 
 
 
 
Electricity
— 
9 
214 
6 
229 
Gas
— 
4 
— 
137 
141 
Total price risk management instruments
— 
13 
214 
143 
370 
Rabbi trusts
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed-income securities
— 
104 
— 
— 
104 
Life insurance contracts
— 
76 
— 
— 
76 
Total rabbi trusts
— 
180 
— 
— 
180 
Long-term disability trust
 
 
 
 
 
Short-term investments
6 
— 
— 
— 
6 
Assets measured at NAV
— 
— 
— 
— 
132 
Total long-term disability trust
6 
— 
— 
— 
138 
TOTAL ASSETS
$
3,979 
$
1,059 
$
214 
$
143 
$
5,558 
Liabilities:
 
 
 
 
 
Price risk management instruments (Note 10)
 
 
 
 
 
Electricity
$
— 
$
11 
$
248 
$
(24)
$
235 
Gas
— 
10 
— 
(3)
7 
TOTAL LIABILITIES
$
— 
$
21 
$
248 
$
(27)
$
242 
 Includes the effect of the contractual ability to settle contracts under master netting agreements and cash collateral.
 Represents amount before deducting $783 million, primarily related to deferred taxes on appreciation of investment value. 
 (1)
 (2)
(1)
(2)
146

 
Fair Value Measurements
 
At December 31, 2020
(in millions)
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Netting
Total
Assets:
 
 
 
 
 
Short-term investments
$
470 
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
470 
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
Short-term investments
27 
— 
— 
— 
27 
Global equity securities
2,398 
— 
— 
— 
2,398 
Fixed-income securities
924 
835 
— 
— 
1,759 
Assets measured at NAV
— 
— 
— 
— 
25 
Total nuclear decommissioning trusts
3,349 
835 
— 
— 
4,209 
Price risk management instruments (Note 10)
 
 
 
 
Electricity
— 
2 
166 
2 
170 
Gas
— 
1 
— 
113 
114 
Total price risk management instruments
— 
3 
166 
115 
284 
Rabbi trusts
 
 
 
 
Fixed-income securities
— 
106 
— 
— 
106 
Life insurance contracts
— 
79 
— 
— 
79 
Total rabbi trusts
— 
185 
— 
— 
185 
Long-term disability trust
 
 
 
 
Short-term investments
9 
— 
— 
— 
9 
Assets measured at NAV
— 
— 
— 
— 
158 
Total long-term disability trust
9 
— 
— 
— 
167 
TOTAL ASSETS
$
3,828 
$
1,023 
$
166 
$
115 
$
5,315 
Liabilities:
 
 
 
 
Price risk management instruments (Note 10)
 
 
 
 
Electricity
— 
1 
238 
(25)
214 
Gas
— 
3 
— 
— 
3 
TOTAL LIABILITIES
$
— 
$
4 
$
238 
$
(25)
$
217 
 Includes the effect of the contractual ability to settle contracts under master netting agreements and cash collateral.
 Represents amount before deducting $671 million, primarily related to deferred taxes on appreciation of investment value.
Valuation Techniques
The following describes the valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of the assets and liabilities shown in the tables above.  There are no restrictions on
the terms and conditions upon which the investments may be redeemed. There were no material transfers between any levels for the years ended December 31,
2021 and 2020.
Trust Assets
Assets Measured at Fair Value
In general, investments held in the trusts are exposed to various risks, such as interest rate, credit, and market volatility risks. Nuclear decommissioning trust assets
and other trust assets are composed primarily of equity and fixed-income securities and also include short-term investments that are money market funds valued at
Level 1.
Global equity securities primarily include investments in common stock that are valued based on quoted prices in active markets and are classified as Level 1.
 (1)
 (2)
(1)
(2)
147

Fixed-income securities are primarily composed of U.S. government and agency securities, municipal securities, and other fixed-income securities, including
corporate debt securities.  U.S. government and agency securities primarily consist of U.S. Treasury securities that are classified as Level 1 because the fair value is
determined by observable market prices in active markets.  A market approach is generally used to estimate the fair value of fixed-income securities classified as
Level 2 using evaluated pricing data such as broker quotes, for similar securities adjusted for observable differences.  Significant inputs used in the valuation model
generally include benchmark yield curves and issuer spreads.  The external credit ratings, coupon rate, and maturity of each security are considered in the valuation
model, as applicable.
Assets Measured at NAV Using Practical Expedient
Investments in the nuclear decommissioning trusts and the long-term disability trust that are measured at fair value using the NAV per share practical expedient
have not been classified in the fair value hierarchy tables above.  The fair value amounts are included in the tables above in order to reconcile to the amounts
presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.  These investments include commingled funds that are composed of equity securities traded publicly on exchanges
as well as fixed-income securities that are composed primarily of U.S. government securities, credit securities and asset-backed securities.
Price Risk Management Instruments
Price risk management instruments include physical and financial derivative contracts, such as power purchase agreements, forwards, futures, swaps, options, and
CRRs that are traded either on an exchange or over-the-counter. 
Power purchase agreements, forwards, and swaps are valued using a discounted cash flow model.  Exchange-traded futures that are valued using observable market
forward prices for the underlying commodity are classified as Level 1.  Over-the-counter forwards and swaps that are identical to exchange-traded futures, or are
valued using forward prices from broker quotes that are corroborated with market data are classified as Level 2.  Exchange-traded options are valued using
observable market data and market-corroborated data and are classified as Level 2. 
Long-dated power purchase agreements that are valued using significant unobservable data are classified as Level 3. These Level 3 contracts are valued using
either estimated basis adjustments from liquid trading points or techniques, including extrapolation from observable prices, when a contract term extends beyond a
period for which market data is available.  The Utility utilizes models to derive pricing inputs for the valuation of the Utility’s Level 3 instruments using pricing
inputs from brokers and historical data.
The Utility holds CRRs to hedge the financial risk of CAISO-imposed congestion charges in the day-ahead market.  Limited market data is available in the CAISO
auction and between auction dates; therefore, the Utility utilizes historical prices to forecast forward prices. CRRs are classified as Level 3.
Level 3 Measurements and Uncertainty Analysis
Inputs used and the fair value of Level 3 instruments are reviewed period-over-period and compared with market conditions to determine reasonableness.
Significant increases or decreases in any of those inputs would result in a significantly higher or lower fair value, respectively.  All reasonable costs related to
Level 3 instruments are expected to be recoverable through rates; therefore, there is no impact to net income resulting from changes in the fair value of these
instruments.  See Note 10 above.
 
Fair Value at
 
 
 
(in millions)
At December 31, 2021
Valuation 
Technique
Unobservable 
Input
 
Fair Value Measurement
Assets
Liabilities
Range 
/Weighted-Average
Price
Congestion revenue rights
$
188 
$
93 
Market approach
CRR auction prices
$ (40.77) - 2,265.94 / 0.40
Power purchase agreements
$
26 
$
155 
Discounted cash flow
Forward prices
$ (7.97) - 256.20 / 47.17
Represents price per megawatt-hour.
Unobservable inputs were weighted by the relative fair value of the instruments.
 
(1)
 (2)
(1) 
(2) 
148

 
Fair Value at
 
 
 
(in millions)
At December 31, 2020
Valuation 
Technique
Unobservable 
Input
 
Fair Value Measurement
Assets
Liabilities
Range 
/Weighted-Average
Price
Congestion revenue rights
$
153 
$
74 
Market approach
CRR auction prices
$ (320.25) - 320.25 / 0.30
Power purchase agreements
$
13 
$
164 
Discounted cash flow
Forward prices
$ 12.56 - 148.30 / 35.52
Represents price per megawatt-hour.
Unobservable inputs were weighted by the relative fair value of the instruments.
Level 3 Reconciliation
The following table presents the reconciliation for Level 3 price risk management instruments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively: 
 
Price Risk Management Instruments
(in millions)
2021
2020
Asset (liability) balance as of January 1
$
(72)
$
5 
Net realized and unrealized gains:
Included in regulatory assets and liabilities or balancing accounts
38 
(77)
Asset (liability) balance as of December 31
$
(34)
$
(72)
 The costs related to price risk management activities are fully passed through to customers in rates. Accordingly, unrealized gains and losses are deferred in regulatory liabilities and assets
and net income is not impacted.
Financial Instruments
PG&E Corporation and the Utility use the following methods and assumptions in estimating fair value for financial instruments: the fair values of cash, net
accounts receivable, short-term borrowings, accounts payable, customer deposits, and the Utility’s variable rate pollution control bond loan agreements
approximate their carrying values at December 31, 2021 and 2020, as they are short-term in nature.
The carrying amount and fair value of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s long-term debt instruments were as follows (the table below excludes financial
instruments with carrying values that approximate their fair values):
 
At December 31,
 
2021
2020
(in millions)
Carrying Amount
Level 2 Fair Value
Carrying Amount
Level 2 Fair Value
Debt (Note 5)
 
 
 
 
PG&E Corporation
$
4,619 
$
4,796 
$
1,901 
$
2,175 
Utility
31,816 
35,803 
29,664 
32,632 
 
(1)
 (2)
(1) 
(2) 
 (1)
(1)
149

Nuclear Decommissioning Trust Investments
The following table provides a summary of equity securities and available-for-sale debt securities: 
(in millions)
Amortized 
Cost
Total 
Unrealized 
Gains
Total 
Unrealized 
Losses
Total Fair 
Value
As of December 31, 2021
 
 
 
 
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
 
 
 
 
Short-term investments
$
22 
$
— 
$
— 
$
22 
Global equity securities
479 
2,066 
(10)
2,535 
Fixed-income securities
1,938 
98 
(12)
2,024 
Total
$
2,439 
$
2,164 
$
(22)
$
4,581 
As of December 31, 2020
 
 
 
 
Nuclear decommissioning trusts
 
 
 
 
Short-term investments
$
27 
$
— 
$
— 
$
27 
Global equity securities
543 
1,881 
(1)
2,423 
Fixed-income securities
1,610 
152 
(3)
1,759 
Total
$
2,180 
$
2,033 
$
(4)
$
4,209 
 Represents amounts before deducting $783 million and $671 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily related to deferred taxes on appreciation of investment value.
The fair value of fixed-income securities by contractual maturity is as follows:
 
As of
(in millions)
December 31, 2021
Less than 1 year
$
97 
1–5 years
495 
5–10 years
480 
More than 10 years
952 
Total maturities of fixed-income securities
$
2,024 
The following table provides a summary of activity for the fixed-income and equity securities:
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
Proceeds from sales and maturities of nuclear decommissioning investments
$
1,678 
$
1,518 
$
956 
Gross realized gains on securities
286 
159 
69 
Gross realized losses on securities
(19)
(41)
(14)
NOTE 12: EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PLANS
Pension Plan and Postretirement Benefits Other than Pensions (“PBOP”)
PG&E Corporation and the Utility sponsor a non-contributory defined benefit pension plan for eligible employees hired before December 31, 2012 and a cash
balance plan for those eligible employees hired after this date or who made a one-time election to participate (“Pension Plan”).  Certain trusts underlying these
plans are qualified trusts under the IRC.  If certain conditions are met, PG&E Corporation and the Utility can deduct payments made to the qualified trusts, subject
to certain limitations.  PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s funding policy is to contribute tax-deductible amounts, consistent with applicable regulatory decisions
and federal minimum funding requirements.  On an annual basis, the Utility funds the pension plan up to the amount it is authorized to recover through rates.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility also sponsor contributory postretirement medical plans for retirees and their eligible dependents, and non-contributory
postretirement life insurance plans for eligible employees and retirees.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility use a fiscal year-end measurement date for all plans.
 (1)
 (1)
(1)
150

Change in Plan Assets, Benefit Obligations, and Funded Status
The following tables show the reconciliation of changes in plan assets, benefit obligations, and the plans’ aggregate funded status for pension benefits and other
benefits for PG&E Corporation during 2021 and 2020:
Pension Plan 
(in millions)
2021
2020
Change in plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
20,759 
$
18,547 
Actual return on plan assets
1,693 
2,736 
Company contributions
335 
343 
Benefits and expenses paid
(892)
(867)
Fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
21,895 
$
20,759 
Change in benefit obligation:
Benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
23,172 
$
20,525 
Service cost for benefits earned
587 
530 
Interest cost
645 
713 
Actuarial (gain) loss
(752)
2,271 
Plan amendments
— 
— 
Benefits and expenses paid
(893)
(867)
Benefit obligation at end of year
$
22,759 
$
23,172 
Funded Status:
Current liability
$
(9)
$
(3)
Noncurrent liability
(856)
(2,410)
Net liability at end of year
$
(865)
$
(2,413)
 The actuarial gain for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to an increase in the discount rate used to measure the projected benefit obligation, offset by unfavorable changes in the
demographic assumptions. The actuarial loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a decrease in the discount rate used to measure the projected benefit obligation.
 PG&E Corporation’s accumulated benefit obligation was $20.4 billion and $20.7 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
 (1)
 (2)
(1)
(2)
151

Postretirement Benefits Other than Pensions 
(in millions)
2021
2020
Change in plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
$
2,995 
$
2,678 
Actual return on plan assets
193 
379 
Company contributions
10 
26 
Plan participant contribution
80 
81 
Benefits and expenses paid
(176)
(169)
Fair value of plan assets at end of year
$
3,102 
$
2,995 
Change in benefit obligation:
Benefit obligation at beginning of year
$
1,876 
$
1,832 
Service cost for benefits earned
63 
61 
Interest cost
51 
63 
Actuarial gain 
(152)
(14)
Benefits and expenses paid
(156)
(149)
Federal subsidy on benefits paid
4 
3 
Plan participant contributions
80 
80 
Benefit obligation at end of year
$
1,766 
$
1,876 
Funded Status:
Noncurrent asset
$
1,340 
$
1,153 
Noncurrent liability
(4)
(34)
Net asset at end of year
$
1,336 
$
1,119 
The actuarial gain for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to an increase in the discount rate used to measure the accumulated benefit obligations and favorable claims cost
changes. The actuarial gain for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to favorable changes in the demographic and medical cost assumptions, offset by a decrease in the
discount rate used to measure the projected benefit obligation.
 At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the postretirement medical plan was in an overfunded position and the postretirement life insurance plan was in an underfunded position. The projected
benefit obligation and the fair value of plan assets for the postretirement life insurance plan were $363 million and $359 million as of December 31, 2021, and $377 million and $343 million
as of December 31, 2020, respectively.
There was no material difference between PG&E Corporation and the Utility for the information disclosed above.
Components of Net Periodic Benefit Cost
PG&E Corporation and the Utility sponsor a non-contributory defined benefit pension plan and cash balance plan.  Both plans are included in “Pension Benefits”
below.  Post-retirement medical and life insurance plans are included in “Other Benefits” below.
(1)
 (2)
(1) 
(2)
152

Net periodic benefit cost as reflected in PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Statements of Income was as follows:
Pension Plan 
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
Service cost for benefits earned
$
587 
$
530 
$
443 
Interest cost
645 
713 
758 
Expected return on plan assets
(1,046)
(1,044)
(906)
Amortization of prior service cost
(6)
(6)
(6)
Amortization of net actuarial loss
6 
3 
3 
Net periodic benefit cost
186 
196 
292 
Less: transfer to regulatory account
147 
136 
42 
Total expense recognized
$
333 
$
332 
$
334 
 A portion of service costs are capitalized pursuant to ASU 2017-07.
 The Utility recorded these amounts to a regulatory account as they are probable of recovery through future rates.
Postretirement Benefits Other than Pensions
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
Service cost for benefits earned
$
63 
$
61 
$
56 
Interest cost
51 
63 
76 
Expected return on plan assets
(137)
(138)
(123)
Amortization of prior service cost
14 
14 
14 
Amortization of net actuarial loss
(33)
(21)
(3)
Net periodic benefit cost
$
(42)
$
(21)
$
20 
 A portion of service costs are capitalized pursuant to ASU 2017-07.
Non-service costs are reflected in Other income, net on the Consolidated Statements of Income. Service costs are reflected in Operating and maintenance on the
Consolidated Statements of Income.
There was no material difference between PG&E Corporation and the Utility for the information disclosed above. 
Components of Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
PG&E Corporation and the Utility record unrecognized prior service costs and unrecognized gains and losses related to pension and post-retirement benefits other
than pension as components of accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax.  In addition, regulatory adjustments are recorded in the Consolidated
Statements of Income and Consolidated Balance Sheets to reflect the difference between expense or income calculated in accordance with GAAP for accounting
purposes and expense or income for ratemaking purposes, which is based on authorized plan contributions.  For pension benefits, a regulatory asset or liability is
recorded for amounts that would otherwise be recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income.  For post-retirement benefits other than pension, the Utility
generally records a regulatory liability for amounts that would otherwise be recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income.  As the Utility is unable to
record a regulatory asset for these other benefits, the charge remains in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
 (1)
 (2)
(1)
(2)
 (1)
(1)
153

Valuation Assumptions
The following weighted average year-end actuarial assumptions were used in determining the plans’ projected benefit obligations and net benefit costs. 
 
Pension Plan
PBOP Plans
 
December 31,
December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
2021
2020
2019
Discount rate
3.03 %
2.77 %
3.46 %
2.97 - 3.04%
2.67 - 2.80 %
3.37 - 3.47%
Rate of future compensation increases
3.80 %
3.80 %
3.90 %
N/A
N/A
N/A
Expected return on plan assets
5.50 %
5.10 %
5.70 %
3.30 - 6.40%
3.10 - 6.10 %
3.50 - 6.60%
Interest crediting rate for cash
balance plan
1.95 %
1.95 %
2.11 %
N/A
N/A
N/A
The assumed health care cost trend rate as of December 31, 2021 was 6.0%, gradually decreasing to the ultimate trend rate of approximately 4.5% in 2028 and
beyond. 
Expected rates of return on plan assets were developed by estimating future stock and bond returns and then applying these returns to the target asset allocations of
the employee benefit plan trusts, resulting in a weighted average rate of return on plan assets.  Returns on fixed-income debt investments were projected based on
real maturity and credit spreads added to a long-term inflation rate.  Returns on equity investments were projected based on estimates of dividend yield and real
earnings growth added to a long-term inflation rate.  For the pension plan, the assumed return of 5.5% compares to a ten-year actual return of 9.6%.  The rate used
to discount pension benefits and other benefits was based on a yield curve developed from market data of over approximately 817 Aa-grade non-callable bonds at
December 31, 2021.  This yield curve has discount rates that vary based on the duration of the obligations.  The estimated future cash flows for the pension benefits
and other benefit obligations were matched to the corresponding rates on the yield curve to derive a weighted average discount rate.
Investment Policies and Strategies
The financial position of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s funded status is the difference between the fair value of plan assets and projected benefit
obligations.  Volatility in funded status occurs when asset values change differently from liability values and can result in fluctuations in costs in financial
reporting, as well as the amount of minimum contributions required under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.  PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s investment policies and strategies are designed to increase the ratio of trust assets to plan liabilities at an acceptable level of funded
status volatility. 
The trusts’ asset allocations are meant to manage volatility, reduce costs, and diversify its holdings.  Interest rate, credit, and equity risk are the key determinants of
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s funded status volatility.  In addition to affecting the trusts’ fixed income portfolio market values, interest rate changes also
influence liability valuations as discount rates move with current bond yields.  To manage volatility, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s trusts hold significant
allocations in long maturity fixed-income investments. Although they contribute to funded status volatility, equity investments are held to reduce long-term
funding costs due to their higher expected return.  Real assets and absolute return investments are held to diversify the trust’s holdings in equity and fixed-income
investments by exhibiting returns with low correlation to the direction of these markets. Real assets include global real estate investment trusts (“REITS”), global
listed infrastructure equities, and private real estate funds.  Absolute return investments include hedge fund portfolios. 
Derivative instruments such as equity index futures are used to meet target equity exposure. Derivative instruments, such as equity index futures and U.S. treasury
futures, are also used to rebalance the fixed income/equity allocation of the pension’s portfolio. Foreign currency exchange contracts are used to hedge a portion of
the non U.S. dollar exposure of global equity investments.
154

The target asset allocation percentages for major categories of trust assets for pension and other benefit plans are as follows:
 
Pension Plan
PBOP Plans
 
2022
2021
2020
2022
2021
2020
Global equity securities
30 %
30 %
30 %
26 %
36 %
28 %
Absolute return
2 %
2 %
2 %
1 %
1 %
2 %
Real assets
8 %
8 %
8 %
3 %
5 %
8 %
Fixed-income securities
60 %
60 %
60 %
70 %
58 %
62 %
Total
100 %
100 %
100 %
100 %
100 %
100 %
PG&E Corporation and the Utility apply a risk management framework for managing the risks associated with employee benefit plan trust assets.  The guiding
principles of this risk management framework are the clear articulation of roles and responsibilities, appropriate delegation of authority, and proper accountability
and documentation.  Trust investment policies and investment manager guidelines include provisions designed to ensure prudent diversification, manage risk
through appropriate use of physical direct asset holdings and derivative securities, and identify permitted and prohibited investments.
Fair Value Measurements
The following tables present the fair value of plan assets for pension and other benefits plans by major asset category at December 31, 2021 and 2020.  
 
Fair Value Measurements
 
At December 31,
 
2021
2020
(in millions)
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Pension Plan:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short-term investments
$
552 
$
255 
$
— 
$
807 
$
334 
$
408 
$
— 
$
742 
Global equity securities
2,074 
424 
— 
2,498 
1,875 
— 
— 
1,875 
Absolute Return
— 
1 
— 
1 
1 
1 
— 
2 
Real assets
632 
— 
— 
632 
517 
— 
— 
517 
Fixed-income securities
2,729 
7,388 
27 
10,144 
2,467 
7,154 
12 
9,633 
Assets measured at NAV
— 
— 
— 
7,972 
— 
— 
— 
8,224 
Total
$
5,987 
$
8,068 
$
27 
$
22,054 
$
5,194 
$
7,563 
$
12 
$
20,993 
PBOP Plans:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short-term investments
$
31 
$
— 
$
— 
$
31 
$
37 
$
— 
$
— 
$
37 
Global equity securities
105 
— 
— 
105 
173 
— 
— 
173 
Real assets
34 
— 
— 
34 
54 
— 
— 
54 
Fixed-income securities
776 
875 
1 
1,652 
481 
715 
1 
1,197 
Assets measured at NAV
— 
— 
— 
1,296 
— 
— 
— 
1,549 
Total
$
946 
$
875 
$
1 
$
3,118 
$
745 
$
715 
$
1 
$
3,010 
Total plan assets at fair value
 
 
 $
25,172 
 
 
 $
24,003 
In addition to the total plan assets disclosed at fair value in the table above, the trusts had other net liabilities of $175 million and $249 million at December 31,
2021 and 2020, respectively, comprised primarily of cash, accounts receivable, deferred taxes, and accounts payable. 
Valuation Techniques
The following describes the valuation techniques used to measure the fair value of the assets and liabilities shown in the table above.  All investments that are
valued using a NAV per share can be redeemed quarterly with a notice not to exceed 90 days.
155

Short-Term Investments
Short-term investments consist primarily of commingled funds across government, credit, and asset-backed sectors. These securities are categorized as Level 1 and
Level 2 assets.
Global Equity Securities
The global equity category includes investments in common stock and equity-index futures.  Equity investments in common stock are actively traded on public
exchanges and are therefore considered Level 1 assets.  These equity investments are generally valued based on unadjusted prices in active markets for identical
securities.  Equity-index futures are valued based on unadjusted prices in active markets and are Level 1 assets.
Real Assets
The real asset category includes portfolios of commodity futures, global REITS, global listed infrastructure equities, and private real estate funds.  The commodity
futures, global REITS, and global listed infrastructure equities are actively traded on a public exchange and are therefore considered Level 1 assets. 
Fixed-Income Securities
Fixed-income securities are primarily composed of U.S. government and agency securities, municipal securities, and other fixed-income securities, including
corporate debt securities.  U.S. government and agency securities primarily consist of U.S. Treasury securities that are classified as Level 1 because the fair value is
determined by observable market prices in active markets.  A market approach is generally used to estimate the fair value of debt securities classified as Level 2
using evaluated pricing data such as broker quotes, for similar securities adjusted for observable differences.  Significant inputs used in the valuation model
generally include benchmark yield curves and issuer spreads.  The external credit ratings, coupon rate, and maturity of each security are considered in the valuation
model, as applicable.
Assets Measured at NAV Using Practical Expedient
Investments in the trusts that are measured at fair value using the NAV per share practical expedient have not been classified in the fair value hierarchy tables
above. The fair value amounts are included in the tables above in order to reconcile to the amounts presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. These
investments include commingled funds that are composed of equity securities traded publicly on exchanges, fixed-income securities that are composed primarily of
U.S. government securities, credit securities and asset-backed securities, and real assets and absolute return investments that are held to diversify the trust’s
holdings in equity and fixed-income securities.
Transfers Between Levels
No material transfers between levels occurred in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
156

Level 3 Reconciliation
The following table is a reconciliation of changes in the fair value of instruments for the pension plan that have been classified as Level 3 for the years ended
December 31, 2021 and 2020: 
(in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2021
Fixed-Income
Balance at beginning of year
$
12 
Actual return on plan assets:
Relating to assets still held at the reporting date
6 
Relating to assets sold during the period
(7)
Purchases, issuances, sales, and settlements:
Purchases
22 
Settlements
(6)
Balance at end of year
$
27 
 
 
(in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2020
Fixed-Income
Balance at beginning of year
$
15 
Actual return on plan assets:
  Relating to assets still held at the reporting date
2 
Relating to assets sold during the period
(3)
Purchases, issuances, sales, and settlements:
Purchases
11 
Settlements
(13)
Balance at end of year
$
12 
There were no material transfers out of Level 3 in 2021 and 2020.
Cash Flow Information
Employer Contributions
PG&E Corporation and the Utility contributed $335 million to the pension benefit plans and $10 million to the other benefit plans in 2021.  These contributions are
consistent with PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s funding policy, which is to contribute amounts that are tax-deductible and consistent with applicable
regulatory decisions and federal minimum funding requirements.  None of these pension or other benefits were subject to a minimum funding requirement
requiring a cash contribution in 2021.  The Utility’s pension benefits met all the funding requirements under Employee Retirement Income Security Act.  PG&E
Corporation and the Utility expect to make total contributions of approximately $327 million and $15 million to the pension plan and other postretirement benefit
plans, respectively, for 2022. 
Benefits Payments and Receipts
As of December 31, 2021, the estimated benefits expected to be paid and the estimated federal subsidies expected to be received in each of the next five fiscal
years, and in aggregate for the five fiscal years thereafter, are as follows: 
(in millions)
Pension 
Plan
PBOP 
Plans
Federal 
Subsidy
2022
869 
81 
(3)
2023
954 
85 
(3)
2024
988 
89 
(3)
2025
1018 
88 
(3)
2026
1,046 
91 
(3)
Thereafter in the succeeding five years
5,533 
466 
(3)
157

There were no material differences between the estimated benefits expected to be paid by PG&E Corporation and paid by the Utility for the years presented above. 
There were also no material differences between the estimated subsidies expected to be received by PG&E Corporation and received by the Utility for the years
presented above.
Retirement Savings Plan
PG&E Corporation sponsors a retirement savings plan, which qualifies as a 401(k) defined contribution benefit plan under the Internal Revenue Code 1986, as
amended.  This plan permits eligible employees to make pre-tax and after-tax contributions into the plan, and provide for employer contributions to be made to
eligible participants.  Total expenses recognized for defined contribution benefit plans reflected in PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Statements of Income were
$133 million, $119 million, and $109 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Beginning January 1, 2019 PG&E Corporation changed its default matching
contributions under its 401(k) plan from PG&E Corporation common stock to cash. Beginning in March 2019, at PG&E Corporation’s directive, the 401(k) plan
trustee began purchasing new shares in the PG&E Corporation common stock fund on the open market rather than directly from PG&E Corporation.
There were no material differences between the employer contribution expense for PG&E Corporation and the Utility for the years presented above.
NOTE 13: RELATED PARTY AGREEMENTS AND TRANSACTIONS
The Utility and other subsidiaries provide and receive various services to and from their parent, PG&E Corporation, and among themselves.  The Utility and
PG&E Corporation exchange administrative and professional services in support of operations.  Services provided directly to PG&E Corporation by the Utility are
priced at the higher of fully loaded cost (i.e., direct cost of good or service and allocation of overhead costs) or fair market value, depending on the nature of the
services.  Services provided directly to the Utility by PG&E Corporation are generally priced at the lower of fully loaded cost or fair market value, depending on
the nature and value of the services.  PG&E Corporation also allocates various corporate administrative and general costs to the Utility and other subsidiaries using
agreed-upon allocation factors, including the number of employees, operating and maintenance expenses, total assets, and other cost allocation methodologies. 
Management believes that the methods used to allocate expenses are reasonable and meet the reporting and accounting requirements of its regulatory agencies.
The Utility’s significant related party transactions were: 
 
Year Ended December 31, 
(in millions)
2021
2020
2019
Utility revenues from:
 
 
 
Administrative services provided to PG&E Corporation
$
3 
$
3 
$
4 
Utility expenses from:
Administrative services received from PG&E Corporation
$
82 
$
108 
$
107 
Utility employee benefit due to PG&E Corporation
39 
34 
42 
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Utility had receivables of $173 million and $35 million, respectively, from PG&E Corporation included in Accounts
receivable – other and Noncurrent assets – other on the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets, and payables of $19 million and $46 million, respectively, to PG&E
Corporation included in accounts payable – other on the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.
On August 11, 2021, PG&E Corporation borrowed $145 million from the Utility under an interest bearing 364-day intercompany note due August 10, 2022. As of
December 31, 2021, the intercompany note is reflected in Accounts receivable - other on the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheet and is eliminated upon
consolidation of PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Balance Sheet. For more information, see “Intercompany Note Payable” in Note 5 above.
158

NOTE 14: WILDFIRE-RELATED CONTINGENCIES
Liability Overview
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have significant contingencies arising from their operations, including contingencies related to wildfires. A provision for a loss
contingency is recorded when it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be reasonably estimated. PG&E Corporation
and the Utility evaluate which potential liabilities are probable and the related range of reasonably estimated losses and record a charge that reflects their best
estimate or the lower end of the range, if there is no better estimate. The assessment of whether a loss is probable or reasonably possible, and whether the loss or a
range of losses is estimable, often involves a series of complex judgments about future events. Loss contingencies are reviewed quarterly, and estimates are
adjusted to reflect the impact of all known information, such as negotiations (including those during mediations with claimants), discovery, settlements and
payments, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and other information and events pertaining to a particular matter. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s provision for
loss and expense excludes anticipated legal costs, which are expensed as incurred. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations,
liquidity, and cash flows may be materially affected by the outcome of the following matters.
The process for estimating losses associated with potential claims related to wildfires requires management to exercise significant judgment based on a number of
assumptions and subjective factors, including the factors identified above and estimates based on currently available information and prior experience with
wildfires. As more information becomes available, including from potential claimants as litigation or resolution efforts progress, management estimates and
assumptions regarding the potential financial impacts of wildfire events may change.
Potential liabilities related to wildfires depend on various factors, including the cause of the fire, contributing causes of the fire (including alternative potential
origins, weather- and climate-related issues, and forest management and fire suppression practices), the number, size and type of structures damaged or destroyed,
the contents of such structures and other personal property damage, the number and types of trees damaged or destroyed, attorneys’ fees for claimants, the nature
and extent of any personal injuries, including the loss of lives, the amount of fire suppression and clean-up costs, other damages the Utility may be responsible for
if found negligent, and the amount of any penalties, fines, or restitution that may be imposed by courts or other governmental entities.
Criminal charges have been filed against the Utility in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire and the 2020 Zogg fire. Under California law (including Penal Code
section 1202.4), if the Utility were convicted of any of the charges, the sentencing court must order the Utility to “make restitution to the victim or victims in an
amount established by court order” that is “sufficient to fully reimburse the victim or victims for every determined economic loss incurred as the result of” the
Utility’s underlying conduct, in addition to interest and the victim’s or victims’ attorneys’ fees. This requirement for full reimbursement of economic loss is not
waivable by either the government or the victims and is not offset by any compensation that the victims have received or may receive from their insurance carriers.
If convicted of any of the charges, the Utility could be subject to fines, penalties, and restitution to victims for their economic losses (including property damage,
medical and mental health expenses, lost wages, lost profits, attorneys’ fees and interest), as well as non-monetary remedies such as oversight requirements. In the
event that the Utility were convicted of certain charges in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire or 2020 Zogg fire, the Utility currently believes that, depending on
which charges it were to be convicted of, its total losses associated with such fire would materially exceed the accrued estimated liabilities that PG&E Corporation
and the Utility have recorded to reflect the lower end of the range of the reasonably estimable range of losses. The Utility is currently unable to determine a
reasonable estimate of the amount of such additional losses. The Utility does not expect that any of its liability insurance would be available to cover restitution
payments ordered by the courts presiding over the criminal proceedings.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are aware of numerous civil complaints related to the following wildfire events and expect that they may receive further such
complaints. The complaints include claims based on multiple theories of liability, including inverse condemnation, negligence, violations of the Public Utilities
Code, violations of the Health & Safety Code, premises liability, trespass, public nuisance and private nuisance. The plaintiffs in each action principally assert that
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s alleged failure to properly maintain, inspect, and de-energize their transmission lines was the cause of the relevant wildfire.
The timing and outcome for resolution of any such claims or investigations are uncertain. The Utility believes it will continue to receive additional information
from potential claimants in connection with these wildfire events as litigation or resolution efforts progress. Any such additional information may potentially allow
PG&E Corporation and the Utility to refine the estimates of their accrued losses and may result in changes to the accrual depending on the information received.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility intend to vigorously defend themselves against both criminal charges and civil complaints.
159

If the Utility’s facilities, such as its electric distribution and transmission lines, are judicially determined to be the substantial cause of the following matters, and
the doctrine of inverse condemnation applies, the Utility could be liable for property damage, business interruption, interest and attorneys’ fees without having
been found negligent. California courts have imposed liability under the doctrine of inverse condemnation in legal actions brought by property holders against
utilities on the grounds that losses borne by the person whose property was damaged through a public use undertaking should be spread across the community that
benefited from such undertaking, and based on the assumption that utilities have the ability to recover these costs through rates. Further, California courts have
determined that the doctrine of inverse condemnation is applicable regardless of whether the CPUC ultimately allows recovery by the utility for any such costs.
The CPUC may decide not to authorize cost recovery even if a court decision were to determine that the Utility is liable as a result of the application of the doctrine
of inverse condemnation. In addition to claims for property damage, business interruption, interest and attorneys’ fees under inverse condemnation, PG&E
Corporation and the Utility could be liable for fire suppression costs, evacuation costs, medical expenses, personal injury damages, punitive damages and other
damages under other theories of liability in connection with the following wildfire events, including if PG&E Corporation or the Utility were found to have been
negligent.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility currently believe that it is reasonably possible that the amount of loss could be greater than the accrued estimated amounts but
are unable to reasonably estimate the additional loss and the upper end of the range because, as described above, there are a number of unknown facts and legal
considerations that may impact the amount of any potential liability, including the total scope and nature of claims that may be asserted against PG&E Corporation
and the Utility and the outcome of the criminal proceedings initiated against the Utility. If the liability for wildfires were to exceed $1.0 billion in the aggregate in
any Coverage Year, the Utility may be eligible to make a claim to the Wildfire Fund under AB 1054 to satisfy settled or finally adjudicated eligible claims in
excess of such amount, except that claims related to the 2019 Kincade fire would be subject to the 40% limitation on the allowed amount of claims arising before
emergence from bankruptcy. PG&E Corporation and the Utility intend to continue to review the available information and other information as it becomes
available, including evidence in the possession of Cal Fire or the relevant district attorney’s office, evidence from or held by other parties, claims that have not yet
been submitted, and additional information about the nature and extent of personal and business property damages and losses, the nature, number and severity of
personal injuries, and information made available through the discovery process.
2019 Kincade Fire
According to Cal Fire, on October 23, 2019 at approximately 9:27 p.m. Pacific Time, a wildfire began northeast of Geyserville in Sonoma County, California (the
“2019 Kincade fire”), located in the service territory of the Utility. According to a Cal Fire incident update dated March 3, 2020, 3:35 p.m. Pacific Time, the 2019
Kincade fire consumed 77,758 acres and resulted in no fatalities, four first responder injuries, 374 structures destroyed, and 60 structures damaged. In connection
with the 2019 Kincade fire, state and local officials issued numerous mandatory evacuation orders and evacuation warnings. Based on County of Sonoma
information, PG&E Corporation and the Utility understand that the geographic zones subject to either a mandatory evacuation order or an evacuation warning
between October 23, 2019 and November 4, 2019 included approximately 200,000 persons.
On July 16, 2020, Cal Fire issued a press release with its determination that the Utility’s equipment caused the 2019 Kincade fire.
On April 6, 2021, the Sonoma County District Attorney’s office filed the Kincade Complaint charging the Utility with five felonies and 28 misdemeanors related to
the 2019 Kincade fire. On April 6, 2021, PG&E Corporation announced that it disputed the charges in the Kincade Complaint. It further announced that it would
accept Cal Fire’s finding that a Utility transmission line caused the 2019 Kincade fire. On May 11, 2021, the Utility filed a demurrer to 25 of the 33 counts
contained in the Kincade Complaint. At a hearing on September 9, 2021, the Sonoma County Superior Court overruled the demurrer. The Utility pled not guilty to
all charges on October 13, 2021. On January 28, 2022, the Sonoma County District Attorney’s Office filed the Kincade Amended Complaint, which replaces two
felonies with five different felonies and drops six misdemeanor counts. On January 28, 2022, the court deemed the Utility’s demurrer and the court’s prior ruling as
applying to 22 of the 30 counts in the Kincade Amended Complaint, and the Utility thereafter pled not guilty to all charges in the Kincade Amended Complaint. A
preliminary hearing on the charges began on February 8, 2022.
160

On December 2, 2021, the CPUC approved a settlement between the Safety Enforcement Division and the Utility (the “Kincade SED Settlement”). The Kincade
SED Settlement resolves SED’s investigation into the 2019 Kincade fire and provides for the removal of approximately 70 transmission lines or portions of lines
that are no longer in service and are de-energized but have not been removed as required by CPUC rules. The Kincade SED Settlement provides that (i) the Utility
will pay $40 million to California’s General Fund; (ii) the Utility will remove permanently abandoned transmission lines over a ten-year period; and (iii) the Utility
must incur $85 million of the costs of such work by December 31, 2024, and it may not seek recovery of this $85 million of costs. SED agreed to refrain from
instituting enforcement proceedings against the Utility for not having removed the lines previously. The Kincade SED Settlement states that it does not constitute
an admission by the Utility of violations of GOs or statutory requirements. In connection with the Kincade SED Settlement, PG&E Corporation and the Utility
recorded a liability of $40 million reflected in Other current liabilities on the Consolidated Financial Statements for the period ended December 31, 2021. For the
$85 million of cost of removal that the Utility will not seek recovery, the Utility expects to record such disallowances in 2022. On January 10, 2022, TURN filed
an application for rehearing of the Kincade SED Settlement. On January 25, 2022, the Utility filed an opposition to the application for rehearing.
As of February 3, 2022, PG&E Corporation and the Utility are aware of approximately 100 complaints on behalf of at least 2,605 plaintiffs related to the 2019
Kincade fire. The plaintiffs filed master complaints on July 16, 2021; PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s response was filed on August 16, 2021; and PG&E
Corporation and the Utility filed a demurrer with respect to the plaintiffs’ inverse condemnation claims. On December 10, 2021, the court overruled the demurrer.
In addition, on January 5, 2022, Cal Fire filed a complaint in the coordinated proceeding seeking to recover approximately $90 million for fire suppression and
other costs incurred in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire. Following a November 5, 2021 hearing, the San Francisco County Superior Court set a trial date of
November 7, 2022.
Based on the current state of the law concerning inverse condemnation in California and the facts and circumstances available to PG&E Corporation and the Utility
as of the date of this filing, including Cal Fire’s determination of the cause and the information gathered as part of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s
investigation, PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe it is probable that they will incur a loss in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire. PG&E Corporation and
the Utility recorded a liability in the aggregate amount of $625 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (before available insurance). Based on the facts and
circumstances available to the Utility as of the filing of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31,
2021, including the status of negotiations with certain subrogation entities, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded an additional charge in 2021 for potential
losses in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire of $175 million, for an aggregate liability of $800 million (before available insurance).
The Utility’s accrued estimated losses do not include, among other things: (i) any amounts for potential penalties, fines, or restitution that may be imposed by
courts or other governmental entities on PG&E Corporation or the Utility, (ii) any punitive damages, (iii) any amounts in respect of compensation claims by federal
or state agencies other than state fire suppression costs, (iv) evacuation costs, or (v) any other amounts that are not reasonably estimable.
The following table presents changes in the lower end of the range of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s reasonably estimable range of losses for claims arising
from the 2019 Kincade fire since December 31, 2019.
Loss Accrual (in millions)
Balance at December 31, 2019
$
— 
Accrued Losses
625 
Payments
— 
Balance at December 31, 2020
625 
Accrued Losses
175 
Payments
(31)
Balance at December 31, 2021
$
769 
The Utility has liability insurance coverage for third-party liability attributable to the 2019 Kincade fire in an aggregate amount of $430 million. As of December
31, 2021, the Utility has recorded an insurance receivable for the full amount of the $430 million.
161

2020 Zogg Fire
According to Cal Fire, on September 27, 2020, at approximately 4:03 p.m. Pacific Time, a wildfire began in the area of Zogg Mine Road and Jenny Bird Lane,
north of Igo in Shasta County, California (the “2020 Zogg fire”), located in the service territory of the Utility. According to a Cal Fire incident update dated
October 16, 2020, 3:08 p.m. Pacific Time, the 2020 Zogg fire consumed 56,338 acres and resulted in four fatalities, one injury, 204 structures destroyed, and 27
structures damaged.
On March 22, 2021, Cal Fire issued a press release with its determination that the 2020 Zogg fire was caused by a pine tree contacting electrical facilities owned
and operated by the Utility located north of the community of Igo.
On September 24, 2021, the Shasta County District Attorney’s Office filed the Zogg Complaint charging the Utility with 11 felonies and 20 misdemeanors related
to the 2020 Zogg fire, the 2020 Daniel fire, the 2020 Ponder fire, and the 2021 Woody fire. On September 24, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility announced
that they disputed the charges in the Zogg Complaint. They further announced that they would accept Cal Fire’s finding that a Utility electric line caused the 2020
Zogg fire, even though PG&E Corporation and the Utility did not have access to all of the evidence that Cal Fire gathered. On November 18, 2021, the Utility filed
a demurrer to 10 of the 31 counts contained in the Zogg Complaint. A hearing on the demurrer is set for April 4, 2022.
Various other entities, which may include other law enforcement agencies, may also be investigating the fire. It is uncertain when any such investigations will be
complete.
As of February 3, 2022, PG&E Corporation and the Utility are aware of approximately 21 complaints on behalf of at least 382 plaintiffs related to the 2020 Zogg
fire. The plaintiffs seek damages that include wrongful death, property damage, economic loss, punitive damages, exemplary damages, attorneys’ fees and other
damages. The plaintiffs filed master complaints on August 6, 2021, and PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s answer was filed on September 7, 2021, and PG&E
Corporation and the Utility filed a demurrer with respect to the plaintiffs’ inverse condemnation claims. On December 10, 2021, the court overruled the demurrer.
At an October 4, 2021 hearing, the San Francisco County Superior Court set a trial date of February 6, 2023. In addition, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have
been contacted by Cal Fire to accept service of a complaint filed against them for fire suppression costs incurred in connection with the 2020 Zogg fire.
Based on the current state of the law concerning inverse condemnation in California and the facts and circumstances available to PG&E Corporation and the Utility
as of the date of this filing, including Cal Fire’s determination of the cause and the information gathered as part of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s
investigation, PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe it is probable that they will incur a loss in connection with the 2020 Zogg fire. PG&E Corporation and the
Utility recorded a liability in the aggregate amount of $275 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 (before available insurance). Based on the facts and
circumstances available to the Utility as of the filing of the Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, including the status of
negotiations with certain agencies, subrogation entities, and individual plaintiffs, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded an additional charge in 2021 for
potential losses in connection with the 2020 Zogg fire in the amount of $100 million, for an aggregate liability of $375 million (before available insurance).
Following continued negotiations during the quarter ended December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility entered agreements with all but one of the
insurance subrogation plaintiffs in the 2020 Zogg fire litigation to resolve their claims arising from the 2020 Zogg fire.
The Utility’s accrued estimated losses do not include, among other things: (i) any amounts for potential penalties, fines, or restitution that may be imposed by
courts or other governmental entities on PG&E Corporation or the Utility, (ii) any punitive damages, (iii) any amounts in respect of compensation claims by federal
or state agencies other than state fire suppression costs, (iv) evacuation costs, or (v) any other amounts that are not reasonably estimable.
162

The following table presents changes in the lower end of the range of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s reasonably estimable range of losses for claims arising
from the 2020 Zogg fire since December 31, 2019.
Loss Accrual (in millions)
Balance at December 31, 2019
$
— 
Accrued Losses
275 
Payments
— 
Balance at December 31, 2020
275 
Accrued Losses
100 
Payments
(164)
Balance at December 31, 2021
$
211 
The Utility has liability insurance for third-party liability attributable to the 2020 Zogg fire in an aggregate amount of $611 million. This amount is reduced from
the $867.5 million of coverage disclosed in the 2020 Form 10-K due to the Utility’s commuting certain insurance policies in connection with its April 2021
wildfire liability insurance renewal. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility has recorded an insurance receivable for $337 million for probable insurance recoveries
in connection with the 2020 Zogg fire, which equals the $375 million probable loss estimate less an initial self-insured retention of $60 million, plus $22 million in
legal fees incurred. Recovery under the Utility’s insurance policies for the 2021 Dixie fire will reduce the amount of insurance proceeds available for the 2020
Zogg fire by the same amount.
2021 Dixie Fire
According to Cal Fire, on July 13, 2021, at approximately 5:15 p.m. Pacific Time, a wildfire began in the Feather River Canyon near Cresta Dam (the “2021 Dixie
fire”), located in the service territory of the Utility. According to a Cal Fire incident update, dated October 25, 2021, 7:46 a.m. Pacific Time, the 2021 Dixie fire
consumed 963,309 acres and resulted in 1,329 structures destroyed (including 717 residential, 143 commercial, and 443 other structures), 95 structures damaged,
and one fatality, which according to published reports was a fire fighter who passed away due to COVID-19 after returning home from the 2021 Dixie fire.
On January 4, 2022, Cal Fire issued a press release with its determination that the 2021 Dixie fire was caused by a tree contacting electrical distribution lines
owned and operated by the Utility.
The Butte County, Plumas County, Shasta County, Lassen County and Tehama County District Attorneys’ Offices, as well as the SED and OEIS, are investigating
the fire; various other entities, which may include other state and federal law enforcement agencies, may also be investigating the fire. The United States
Attorney’s Office for the Eastern District of California issued a subpoena for documents as well. PG&E Corporation and the Utility are cooperating with the
investigations. It is uncertain when any such investigations will be complete. PG&E Corporation and the Utility are also conducting their own investigation into the
cause of the 2021 Dixie fire. This investigation is ongoing, and PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not have access to all of the evidence in the possession of Cal
Fire or other third parties.
As of February 3, 2022, PG&E Corporation and the Utility are aware of approximately 20 complaints on behalf of at least 1,005 plaintiffs related to the 2021 Dixie
fire and expect that they may receive further such complaints. The plaintiffs seek damages that include property damage, economic loss, punitive damages,
exemplary damages, attorneys’ fees and other damages.
Based on the current state of the law concerning inverse condemnation in California and the facts and circumstances available to PG&E Corporation and the Utility
as of the date of this filing, including Cal Fire’s determination of the cause and the information gathered as part of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s
investigation, PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe it is probable that they will incur a loss in connection with the 2021 Dixie fire. PG&E Corporation and the
Utility recorded a liability in the aggregate amount of $1.15 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 (before available recoveries).
The Utility’s accrued estimated losses do not include, among other things: (i) any amounts for potential penalties, fines, or restitution that may be imposed by
courts or other governmental entities on PG&E Corporation or the Utility, (ii) any punitive damages, (iii) any amounts in respect of compensation claims by federal
or state agencies including for state or federal fire suppression costs and damages related to federal land, (iv) evacuation costs, or (v) any other amounts that are not
reasonably estimable.
163

As noted above, the aggregate estimated liability for claims in connection with the 2021 Dixie fire does not include potential claims for fire suppression costs from
federal, state, county, or local agencies or damage to land and vegetation in national parks or national forests. As to these damages, PG&E Corporation and the
Utility have not concluded that a loss is probable due to the incomplete information available to PG&E Corporation and the Utility as of the date of this filing as to
facts pertinent to potential claims and defenses. Moreover, PG&E Corporation and the Utility are currently unable to reasonably estimate the range of possible
losses for any such claims due to, among other factors, incomplete information as to facts pertinent to potential claims and defenses, as well as facts that would
bear on the amount, type, and valuation of vegetation loss, potential reforestation, habitat loss, and other resources damaged or destroyed by the 2021 Dixie fire.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe, however, that such losses could be significant with respect to fire suppression costs due to the size and duration of the
2021 Dixie fire and corresponding magnitude of fire suppression resources dedicated to fighting the 2021 Dixie fire and with respect to claims for damage to land
and vegetation in national parks or national forests due to the very large number of acres of national park and national forests that were affected by the 2021 Dixie
fire. According to the National Interagency Coordination Center Incident Management Situation Report dated October 29, 2021 at 7:30 a.m. Mountain Time, over
$630 million of costs had been incurred in suppressing the 2021 Dixie fire. The Utility currently estimates that the fire burned approximately 70,000 acres of
national parks and approximately 685,000 acres of national forests.
The Utility has liability insurance coverage for third-party liability attributable to periods in which both the 2020 Zogg fire and 2021 Dixie fire occurred in an
aggregate amount of $900 million. Recovery under the Utility’s insurance policies for the 2020 Zogg fire will reduce the amount of insurance proceeds available
for the 2021 Dixie fire by the same amount. An immaterial decrease was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility has recorded
an insurance receivable of $563 million for probable insurance recoveries in connection with the 2021 Dixie fire, which equals the aggregate $900 million of
available insurance coverage for third-party liability attributable to the 2021 Dixie fire, less the $337 million insurance receivable recorded in connection with the
2020 Zogg fire.
As of December 31, 2021, the Utility has recorded a Wildfire Fund receivable of $150 million for probable recoveries in connection with the 2021 Dixie fire. See
“Wildfire Fund under AB 1054” below. The Utility has also recorded a $101 million reduction to its regulatory liability for wildfire-related claims costs that were
determined to be probable of recovery through the FERC TO formula rate and a $347 million regulatory asset for costs that were determined to be probable of
recovery through the WEMA. See “Regulatory Recovery” below. Decreases in the amount of the insurance receivable for the 2021 Dixie fire may also increase the
amount that is probable of recovery through the FERC TO formula rate and the WEMA. An immaterial increase was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Loss Recoveries
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recovery mechanisms available for wildfire liabilities including from insurance, customers, and the Wildfire Fund. PG&E
Corporation and the Utility record a receivable for a recovery when it is deemed probable that recovery of a recorded loss will occur, and the Utility can reasonably
estimate the amount or its range. While the Utility plans to seek recovery of all insured losses, it is unable to predict the ultimate amount and timing of such
insurance recoveries.
Total probable recoveries for the 2021 Dixie fire as of December 31, 2021 are:
Potential Recovery Source (in millions)
2021 Dixie fire
Insurance
$
563 
FERC TO rates
101 
WEMA
347 
Wildfire Fund
150 
Probable recoveries at December 31, 2021
$
1,161 
The Utility could be subject to significant liability in connection with these wildfire events. If such liability is not recoverable from insurance or the other
mechanisms described herein, it could have a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and
cash flows.
164

Insurance
Insurance Coverage
In April 2021, the Utility purchased approximately $268 million in wildfire liability insurance coverage for the period from April 13, 2021 to April 1, 2022, and
approximately $32 million in incremental wildfire liability reinsurance for the period from April 1, 2021 to April 1, 2022 at a cost of approximately $220 million.
This coverage is in addition to approximately $11 million in existing wildfire liability reinsurance for the period from July 1, 2020 to July 1, 2021 and
approximately $600 million in existing wildfire liability insurance purchased by the Utility in August 2020 for the period from August 1, 2020 to August 1, 2021.
On August 1, 2021, the $600 million of existing wildfire liability coverage renewed on a 12-month term covering the period from August 1, 2021 to August 1,
2022 at a cost of approximately $516 million pursuant to multi-year policy terms. The Utility’s wildfire liability insurance is subject to an initial self-insured
retention of $60 million.
In June 2021, the Utility purchased approximately $535 million in non-wildfire liability coverage for the period from June 1, 2021 to April 1, 2022 at a cost of
approximately $89 million. This coverage is in addition to approximately $140 million in existing non-wildfire liability insurance for the period from August 1,
2020 to August 1, 2021. In connection with the June 2021 renewal, the Utility procured an extension of this existing coverage to April 1, 2022 at a premium cost of
approximately $30 million. The Utility also has $50 million in additional non-wildfire liability coverage available through one of its wildfire liability policies with
shared limits. The Utility’s non-wildfire liability insurance is subject to an initial self-insured retention of $10 million. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E
Corporation and the Utility had prepaid insurance of $358 million, reflected in Other current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Various coverage limitations applicable to different insurance layers could result in material uninsured costs in the future depending on the amount and type of
damages resulting from covered events.
In the Utility’s 2020 GRC proceeding, the CPUC also approved a settlement agreement provision that allows the Utility to recover annual insurance costs for up to
$1.4 billion in general liability insurance coverage. For more information about the RTBA, see Note 4 above.
Insurance Receivable
Through December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded $430 million for probable insurance recoveries in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire,
$337 million for probable insurance recoveries in connection with the 2020 Zogg fire, and $563 million for probable insurance recoveries in connection with the
2021 Dixie fire. PG&E Corporation and the Utility intend to seek full recovery for all insured losses.
The balances for insurance receivables with respect to wildfires are included in Other accounts receivable in PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated
Balance Sheets:
Insurance Receivable (in millions)
2021 Dixie
fire
2020 Zogg
fire
2019 Kincade
fire
2018 Camp
fire
2017 Northern
California wildfires
2015 Butte
fire
Total
Balance at December 31, 2019
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
1,380 
$
808 
$
50 
$
2,238 
Accrued insurance recoveries
— 
219 
430 
— 
— 
— 
649 
Reimbursements
— 
— 
— 
(1,380)
(783)
(50)
(2,213)
Balance at December 31, 2020
— 
219 
430 
— 
25 
— 
674 
Accrued insurance recoveries 
563 
118 
— 
— 
— 
— 
681 
Reimbursements 
— 
(67)
(16)
— 
(25)
— 
(108)
Balance at December 31, 2021
$
563 
$
270 
$
414 
$
— 
$
— 
$
— 
$
1,247 
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the accrued insurance recoveries decreased for the 2021 Dixie fire with a corresponding increase for the 2020 Zogg fire for $6.5 million.
On January 26, 2022, the Utility received $43 million of insurance reimbursements related to the 2020 Zogg fire.
(1)
(2)
(1) 
(2) 
165

Regulatory Recovery
FERC TO rates
The Utility recognizes income and reduces its regulatory liability for potential refund through the FERC TO formula rate in future rates for a portion of the third-
party wildfire-related claims in excess of insurance coverage. The allocation to transmission customers was based on a FERC-approved allocation factor as
determined in the formula rate. Based on information currently available to the Utility regarding the 2021 Dixie fire, for the year ended December 31, 2021, the
Utility recorded a $101 million reduction to its regulatory liability for wildfire-related claims costs that were determined to be probable of recovery through the
FERC TO formula rate.
WEMA
In June 2018, the CPUC approved the establishment of the WEMA, which provides for tracking of incremental wildfire claims and outside legal costs plus
incremental insurance premium costs above what is being recovered through rates. For the year ended December 31, 2021, based on information currently
available to the Utility, incremental wildfire claims-related costs for the 2021 Dixie fire were determined to be probable of recovery and the Utility recorded a $347
million regulatory asset in the WEMA.
Wildfire Fund under AB 1054
On July 12, 2019, the California governor signed into law AB 1054, a bill which provides for the establishment of a statewide fund that will be available for
eligible electric utility companies to pay eligible claims for liabilities arising from wildfires occurring after July 12, 2019 that are caused by the applicable electric
utility company’s equipment, subject to the terms and conditions of AB 1054. Each of California’s large electric IOUs has elected to participate in the Wildfire
Fund. Eligible claims are claims for third-party damages resulting from any such wildfires, limited to the portion of such claims that exceeds the greater of (i)
$1.0 billion in the aggregate in any Coverage Year and (ii) the amount of insurance coverage required to be in place for the electric utility company pursuant to
Section 3293 of the Public Utilities Code, added by AB 1054. The accrued Wildfire Fund receivable as of December 31, 2021 reflects an expectation that the
Coverage Year will be based on the calendar year with coverage limited to the 2021 Dixie Fire. For 2022, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have elected a
Coverage Year that commences on January 1, 2022 at 12:01 a.m. Pacific Time and ends on December 31, 2022 at 12:00 a.m. Pacific Time.
Electric utility companies that draw from the Wildfire Fund will only be required to reimburse amounts that are determined by the CPUC in a proceeding for cost
recovery applying the prudency standard in AB 1054, not to be just and reasonable, subject to a disallowance cap equal to 20% of the IOU’s transmission and
distribution equity rate base. For the Utility, the disallowance cap would be approximately $2.9 billion based on its 2021 equity rate base, and is subject to
adjustment based on changes in the Utility’s total transmission and distribution equity rate base and would apply for a three calendar year period. The disallowance
cap is inapplicable in certain circumstances, including if the Wildfire Fund administrator determines that the electric utility company’s actions or inactions that
resulted in the applicable wildfire constituted “conscious or willful disregard for the rights and safety of others,” or the electric utility company fails to maintain a
valid safety certification. Costs that the CPUC determines to be just and reasonable in accordance with the prudency standard in AB 1054 will not be reimbursed to
the Wildfire Fund, resulting in a draw-down of the Wildfire Fund. The Utility expects that the same prudency standard would also be applied in any CPUC review
of an application filed by the Utility seeking recovery of costs recorded to the WEMA.
Before the expiration of any current safety certification, the Utility must request a new safety certification from the OEIS, which the Utility expects to be issued
within 90 days if the Utility has provided documentation that it has satisfied the requirements for the safety certification pursuant to Section 8389(e) of the Public
Utilities Code, added by AB 1054. An issued safety certification is valid for 12 months or until a timely request for a new safety certification is acted upon,
whichever occurs later. On January 14, 2021, the OEIS (then the Wildfire Safety Division of the CPUC) approved the Utility’s 2020 application and issued the
Utility’s 2020 safety certification pursuant to the requirements of AB 1054. The safety certification is separate from the CPUC’s enforcement authority and does
not preclude the CPUC from pursuing remedies for safety or other applicable violations. On January 31, 2022, the OEIS approved the Utility’s 2021 application
and issued the Utility’s 2021 safety certification.
The Wildfire Fund and disallowance cap will be terminated when the amounts therein are exhausted. The Wildfire Fund is expected to be capitalized with (i)
$10.5 billion of proceeds of bonds supported by a 15-year extension of the Department of Water Resources charge to customers, (ii) $7.5 billion in initial
contributions from California’s three large electric IOUs and (iii) $300 million in annual contributions paid by California’s three large electric IOUs for a 10-year
period. For more information see “Initial and Annual Contributions to the Wildfire Fund Established Pursuant to AB 1054” in Note 3 above.
166

The Wildfire Fund will only be available for payment of eligible claims so long as there are sufficient funds remaining in the Wildfire Fund. Such funds could be
depleted more quickly than expected, including as a result of claims made by California’s other participating electric utility companies. The Wildfire Fund is
available to pay for the Utility’s eligible claims arising as of July 12, 2019, the effective date of AB 1054, subject to a limit of 40% of the allowed amount of such
claims arising between the effective date of AB 1054 and the Utility’s emergence from Chapter 11. The 40% limit does not apply to eligible claims that arise after
the Utility’s emergence from Chapter 11.
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded $150 million in Other noncurrent assets for Wildfire Fund receivables related to the 2021
Dixie fire.
For more information see Note 3 above.
Wildfire-Related Derivative Litigation
Two purported derivative lawsuits alleging claims for breach of fiduciary duties and unjust enrichment were filed in the San Francisco County Superior Court on
November 16, 2017 and November 20, 2017, respectively, naming as defendants certain then-current and former members of the boards of directors and certain
then-current and former officers of PG&E Corporation and the Utility. PG&E Corporation and the Utility are named as nominal defendants. These lawsuits were
consolidated by the court on February 14, 2018 and denominated In Re California North Bay Fire Derivative Litigation (now re-captioned Trotter v. Williams et
al.). On April 13, 2018, the plaintiffs filed a consolidated complaint. After the parties reached an agreement regarding a stay of the derivative proceeding pending
resolution of the tort actions related to the 2017 Northern California wildfires and any regulatory proceeding relating to the 2017 Northern California wildfires, on
April 24, 2018, the court entered a stipulation and order to stay. The stay was subject to certain conditions regarding the plaintiffs’ access to discovery in other
actions. On January 28, 2019, the plaintiffs filed a request to lift the stay for the purposes of amending their complaint to add allegations regarding the 2018 Camp
fire. Prior to resolution of the plaintiffs’ request to lift the stay, this matter was automatically stayed by PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s commencement of
the Chapter 11 Cases. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s rights with respect to PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s claims directly or indirectly related to any
of the Fires (as defined in the Plan) against former officers and directors of PG&E Corporation and the Utility were assigned to the Fire Victim Trust under the
Plan. Any such recovery is limited to the extent of any director and officer insurance policy proceeds paid by any insurance carrier to reimburse PG&E Corporation
or the Utility for amounts paid pursuant to their indemnification obligations in connection with such causes of action. The assignment became effective as of the
Emergence Date. On November 12, 2020, the trustee for the Fire Victim Trust filed a motion to intervene to substitute as the plaintiff in the matter, to which the
parties later stipulated. On March 8, 2021, the court granted the parties’ stipulation to substitute the trustee for the Fire Victim Trust as the plaintiff.
On December 24, 2018, a separate derivative lawsuit, entitled Bowlinger v. Chew, et al. (now captioned Trotter v. Chew, et al.), was filed in San Francisco
Superior Court, alleging claims for breach of fiduciary duty, abuse of control, corporate waste, and unjust enrichment in connection with the 2018 Camp fire
against certain then-current and former officers and directors, and naming PG&E Corporation and the Utility as nominal defendants. On February 5, 2019, the
plaintiff filed a response to the notice asserting that the automatic stay did not apply to his claims. PG&E Corporation and the Utility accordingly filed a Motion to
Enforce the Automatic Stay with the Bankruptcy Court as to the Bowlinger action, which was granted. On November 5, 2020, the court entered a stipulation and
order to substitute the trustee for the Fire Victim Trust as the plaintiff.
On February 24, 2021, the trustee filed an amended complaint in the Trotter v. Chew action, asserting two claims for breach of fiduciary duty against certain of
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s former directors and officers. Neither PG&E Corporation nor the Utility is a party to the action. On March 30, 2021, the
Trotter v. Chew and Trotter v. Williams actions were consolidated. On April 26, 2021, the defendants filed demurrers to the amended complaint. On November 8,
2021, the Court entered an order sustaining in part and overruling in part the demurrers. On November 18, 2021, the trustee filed a second amended complaint. On
December 21, 2021, the defendants filed demurrers to the second amended complaint. Trial is set for June 27, 2022.
On January 25, 2019, a separate purported derivative lawsuit, entitled Hagberg v. Chew, et al., was filed in San Francisco Superior Court, alleging claims for
breach of fiduciary duty, abuse of control, corporate waste, and unjust enrichment in connection with the 2018 Camp fire against certain then-current and former
officers and directors, and naming PG&E Corporation and the Utility as nominal defendants. A stipulation and proposed order to voluntarily dismiss this action
was filed on April 20, 2021 and a case management conference on the dismissal order is set for March 9, 2022.
167

The above purported derivative lawsuits were brought against the named defendants on behalf of PG&E Corporation or the Utility. As a result of the assignment of
these claims to the Fire Victim Trust, any recovery based on these claims would be paid to the Fire Victim Trust. Any such recovery is limited to the extent of any
director and officer insurance policy proceeds paid by any insurance carrier to reimburse PG&E Corporation or the Utility for amounts paid pursuant to their
indemnification obligations in connection with such causes of action.
Securities Class Action Litigation
Wildfire-Related Securities Class Action
In June 2018, two purported securities class actions were filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California (the “District Court”),
naming PG&E Corporation and certain of its then-current and former officers as defendants, entitled David C. Weston v. PG&E Corporation, et al. and Jon Paul
Moretti v. PG&E Corporation, et al., respectively.  The complaints alleged material misrepresentations and omissions related to, among other things, vegetation
management and transmission line safety in various PG&E Corporation public disclosures. The complaints asserted claims under Section 10(b) and Section 20(a)
of the Exchange Act and Rule 10b-5 promulgated thereunder, and sought unspecified monetary relief, interest, attorneys’ fees and other costs. Both complaints
identified a proposed class period of April 29, 2015 to June 8, 2018. On September 10, 2018, the court consolidated both cases, and the litigation is now
denominated In re PG&E Corporation Securities Litigation, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California, Case No. 18-03509. The court also
appointed PERA as lead plaintiff. PERA filed a consolidated amended complaint on November 9, 2018. On December 14, 2018, PERA filed a second amended
consolidated complaint to add allegations regarding the 2018 Camp fire.
Due to the commencement of the Chapter 11 Cases, the proceedings were automatically stayed as to PG&E Corporation and the Utility.
On February 22, 2019, a third purported securities class action was filed in the District Court, entitled York County on behalf of the York County Retirement Fund,
et al. v. Rambo, et al. (the “York County Action”). The complaint names as defendants certain then-current and former officers and directors, as well as the
underwriters of four public offerings of notes from 2016 to 2018. Neither PG&E Corporation nor the Utility is named as a defendant. The complaint alleges
material misrepresentations and omissions in connection with the note offerings related to, among other things, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s vegetation
management and wildfire safety measures. The complaint asserts claims under Section 11 and Section 15 of the Securities Act of 1933, and seeks unspecified
monetary relief, attorneys’ fees and other costs, and injunctive relief. On May 7, 2019, the York County Action was consolidated with In re PG&E Corporation
Securities Litigation.
On May 28, 2019, the plaintiffs in the consolidated securities actions filed a third amended consolidated class action complaint, which includes the claims asserted
in the previously filed actions and names as defendants PG&E Corporation, the Utility, certain current and former officers and former directors, and the
underwriters. On August 28, 2019, the Bankruptcy Court denied PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s request to extend the stay to the claims against the officer,
director, and underwriter defendants. On October 4, 2019, the officer, director, and underwriter defendants filed motions to dismiss the third amended complaint,
which motions are under submission with the District Court. The securities actions have been enjoined as to PG&E Corporation and the Utility pursuant to the Plan
with any such claims submitted through a proof of claim to be resolved by the Bankruptcy Court as part of the claims reconciliation process in the Chapter 11
Cases. On April 29, 2021, the District Court issued a notice of intent to stay this action pending completion of the claims procedures in the bankruptcy proceedings.
PERA filed objections to the notice of intent to stay on May 28, 2021. PG&E Corporation and the Utility filed a response to PERA’s objections on June 10, 2021,
the officer, director, and underwriter defendants filed a response to PERA’s objections on June 11, 2021, and PERA filed a sur-response on June 21, 2021. The
District Court has not taken further action with respect to its notice of intent to stay.
168

Satisfaction of HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims and Subordinated Debt Claims
Claims against PG&E Corporation and the Utility relating to, among others, the three purported securities class actions (described above) that have been
consolidated and denominated In re PG&E Corporation Securities Litigation, U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California, Case No. 18-03509, will
be resolved pursuant to the Plan. As described above, these claims consist of pre-petition claims under the federal securities laws related to, among other things,
allegedly misleading statements or omissions with respect to vegetation management and wildfire safety disclosures, and are classified into separate categories
under the Plan, each of which is subject to subordination under the Bankruptcy Code. The first category of claims consists of pre-petition claims arising from or
related to the common stock of PG&E Corporation (such claims, with certain other similar claims against PG&E Corporation, the “HoldCo Rescission or Damage
Claims”). The second category of pre-petition claims, which comprises two separate classes under the Plan, consists of claims arising from debt securities issued
by PG&E Corporation and the Utility (such claims, with certain other similar claims against PG&E Corporation and the Utility, the “Subordinated Debt Claims,”
and together with the HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims, the “Subordinated Claims”).
While PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe they have defenses to the Subordinated Claims, as well as insurance coverage that may be available with respect
to the Subordinated Claims, these defenses may not prevail and any such insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover the full amount of the allowed claims.
In that case, PG&E Corporation and the Utility will be required, pursuant to the Plan, to satisfy any such allowed claims as follows:
•
each holder of an allowed HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claim will receive a number of shares of common stock of PG&E Corporation equal to such
holder’s HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claim Share (as such term is defined in the Plan); and
•
each holder of an allowed Subordinated Debt Claim will receive payment in full in cash.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have been engaged in settlement efforts with respect to the Subordinated Claims. If the Subordinated Claims are not settled,
PG&E Corporation and the Utility expect that the Subordinated Claims will be resolved by the Bankruptcy Court in the claims reconciliation process and treated as
described above under the Plan. Under the Plan, after the Emergence Date, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have the authority to compromise, settle, object to,
or otherwise resolve proofs of claim, and the Bankruptcy Court retains jurisdiction to hear disputes arising in connection with disputed claims. With respect to the
Subordinated Claims, the claims reconciliation process may include litigation of the merits of such claims, including the filing of motions, fact discovery, and
expert discovery. The total number and amount of allowed Subordinated Claims, if any, was not determined at the Emergence Date. To the extent any such claims
are allowed, the total amount of such claims could be material, and therefore could result in (a) the issuance of a material number of shares of common stock of
PG&E Corporation with respect to allowed HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims, or (b) the payment of a material amount of cash with respect to allowed
Subordinated Debt Claims. There can be no assurance that such claims will not have a material adverse impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial
condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
Further, if shares are issued in respect of allowed HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims, it may be determined that, under the Plan, the Fire Victim Trust should
receive additional shares of common stock of PG&E Corporation (assuming, for this purpose, that shares issued in respect of the HoldCo Rescission or Damage
Claims were issued on the Emergence Date).
The named plaintiffs in the consolidated securities actions filed proofs of claim with the Bankruptcy Court on or before the bar date that reflect their securities
litigation claims against PG&E Corporation and the Utility. PERA has filed two motions seeking approval from the Bankruptcy Court to treat its proof of claim as
a class claim. On February 27, 2020 and January 26, 2021, the Bankruptcy Court issued orders denying the motions. PERA filed an appeal of the February 27,
2020 order and on March 8, 2021, the District Court issued an order dismissing the appeal.
On July 2, 2020, PERA filed a notice of appeal of the Confirmation Order to the District Court, solely to the extent of seeking review of that part of the
Confirmation Order approving the Insurance Deduction (as defined in the Plan) with respect to the formula for the determination of the HoldCo Rescission or
Damage Claims Share. On August 10, 2021, the District Court issued an order affirming the Bankruptcy Court’s ruling with respect to the Insurance Deduction. On
September 9, 2021, PERA filed a notice of appeal of the District Court’s order to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals and on December 15, 2021, PERA filed its
opening brief. PERA’s appeal to the Ninth Circuit remains pending.
169

On September 1, 2020, PG&E Corporation and the Utility filed a motion (the “Securities Claims Procedures Motion”) with the Bankruptcy Court to approve
procedures to help facilitate the resolution of the Subordinated Claims. The motion, among other things, requested approval of procedures which would allow
PG&E Corporation and the Utility to collect trading information with respect to the Subordinated Claims, to engage in an alternative dispute resolution process for
resolving disputed Subordinated Claims, and to file certain omnibus claim objections with respect to the Subordinated Claims. PERA and a number of other parties
filed objections to the Securities Claims Procedures Motion. On January 25, 2021, the Bankruptcy Court granted the Securities Claims Procedures Motion.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have been working to resolve the Subordinated Claims in accordance with the procedures approved by the Bankruptcy Court,
including by requesting trading information from holders of Subordinated Claims. Also, pursuant to those procedures, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have filed
numerous omnibus objections in the Bankruptcy Court to certain of the Subordinated Claims. The Bankruptcy Court has entered several orders disallowing and
expunging Subordinated Claims that were subject to these omnibus objections, and certain Subordinated Claims subject to these omnibus objections remain
pending. PG&E Corporation and the Utility expect to file additional omnibus objections with respect to certain of the Subordinated Claims and to continue to act
under the procedures approved by the Bankruptcy Court to resolve the Subordinated Claims.
Based on discussions with certain holders of the HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims, PG&E Corporation believes it is probable that it will incur a loss in
connection with the HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims. As of the date of this filing, PG&E Corporation determined that the amount or range of such loss is not
reasonably estimable because either a negotiated resolution would be contingent upon available insurance coverage, the scope of which has not yet been agreed, or
any negotiated resolutions would be limited to a subset of immaterial claims. PG&E Corporation is further unable to estimate the amount or range of loss because
the nature and value of HoldCo Rescission or Damage Claims varies significantly among potential claimholders, and as of the date of this filing, PG&E
Corporation has only engaged in substantive discussions with a limited subset of claimholders.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility continue to believe it is reasonably possible that they will incur a loss in connection with the Subordinated Debt Claims but are
unable to reasonably estimate the amount or range of loss because the nature and value, if any, of such claims varies significantly among potential claimholders. As
of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have not recorded a liability in connection with the Subordinated Claims.
De-energization Securities Class Action
On October 25, 2019, a purported securities class action was filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, entitled Vataj v.
Johnson et al. The complaint named as defendants a then-current director and certain then-current and former officers of PG&E Corporation. Neither PG&E
Corporation nor the Utility was named as a defendant. The complaint alleged materially false and misleading statements regarding PG&E Corporation’s wildfire
prevention and safety protocols and policies, including regarding the Utility’s PSPS events, that allegedly resulted in losses and damages to holders of PG&E
Corporation’s securities. The complaint asserted claims under Section 10(b) and Section 20(a) of the Exchange Act and Rule 10b-5 promulgated thereunder, and
sought unspecified monetary relief, attorneys’ fees and other costs.
On April 17, 2020, the plaintiffs filed an amended complaint asserting the same claims. The amended complaint added PG&E Corporation and a current officer of
PG&E Corporation as defendants, and removed claims against certain current and former officers of PG&E Corporation previously named in the action.
On February 16, 2021, the plaintiffs filed a motion with the District Court for preliminary approval of a proposed settlement. On November 2, 2021, the District
Court entered an order granting final approval of the settlement, which is now effective. Pursuant to the settlement stipulation: (1) PG&E Corporation paid
$10 million, and (2) plaintiffs and the Settlement Class (as defined in the stipulation of settlement) released the Released Persons (as defined in the stipulation of
settlement, including PG&E Corporation and the Utility, and each of their officers, directors, as well as the current and former officers named in both the original
and amended complaints) from all claims that have been or could have been asserted by or on behalf of PG&E Corporation shareholders that relate to (a)
allegations that were asserted or could have been asserted in either of the complaints in Vataj, and (b) investments in PG&E Corporation’s stock during the relevant
period specified in the stipulation of settlement.
170

Indemnification Obligations and Directors’ and Officers’ Insurance Coverage
To the extent permitted by law, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have obligations to indemnify directors and officers for certain events or occurrences while a
director or officer is or was serving in such capacity, which indemnification obligations extend to the claims asserted against certain directors and officers in the
securities class actions and in the litigation matters enumerated above under the heading “Wildfire-Related Derivative Litigation.” PG&E Corporation and the
Utility maintain directors’ and officers’ insurance coverage to reduce their exposure to such indemnification obligations. PG&E Corporation and the Utility have
provided notice to their insurance carriers of the claims asserted in the litigation matters enumerated above under the headings “Wildfire-Related Securities Class
Action” and “Wildfire-Related Derivative Litigation,” and are in arbitration with the carriers regarding, among other things, the applicability of multiple years of
directors’ and officers’ insurance policies to those matters. Recovery under the directors’ and officers’ insurance policies in one such litigation matter will impact
the directors’ and officers’ insurance proceeds available in the other matters.
On March 17, 2021, the trustee for the Fire Victim Trust filed a lawsuit entitled Trotter v. PG&E Corporation, et al., in San Francisco Superior Court, seeking,
among other things, a declaration that the trustee for the Fire Victim Trust be permitted to participate in the arbitration with the carriers. The trustee named PG&E
Corporation, the Utility, and the insurance carriers as defendants. On March 25, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility removed the action to the Bankruptcy
Court. On March 29, 2021, the Fire Victim Trust filed a motion to remand the lawsuit back to state court, which the Bankruptcy Court denied on April 20, 2021.
On April 30, 2021, the Fire Victim Trust moved for summary judgment. Oppositions and cross-motions to the summary judgment motion were filed by PG&E
Corporation, the Utility and the insurance carriers on May 21, 2021. On June 22, 2021, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order denying the Fire Victim Trust’s
motion for summary judgment and granting the defendants’ cross-motions for summary judgment. On June 29, 2021, the Bankruptcy Court entered judgment in
favor of all defendants and against the Fire Victim Trust.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility additionally have potential indemnification obligations to the underwriters for the Utility’s note offerings, pursuant to the
underwriting agreements associated with those offerings. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s indemnification obligations to the officers, directors and
underwriters may be limited or affected by the Chapter 11 Cases, among other things.
The extent of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s recovery of the directors’ and officers’ insurance proceeds could have a material effect on PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
Butte County District Attorney’s Office Investigation into the 2018 Camp Fire
Following the 2018 Camp fire, the Butte County District Attorney’s Office and the California Attorney General’s Office opened a criminal investigation of the
2018 Camp fire.
On March 17, 2020, the Utility entered into the Plea Agreement and Settlement (the “Plea Agreement”) with the People of the State of California, by and through
the Butte County District Attorney’s office to resolve the criminal prosecution of the Utility in connection with the 2018 Camp fire. Subject to the terms and
conditions of the Plea Agreement, the Utility pleaded guilty to 84 counts of involuntary manslaughter in violation of Penal Code section 192(b) and one count of
unlawfully causing a fire in violation of Penal Code section 452, and to admit special allegations pursuant to Penal Code sections 452.1(a)(2), 452.1(a)(3) and
452.1(a)(4).
On August 20, 2021, the Butte County Superior Court held a brief hearing on the status of restitution, which involves distribution of funds from the Fire Victim
Trust. The Court continued the hearing to February 25, 2022.
Restructuring Support Agreement with the TCC
On December 6, 2019, PG&E Corporation and the Utility entered into the TCC RSA. The TCC RSA (as incorporated into the Plan) provides for, among other
things, a combination of cash and common stock of the reorganized PG&E Corporation to be provided by PG&E Corporation and the Utility pursuant to the Plan
(together with certain additional rights, the “Aggregate Fire Victim Consideration”) in order to settle and discharge the Fire Victim Claims, upon the terms and
conditions set forth in the TCC RSA and the Plan. The Aggregate Fire Victim Consideration that has funded and will fund the Fire Victim Trust pursuant to the
Plan for the benefit of holders of the Fire Victim Claims consists of (a) $5.40 billion in cash that was contributed on the Emergence Date, (b) $1.35 billion in cash
consisting of (i) $758 million that was paid in cash on January 15, 2021 and (ii) the remaining balance of $592 million that was paid in cash on January 18, 2022,
in each case pursuant to the terms of the tax benefits payment agreement between the Fire Victim Trust and the Utility, and (c) an amount of common stock
representing 22.19% of the outstanding shares of PG&E Corporation on the Emergence Date, subject to potential adjustments.
171

NOTE 15: OTHER CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have significant contingencies arising from their operations, including contingencies related to enforcement and litigation
matters and environmental remediation.  A provision for a loss contingency is recorded when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the
loss can be reasonably estimated.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility evaluate the range of reasonably estimated losses and record a provision based on the lower
end of the range, unless an amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount.  The assessment of whether a loss is probable or reasonably
possible, and whether the loss or a range of loss is estimable, often involves a series of complex judgments about future events.  Loss contingencies are reviewed
quarterly and estimates are adjusted to reflect the impact of all known information, such as negotiations, discovery, settlements and payments, rulings, penalties
related to regulatory compliance, advice of legal counsel, and other information and events pertaining to a particular matter.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility
exclude anticipated legal costs from the provision for loss and expense these costs as incurred. The Utility also has substantial financial commitments in connection
with agreements entered into to support its operating activities.  See “Purchase Commitments” below.  PG&E Corporation and the Utility have financial
commitments described in “Other Commitments” below.  PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows
may be materially affected by the outcome of the following matters.
Enforcement Matters
U.S. District Court Matters and Probation
In connection with the Utility’s probation proceeding, the United States District Court for the Northern District of California had the ability to impose additional
probation conditions on the Utility. On January 25, 2022, the period of probation expired.
CPUC and FERC Matters
Order Instituting Investigation into the 2017 Northern California Wildfires and the 2018 Camp Fire
On June 27, 2019, the CPUC issued the Wildfires OII to determine whether the Utility “violated any provision(s) of the California Public Utilities Code,
Commission General Orders or decisions, or other applicable rules or requirements pertaining to the maintenance and operation of its electric facilities that were
involved in igniting fires in its service territory in 2017.” On December 5, 2019, the assigned commissioner issued a second amended scoping memo and ruling
that amended the scope of issues to be considered in this proceeding to include the 2018 Camp fire.
As previously disclosed, on December 17, 2019, the Utility, the SED of the CPUC, the CPUC’s Office of the Safety Advocate, and the Coalition of California
Utility Employees jointly submitted to the CPUC a proposed settlement agreement in connection with this proceeding and jointly moved for its approval. The
settlement agreement became effective on the Emergence Date.
Pursuant to the settlement agreement, the Utility agreed to (i) not seek rate recovery of wildfire-related expenses and capital expenditures in future applications in
the amount of $1.625 billion, as specified below, and (ii) incur costs of $50 million in shareholder-funded system enhancement initiatives as described further in
the settlement agreement. The amounts set forth in the table below include actual recorded costs and forecasted cost estimates as of the date of the settlement
agreement for expenses and capital expenditures which the Utility has incurred or planned to incur to comply with its legal obligations to provide safe and reliable
service. While actual costs incurred for certain cost categories are different than what was assumed in the settlement agreement, the Utility recorded $1.625 billion
of the disallowed costs for the year ended December 31, 2020.
172

(in millions)
Description 
Expense
Capital
Total
Distribution Safety Inspections and Repairs Expense (FRMMA/WMPMA)
$
236 
$
— 
$
236 
Transmission Safety Inspections and Repairs Expense (TO) 
433 
— 
433 
Vegetation Management Support Costs (FHPMA)
36 
— 
36 
2017 Northern California Wildfires CEMA Expense and Capital (CEMA)
82 
66 
148 
2018 Camp Fire CEMA Expense (CEMA)
435 
— 
435 
2018 Camp Fire CEMA Capital for Restoration (CEMA)
— 
253 
253 
2018 Camp Fire CEMA Capital for Temporary Facilities (CEMA)
— 
84 
84 
Total
$
1,222 
$
403 
$
1,625 
 All amounts included in the table reflect actual recorded costs for 2019 and 2020.
Transmission amounts are under the FERC’s regulatory authority.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a charge when it is both probable that costs incurred or projected to be incurred for recently completed plant will not be
recoverable through rates and the amount of disallowance can be reasonably estimated.
The Utility expects additional system enhancement spending pursuant to the settlement agreement to occur through 2025.
On April 20, 2020, the assigned commissioner issued a decision different adopting, with changes, the proposed modifications set forth in the request for review.
The decision different (i) increases the amount of disallowed wildfire expenditures by $198 million (as set forth in the POD); (ii) increases the amount of
shareholder funding for system enhancement initiatives by $64 million (as set forth in the POD); (iii) imposes a $200 million fine but permanently suspends
payment of the fine; and (iv) limits the tax savings that must be returned to customers to those savings generated by disallowed operating expenditures. The
decision different also denies all pending appeals of the POD and denies, in part, the Utility’s motion requesting other relief. The CPUC approved the decision
different on May 7, 2020.
As it relates to the additional $198 million in disallowed costs as adopted in the decision different, the Utility has recorded the full amount, primarily in the
WMPMA through December 31, 2021.
Transmission Owner Rate Case Revenue Subject to Refund
The FERC determines the amount of authorized revenue requirements, including the rate of return on electric transmission assets, that the Utility may collect in
rates in the TO rate case. The FERC typically authorizes the Utility to charge new rates based on the requested revenue requirement, subject to refund, before the
FERC has issued a final decision. The Utility bills and records revenue based on the amounts requested in its rate case filing and records a reserve for its estimate
of the amounts that are probable of refund. Rates subject to refund went into effect on March 1, 2017, March 1, 2018, and May 1, 2019 for the TO rate case for
2017 (“TO18”), the TO rate case for 2018 (“TO19”), and the TO rate case for 2019 (“TO20”), respectively.
On October 15, 2020, the FERC issued an order that, among other things, rejected the Utility’s direct assignment of common plant to FERC and required the
allocation of all common plant between CPUC and FERC jurisdiction be based on operating and maintenance labor ratios. The order reopened the record for the
limited purpose of allowing the parties an opportunity to present written evidence concerning the FERC’s revised ROE methodology adopted in FERC Opinion
No. 569-A, issued on May 21, 2020.
On December 17, 2020 and June 17, 2021, the FERC issued orders denying requests for rehearing submitted by the Utility and intervenors. In 2021, the Utility
filed four appeals. The appeals related to two issues: (i) impact of the Tax Act on TO18 rates in January and February 2018 and (ii) aspects of the rehearing order
other than the Tax Act. The appeals have been consolidated and are currently being held in abeyance until the FERC addresses the ROE issue.
As a result of an order denying rehearing on the common plant allocation, the Utility increased its Regulatory liabilities for amounts previously collected during the
TO18, TO19, and TO20 rate case periods from 2017 through the fourth quarter of 2021 by approximately $324 million. A portion of these common plant costs are
expected to be recovered at the CPUC in a separate application and as a result, the Utility has recorded approximately $197 million to Regulatory assets.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2) 
173

On September 21, 2018, the Utility filed an all-party settlement with the FERC, which was approved by the FERC on December 20, 2018, in connection with
TO19. As part of the settlement, the TO19 revenue requirement will be set at 98.85% of the revenue requirement for TO18 that will be determined upon issuance
of a final unappealable decision in the TO18 proceeding.
On December 30, 2020, the FERC approved an all-party settlement agreement in connection with TO20. The TO20 settlement resolved all issues of the Utility’s
formula rate. However, some of the formula rate issues are contingent on the outcome of TO18, including the allocation of costs related to common, general and
intangible plant. The settlement provides that the formula rate will remain in effect through December 31, 2023. The TO20 rate case provides that the transmission
revenue requirement and rates are to be updated annually on January 1, subject to true-up. The Utility is required to make a successor rate filing in 2023, which
would go into effect on January 1, 2024.
2018 CEMA Interim Rate Relief Subject to Refund
On March 30, 2018, the Utility submitted to the CPUC its 2018 CEMA application requesting cost recovery of $183 million in connection with seven catastrophic
events that included fire and storm declared emergencies from mid-2016 through early 2017, as well as $405 million related to work performed in 2016 and 2017
to cut back or remove dead or dying trees that were exposed to years of drought conditions and bark beetle infestation. The Utility filed three revisions to this
application, resulting in a total cost recovery request of $763 million.
On April 25, 2019, the CPUC approved the Utility’s request for interim rate relief, allowing for recovery of $373 million of costs as requested by the Utility at that
time. The interim rate relief was implemented commencing on October 1, 2019. Costs included in the interim rate relief are subject to audit and refund.
On November 2, 2021, the Utility filed a settlement agreement with the active parties in the matter. The settlement agreement, if approved by the CPUC, would
authorize the Utility to collect a total of $683 million plus interest for the 2018 CEMA application. As noted above, $373 million of the total amount has already
been collected in interim rates. The interim rates would become final and no longer subject to refund. The remainder of the authorized revenue requirement that has
yet to be collected would be amortized over a 12-month period.
2020 WMCE Interim Rate Relief Subject to Refund
On September 30, 2020, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC requesting cost recovery of recorded expenditures related to wildfire mitigation, certain
catastrophic events, and a number of other activities (the “2020 WMCE application”). The recorded expenditures, which exclude amounts disallowed as a result of
the CPUC’s decision in the OII into the 2017 Northern California wildfires and the 2018 Camp fire, consist of $1.18 billion in expense and $801 million in capital
expenditures, resulting in a proposed revenue requirement of approximately $1.28 billion.
As previously disclosed, on October 23, 2020, the CPUC approved $447 million in interim rate relief (which includes interest) pertaining to costs addressed in the
2020 WMCE application. All of the costs presented in the 2020 WMCE application are subject to the CPUC’s reasonableness review, which could result in some
or all of the interim rate relief of $447 million being subject to refund.
The costs addressed in the 2020 WMCE application cover activities mainly during the years 2017 to 2019 and are incremental to those previously authorized in the
Utility’s 2017 GRC and other proceedings. The majority of costs addressed in this application reflect work necessary to mitigate wildfire risk and to respond to
catastrophic events occurring during the years 2017 to 2019. The Utility’s requested revenue includes amounts for the FHPMA of $293 million, the FRMMA and
the WMPMA of $740 million, and the CEMA of $251 million.
On September 21, 2021, the Utility filed a motion with the CPUC seeking approval of a settlement agreement that would authorize the Utility to continue to
recover an interim revenue requirement of $447 million over a 17-month amortization period, followed by an additional revenue requirement of $591 million over
a 24-month amortization period. On September 23, 2021, the CPUC extended the statutory deadline for a PD in this hearing to April 1, 2022.
174

2015 Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Case and 2011-2014 Gas Transmission and Storage Capital Expenditures Audit
In its final decision in the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case, the CPUC excluded from rate base $696 million of capital spending in 2011 through 2014. This was the
amount forecast to be recorded in excess of the amount adopted in the 2011 GT&S rate case. The decision permanently disallowed $120 million of that amount and
ordered that the remaining $576 million be subject to an audit overseen by the CPUC staff, with the possibility that the Utility may seek recovery in a future
proceeding. The audit report was released June 2, 2020 and did not recommend any additional disallowances. The 2015 GT&S decision authorized the Utility to
seek recovery, through a separate application, of those costs not recommended for disallowance by the audit.
On July 31, 2020, the Utility filed an application seeking recovery of $416.3 million in 2015 to 2022 revenue associated with $512 million of recorded capital
expenditures. On July 7, 2021, the Utility filed a joint motion to adopt a settlement agreement reached with the active parties in the proceeding. If approved by the
CPUC, the settlement agreement would resolve all issues in this proceeding and would authorize a $356.3 million revenue requirement for the period of 2015
through 2022. Of this amount, $313.3 million of revenues for the period 2015 through 2021 would be amortized in rates over 60 months and $43 million associated
with 2022 would be amortized in rates over 12 months through an annual gas true-up filing for rates effective January 1, 2022. Going forward, the as-yet
undepreciated capital plant associated with this application would be included in test year 2023 rate base in the Utility’s consolidated 2023 GRC. No party
submitted comments on the settlement.
The Utility is unable to determine the timing and outcome of this proceeding.
Other Matters
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are subject to various claims and lawsuits that separately are not considered material.  Accruals for contingencies related to such
matters (excluding amounts related to the contingencies discussed above under “Enforcement and Litigation Matters”) totaled $77 million and $144 million as of
December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. These amounts were included in Other current liabilities on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not believe it is reasonably possible that the resolution of these matters will have a material impact on their financial
condition, results of operations, or cash flows.
PSPS Class Action
On December 19, 2019, a complaint was filed in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Northern District of California naming PG&E Corporation and the
Utility. The plaintiff seeks certification of a class consisting of all California residents and business owners who had their power shut off by the Utility during the
October 9, October 23, October 26, October 28, or November 20, 2019 power outages and any subsequent voluntary outages occurring during the course of
litigation. The plaintiff alleges that the necessity for the October and November 2019 power shutoff events was caused by the Utility’s negligence in failing to
properly maintain its electrical lines and surrounding vegetation. The complaint seeks up to $2.5 billion in special and general damages, punitive and exemplary
damages and injunctive relief to require the Utility to properly maintain and inspect its power grid. PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe the allegations are
without merit and intend to defend this lawsuit vigorously.
On January 21, 2020, PG&E Corporation and the Utility filed a motion to dismiss the complaint or in the alternative strike the class action allegations. On March
30, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court granted the Utility’s motion to dismiss this class action because the plaintiff’s class action claims are preempted as a matter of law
by the California Public Utilities Code. On April 3, 2020, the Bankruptcy Court entered an order dismissing the action without leave to amend.
The plaintiff appealed the decision dismissing the complaint to the District Court. On March 26, 2021, the District Court affirmed the Bankruptcy Court’s dismissal
of this action, and the plaintiff filed a notice of appeal to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. The appellant filed its opening brief on June 25, 2021. A former
executive director of the CPUC filed an amicus brief on July 2, 2021, asking the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals to reverse the decision of the District Court and to
remand the case for further proceedings. The answering brief of PG&E Corporation and the Utility was filed August 25, 2021. On September 1, 2021, the CPUC
filed an amicus brief asking the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals to affirm the District Court’s dismissal. The appellant’s reply brief was filed on October 15, 2021.
A panel of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals heard oral argument on the plaintiff’s appeal on January 12, 2022.
The Utility is unable to determine the timing and outcome of this proceeding.
175

CZU Lightning Complex Fire Notices of Violation
Between November 2020 and January 2021, several governmental entities raised concerns regarding the Utility’s emergency response to the 2020 CZU Lightning
Complex fire, including Cal Fire, the California Coastal Commission, the Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board, and Santa Cruz County Board of
Supervisors alleging environmental, vegetation management, and unpermitted work violations. In the matter of Santa Cruz County’s complaint with the CPUC, the
parties reached a settlement, and the CPUC dismissed the complaint on December 15, 2021. The Utility continues to work with the California Coastal
Commission, Cal Fire, and the Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board to resolve any outstanding issues and to work with Santa Cruz County to
implement the terms of the settlement agreement.
Based on the information currently available, PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe it is probable that a liability has been incurred. Accordingly, PG&E
Corporation and the Utility recorded a charge during the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2021 for an amount that is not material. PG&E Corporation and the
Utility do not believe that the resolution of these matters will have a material impact on their financial condition, results of operations, or cash flows. Violations
can result in penalties, remediation and other relief.
Environmental Remediation Contingencies
Given the complexities of the legal and regulatory environment and the inherent uncertainties involved in the early stages of a remediation project, the process for
estimating remediation liabilities requires significant judgment. The Utility records an environmental remediation liability when the site assessments indicate that
remediation is probable, and the Utility can reasonably estimate the loss or a range of probable amounts. The Utility records an environmental remediation liability
based on the lower end of the range of estimated probable costs, unless an amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount. Key factors that
inform the development of estimated costs include site feasibility studies and investigations, applicable remediation actions, operations and maintenance activities,
post-remediation monitoring, and the cost of technologies that are expected to be approved to remediate the site. Amounts recorded are not discounted to their
present value. The Utility’s environmental remediation liability is primarily included in non-current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets and is comprised
of the following:
 
Balance at
(in millions)
December 31, 2021
December 31, 2020
Topock natural gas compressor station
$
299 
$
303 
Hinkley natural gas compressor station
123 
132 
Former MGP sites owned by the Utility or third parties 
667 
659 
Utility-owned generation facilities (other than fossil fuel-fired),
  other facilities, and third-party disposal sites 
104 
111 
Fossil fuel-fired generation facilities and sites 
70 
96 
Total environmental remediation liability
$
1,263 
$
1,301 
Primarily driven by the following sites: San Francisco Beach Street, Vallejo, Napa, and San Francisco East Harbor.
Primarily driven by Geothermal landfill and Shell Pond site.
 Primarily driven by the San Francisco Potrero Power Plant.
The Utility’s gas compressor stations, former MGP sites, power plant sites, gas gathering sites, and sites used by the Utility for the storage, recycling, and disposal
of potentially hazardous substances are subject to requirements issued by the Environmental Protection Agency under the Federal Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act in addition to other state hazardous waste laws.  The Utility has a comprehensive program in place designed to comply with federal, state, and local
laws and regulations related to hazardous materials, waste, remediation activities, and other environmental requirements.  The Utility assesses and monitors the
environmental requirements on an ongoing basis and implements changes to its program as deemed appropriate. The Utility’s remediation activities are overseen
by the DTSC, several California regional water quality control boards, and various other federal, state, and local agencies.
The Utility’s environmental remediation liability as of December 31, 2021, reflects its best estimate of probable future costs for remediation based on the current
assessment data and regulatory obligations. Future costs will depend on many factors, including the extent of work necessary to implement final remediation plans,
the Utility’s time frame for remediation, and unanticipated claims filed against the Utility.  The Utility may incur actual costs in the future that are materially
different than this estimate and such costs could have a material impact on results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows during the period in which they
are recorded. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility expected to recover $982 million of its environmental remediation liability for certain sites through various
ratemaking mechanisms authorized by the CPUC. 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1) 
(2) 
(3)
176

Natural Gas Compressor Station Sites
The Utility is legally responsible for remediating groundwater contamination caused by hexavalent chromium used in the past at the Utility’s natural gas
compressor stations. The Utility is also required to take measures to abate the effects of the contamination on the environment.
Topock Site
The Utility’s remediation and abatement efforts at the Topock site are subject to the regulatory authority of the California DTSC and the U.S. Department of the
Interior. On April 24, 2018, the DTSC authorized the Utility to build an in-situ groundwater treatment system to convert hexavalent chromium into a non-toxic and
non-soluble form of chromium. Construction activities began in October 2018 and will continue for several years. The Utility’s undiscounted future costs
associated with the Topock site may increase by as much as $220 million if the extent of contamination or necessary remediation is greater than anticipated. The
costs associated with environmental remediation at the Topock site are expected to be recovered primarily through the HSM, where 90% of the costs are recovered
through rates.
Hinkley Site
The Utility has been implementing remediation measures at the Hinkley site to reduce the mass of the chromium plume in groundwater and to monitor and control
movement of the plume. The Utility’s remediation and abatement efforts at the Hinkley site are subject to the regulatory authority of the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, Lahontan Region. In November 2015, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Lahontan Region adopted a clean-up and
abatement order directing the Utility to contain and remediate the underground plume of hexavalent chromium and the potential environmental impacts. The final
order states that the Utility must continue and improve its remediation efforts, define the boundaries of the chromium plume, and take other action. Additionally,
the final order sets plume capture requirements, requires a monitoring and reporting program, and includes deadlines for the Utility to meet interim cleanup targets.
The United States Geological Survey team is currently conducting a background study on the site to better define the chromium plume boundaries. A draft
background report was received in January 2020 and is expected to be finalized in 2022. The Utility’s undiscounted future costs associated with the Hinkley site
may increase by as much as $138 million if the extent of contamination or necessary remediation is greater than anticipated. The costs associated with
environmental remediation at the Hinkley site will not be recovered through rates.
Former Manufactured Gas Plants
Former MGPs used coal and oil to produce gas for use by the Utility’s customers before natural gas became available. The by-products and residues of this process
were often disposed of at the MGPs themselves. The Utility has a program to manage the residues left behind as a result of the manufacturing process; many of the
sites in the program have been addressed. The Utility’s undiscounted future costs associated with MGP sites may increase by as much as $477 million if the extent
of contamination or necessary remediation at currently identified MGP sites is greater than anticipated. The costs associated with environmental remediation at the
MGP sites are recovered through the HSM, where 90% of the costs are recovered through rates.
Utility-Owned Generation Facilities and Third-Party Disposal Sites
Utility-owned generation facilities and third-party disposal sites often involve long-term remediation. The Utility’s undiscounted future costs associated with
Utility-owned generation facilities and third-party disposal sites may increase by as much as $50 million if the extent of contamination or necessary remediation is
greater than anticipated. The environmental remediation costs associated with the Utility-owned generation facilities and third-party disposal sites are recovered
through the HSM, where 90% of the costs are recovered through rates.
Fossil Fuel-Fired Generation Sites
In 1998, the Utility divested its generation power plant business as part of generation deregulation. Although the Utility sold its fossil-fueled power plants, the
Utility retained the environmental remediation liability associated with each site. The Utility’s undiscounted future costs associated with fossil fuel-fired generation
sites may increase by as much as $43 million if the extent of contamination or necessary remediation is greater than anticipated. The environmental remediation
costs associated with the fossil fuel-fired sites will not be recovered through rates.
177

Nuclear Insurance
The Utility maintains multiple insurance policies through NEIL, a mutual insurer owned by utilities with nuclear facilities, and EMANI, covering nuclear or non-
nuclear events at the Utility’s two nuclear generating units at Diablo Canyon and the retired Humboldt Bay Unit 3.  
NEIL provides insurance coverage for property damages and business interruption losses incurred by the Utility if a nuclear or non-nuclear event were to occur at
the Utility’s two nuclear generating units at Diablo Canyon. NEIL provides property damage and business interruption coverage of up to $3.2 billion per nuclear
incident and $2.7 billion per non-nuclear incident for Diablo Canyon. For Humboldt Bay Unit 3, NEIL provides up to $50 million of coverage for nuclear and non-
nuclear property damages.
NEIL also provides coverage for damages caused by acts of terrorism at nuclear power plants. Through NEIL, there is up to $3.2 billion available to the
membership to cover this exposure. This coverage amount is shared by all NEIL members and applies to all terrorist acts occurring within a 12-month period
against one or more commercial nuclear power plants insured by NEIL.
In addition to the nuclear insurance the Utility maintains through NEIL, the Utility also is a member of EMANI. EMANI shares losses with NEIL as part of the
first $400 million in coverage for nuclear or non-nuclear property damages. Additional coverage is procured through EMANI, which provides excess insurance
coverage for property damages and business interruption losses incurred by the Utility if a nuclear or non-nuclear event were to occur at Diablo Canyon. The
excess insurance coverage through EMANI provides an additional $200 million for any one accident and in the annual aggregate excess of the combined amount
recoverable under the Utility’s NEIL policies.
If NEIL losses in any policy year exceed accumulated funds, the Utility could be subject to a retrospective assessment.  If NEIL were to exercise this assessment,
the maximum aggregate annual retrospective premium obligation for the Utility would be approximately $42 million.  If EMANI losses in any policy year exceed
accumulated funds, the Utility could be subject to a retrospective assessment of approximately $4 million. 
Under the Price-Anderson Act, public liability claims that arise from nuclear incidents that occur at Diablo Canyon, and that occur during the transportation of
material to and from Diablo Canyon are limited to approximately $13.6 billion. The Utility purchases the maximum available public liability insurance of
$450 million for Diablo Canyon. The balance of the $13.6 billion of liability protection is provided under a loss-sharing program among nuclear reactor owners.
The Utility may be assessed up to $275 million per nuclear incident under this loss sharing program, with payments in each year limited to a maximum of
$41 million per incident. Both the maximum assessment and the maximum yearly assessment are adjusted for inflation at least every five years.
The Price-Anderson Act does not apply to claims that arise from nuclear incidents that occur during shipping of nuclear material from the nuclear fuel enricher to a
fuel fabricator or that occur at the fuel fabricator’s facility. The Utility has a separate policy that provides coverage for claims arising from some of these incidents
up to a maximum of $450 million per incident. In addition, the Utility has approximately $53 million of liability insurance for Humboldt Bay Unit 3 and has a
$500 million indemnification from the NRC for public liability arising from nuclear incidents for Humboldt Bay Unit 3, covering liabilities in excess of the
$53 million in liability insurance.
Diablo Canyon Outages
Diablo Canyon Unit 2 experienced five outages between July 2020 and April 2021, each due or related to malfunctions within the main generator associated with
excessive vibrations. Additional inspections and replacement of a redesigned component of the generator occurred during Unit 2’s planned spring 2021 refueling
outage. The affected component is part of the secondary system and does not involve a risk of release of radioactive material into the environment. During July
2020 through April 2021, the Utility implemented effective corrective actions. The Utility continues to monitor the affected component.
If additional shutdowns occur in the future, the Utility may incur incremental costs or forgo additional power market revenues. The Utility will also be subject to a
review of the reasonableness of its actions before the CPUC in the 2021 Energy Resource Recovery Account compliance proceeding.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not currently believe that the resolution of this matter will have a material impact on their financial condition, results of
operations, or cash flows.
178

Purchase Commitments
The following table shows the undiscounted future expected obligations under power purchase agreements that have been approved by the CPUC and have met
specified construction milestones as well as undiscounted future expected payment obligations for natural gas supplies, natural gas transportation, natural gas
storage, and nuclear fuel as of December 31, 2021: 
 
Power Purchase Agreements
 
 
 
(in millions)
Renewable 
Energy
Conventional 
Energy
Other
Natural 
Gas
Nuclear 
Fuel
Total
2022
$
2,062 
$
530 
$
61 
$
823 
$
42 
$
3,518 
2023
2,043 
425 
61 
191 
41 
2,761 
2024
2,020 
282 
61 
157 
27 
2,547 
2025
2,009 
216 
61 
157 
— 
2,443 
2026
1,948 
204 
21 
140 
— 
2,313 
Thereafter
19,310 
539 
19 
52 
— 
19,920 
Total purchase commitments
$
29,392 
$
2,196 
$
284 
$
1,520 
$
110 
$
33,502 
Third-Party Power Purchase Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, the Utility enters into various agreements, including renewable energy agreements, QF agreements, and other power purchase
agreements to purchase power and electric capacity.  The price of purchased power may be fixed or variable.  Variable pricing is generally based on the current
market price of either natural gas or electricity at the date of delivery.
Renewable Energy Power Purchase Agreements.  In order to comply with California’s RPS requirements, the Utility is required to deliver renewable energy to its
customers at a gradually increasing rate.  The Utility has entered into various agreements to purchase renewable energy to help meet California’s requirement. The
Utility’s obligations under a significant portion of these agreements are contingent on the third party’s construction of new generation facilities, which are expected
to grow.  As of December 31, 2021, renewable energy contracts expire at various dates between 2022 and 2041.
Conventional Energy Power Purchase Agreements.  The Utility has entered into many power purchase agreements for conventional generation resources, which
include tolling agreements and RA agreements.  The Utility’s obligations under a portion of these agreements are contingent on the third parties’ development of
new generation facilities to provide capacity and energy products to the Utility. These power purchase agreements expire at various dates between 2022 and 2041.
Other Power Purchase Agreements.  The Utility has entered into agreements to purchase energy and capacity with independent power producers that own
generation facilities that meet the definition of a QF under federal law. As of December 31, 2021, QF contracts in operation expire at various dates between 2022
and 2041.  In addition, the Utility has agreements with various irrigation districts and water agencies to purchase hydroelectric power.
The net costs incurred for all power purchases and electric capacity amounted to $3.0 billion in 2021, $2.9 billion in 2020, and $3.0 billion in 2019.
Natural Gas Supply, Transportation, and Storage Commitments 
The Utility purchases natural gas directly from producers and marketers in both Canada and the United States to serve its core customers and to fuel its owned-
generation facilities.  The Utility also contracts for natural gas transportation from the points at which the Utility takes delivery (typically in Canada, the US Rocky
Mountain supply area, and the southwestern United States) to the points at which the Utility’s natural gas transportation system begins.  These agreements expire at
various dates between 2022 and 2041.  In addition, the Utility has contracted for natural gas storage services in Northern California to more reliably meet
customers’ loads.
Costs incurred for natural gas purchases, natural gas transportation services, and natural gas storage, which include contracts with terms of less than 1 year,
amounted to $1.2 billion in 2021, $0.8 billion in 2020, and $0.9 billion in 2019.
179

Nuclear Fuel Agreements
The Utility has entered into several purchase agreements for nuclear fuel.  These agreements expire at various dates between 2022 and 2024 and are intended to
ensure long-term nuclear fuel supply.  The Utility relies on a number of international producers of nuclear fuel in order to diversify its sources and provide security
of supply.  Pricing terms are also diversified, ranging from market-based prices to base prices that are escalated using published indices. 
Payments for nuclear fuel amounted to $79 million in 2021, $111 million in 2020, and $74 million in 2019.
Other Commitments
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have other commitments primarily related to office facilities and land leases, which expire at various dates between 2022 and
2052.  At December 31, 2021, the future minimum payments related to these commitments were as follows: 
(in millions)
Other Commitments
2022
$
43 
2023
65 
2024
81 
2025
77 
2026
74 
Thereafter
2,938 
Total minimum lease payments
$
3,278 
Payments for other commitments amounted to $50 million in 2021, $45 million in 2020, and $48 million in 2019.  Certain office facility leases contain escalation
clauses requiring annual increases in rent.  The rents may increase by a fixed amount each year, a percentage of the base rent, or the consumer price index.  There
are options to extend these leases for one to five years.
Oakland Headquarters Lease
On October 23, 2020, the Utility and BA2 300 Lakeside LLC (“Landlord”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of TMG Bay Area Investments II, LLC, entered into an
office lease agreement for approximately 910,000 rentable square feet of space within the Lakeside Building to serve as the Utility’s principal administrative
headquarters (the “Lease”). In connection with the Lease, the Utility also issued to Landlord (i) an option payment letter of credit in the amount of $75 million, and
(ii) a lease security letter of credit in the amount of $75 million.
The term of the Lease will begin on or about April 8, 2022. The Lease term will expire 34 years and 11 months after the commencement date, unless earlier
terminated in accordance with the terms of the Lease. In addition to base rent, the Utility will be responsible for certain costs and charges specified in the Lease,
including insurance costs, maintenance costs and taxes.
The Lease requires the Landlord to pursue approvals to subdivide the real estate it owns surrounding the Lakeside Building to create a separate legal parcel that
contains the Lakeside Building (the “Property”) that can be sold to the Utility. The Lease grants to the Utility an option to purchase the Property, following such
subdivision, at a price of $892 million, subject to certain adjustments (the “Purchase Price”). The Purchase Price would not be paid until 2023.
As space in the Lakeside Building becomes available following the expiration of existing tenants’ leases and completion of the redevelopment of the property to
the Utility’s specifications, the Utility expects to relocate employees and operations from the SFGO and certain East Bay office locations to the Lakeside Building
in phases over several years, beginning in 2022.
At December 31, 2021, the Lease had no impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
180

MANAGEMENT’S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING
Management of PG&E Corporation and the Utility is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting.  PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP.  Internal control
over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
the transactions and dispositions of the assets of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to
permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP and that receipts and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
management and directors of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
acquisition, use, or disposition of assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.  Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Management assessed the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on the criteria established in Internal Control—
Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.  Based on its assessment and those criteria,
management has concluded that PG&E Corporation and the Utility maintained effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021.
Deloitte & Touche LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, has audited PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
181

REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of PG&E Corporation and subsidiaries (the "Company") as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the
related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, equity and cash flows, for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2021, and
the related notes and the schedules listed in the Index at Item 15 (collectively referred to as the "financial statements"). In our opinion, the financial statements
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations and its cash flows
for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2021, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America
(GAAP).
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Company's internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, and our report dated February 10, 2022, expressed an unqualified opinion on the
Company's internal control over financial reporting.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company's financial statements
based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance
with the US federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to
assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current-period audit of the financial statements that were communicated or required to
be communicated to the audit committee and that (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved especially
challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the financial statements, taken
as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or
disclosures to which they relate.
Regulation and Regulated Operations—Refer to Notes 3, 4 and 14 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
The Company’s subsidiary, Pacific Gas & Electric Company, follows accounting principles for rate-regulated entities and collects rates from customers to recover
“revenue requirements” that have been authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission based
on its cost of providing service. Pacific Gas & Electric Company records assets and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be
recorded under GAAP for nonregulated entities. Pacific Gas & Electric Company capitalizes and records, as regulatory assets, costs that would otherwise be
charged to expense if it is probable that the incurred costs will be recovered in future rates.
182

We identified the impact of rate regulation as a critical audit matter due to the significant judgments made by management to support its assertions about affected
account balances and disclosures and the high degree of subjectivity involved in assessing the likelihood of recovery of incurred costs in current or future rates due
in part to the uncertainty related to future decisions by the rate regulators. This required specialized knowledge of accounting for rate regulation and the rate setting
process due to its inherent complexities and a high degree of auditor judgment when performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of management’s
conclusions that the costs approved by a CPUC decision for tracking purposes meet the definition of a regulatory asset under GAAP and are recorded at the
appropriate amount.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures related to the application of specialized rules to account for the effects of cost-based rate regulation related to the uncertainty of future
decisions by the rate regulators and the costs approved by a CPUC decision for tracking purposes that meet the definition of a regulatory asset and are recorded at
the appropriate amount included the following, among others:
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls over (1) the evaluation of the likelihood of (a) the recovery in future rates of costs deferred as regulatory assets and
(b) regulatory developments that may affect the likelihood of recovering costs in future rates or of a future reduction in rates; (2) management’s
determination that costs approved by a CPUC decision for tracking purposes meet the definition of a regulatory asset and are recorded at the appropriate
amount; and (3) the review of disclosures related to these matters.
•
We read relevant regulatory orders issued by the CPUC for Pacific Gas and Electric Company and other public utilities in California, procedural filings,
filings made by intervenors, and other publicly available information to assess the likelihood of recovery in future rates based on precedents of the
CPUC’s treatment of similar costs under similar circumstances. We evaluated the external information and compared to management’s recorded
regulatory asset balances for completeness.
•
For regulatory matters in process (e.g., applications for cost recovery), we inspected Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s filings with the CPUC and the
filings with the CPUC by intervenors that may affected Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s future rates, for any evidence that might contradict
management’s assertions.
•
For regulatory assets approved by a CPUC decision for tracking purposes, we selected samples of costs and evaluated whether they met the definition of a
regulatory asset by comparing the costs to the description of the costs approved by a CPUC decision and were recorded at the appropriate amount.
•
We evaluated whether the Company’s disclosures related to the impacts of rate regulation, including the balances recorded and regulatory developments,
were appropriate and consistent with the information obtained in our procedures.
Wildfire-Related Contingencies—Refer to Note 14 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
The Company has recorded provisions for loss contingencies related to the 2019 Kincade fire, 2020 Zogg fire and 2021 Dixie fire. The Company has recorded an
estimated probable loss of $2,325 million as of December 31, 2021, which represents the lower end of the range of reasonably possible losses in connection with
the fires.
We identified wildfire-related contingencies and the related disclosures as a critical audit matter because (1) of the significant judgments made by management to
estimate losses and (2) the outcome of the wildfire-related contingencies materially affects the Company’s financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
This required the application of a high degree of auditor judgment and extensive audit effort when performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of
management’s estimated losses and disclosure related to wildfire-related contingencies.
183

How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures related to management’s judgments regarding its estimated losses for wildfire-related contingencies and related disclosures included the
following, among others:
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls over (1) the Company’s determination of whether a loss was probable or reasonably possible; (2) the determination
of the significant assumptions, including the information gained through investigations into the cause of the fire, information from claimants, and the
advice of legal counsel that may affect the valuation of the liability; and (3) the disclosures related to the wildfires.
•
We evaluated management’s judgments related to whether a loss was probable or reasonably possible for the wildfires by inquiring of management and
the Company’s legal counsel regarding the amounts of probable and reasonably possible losses, including the potential impact of information gained
through investigations into the cause of the fires, information from claimants, the advice of legal counsel, and reading external information for any
evidence that might contradict management’s assertions.
•
We evaluated the estimation methodology for determining the amount of probable loss through inquiries with management; we tested the significant
assumptions used in the valuation of the liability. With the assistance of our real estate valuation specialists, we assessed the appropriateness of the data
sources utilized to determine the assumption utilized in management’s estimate.
•
We read the legal letters from the Company’s external and internal legal counsel regarding known information and evaluated whether the information
therein was consistent with the information obtained in our procedures.
•
We evaluated whether the Company’s disclosures were appropriate and consistent with the information obtained in our procedures.
Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless Licenses Agreement—Refer to Notes 3 and 4 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
The Company’s subsidiary, Pacific Gas & Electric Company, granted an exclusive license to a third party to sublicense and market wireless communications
equipment attachment locations on the Utility’s structures and to add additional cell sites to the license. The Utility received $947 million in proceeds, and
recorded $370 million as a financing obligation, $106 million as a contract liability (deferred revenue), and $471 million as regulatory liabilities.
We identified the accounting for the sale of the wireless licenses as a critical audit matter due to the significant judgments made by management in the application
of accounting guidance. This required specialized knowledge of accounting for the sale of future revenue and leases as well as rate regulation due to its inherent
complexities and extensive audit effort when performing audit procedures to evaluate the accounting treatment associated with the transaction.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures related to the application of accounting guidance for the Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless Licenses Agreement included the following:
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls over the evaluation of the accounting treatment for the Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless Licenses Agreement.
•
With the assistance of professionals in our firm having expertise in accounting for the sale of future revenue and leases, we evaluated the conclusions
regarding the sale of future revenue, deferred revenue and regulatory liability accounting treatment applied to the Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless
Licenses Agreement by performing the following:
◦
Reading the contract terms and conditions included in the agreements
◦
We read the Company’s analysis of the appropriate accounting guidance
◦
Evaluating the conclusions regarding the accounting guidance used to account for the transaction
184

•
We evaluated whether the Company’s disclosures were appropriate and consistent with the information obtained in our procedures.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
San Francisco, California
February 10, 2022
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1999.
185

REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Pacific Gas and Electric Company and subsidiaries (the "Utility") as of December 31, 2021 and
2020, the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, shareholders’ equity and cash flows, for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31, 2021, and the related notes and the schedules listed in the Index at Item 15 (collectively referred to as the "financial statements"). In our opinion, the
financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Utility as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations
and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2021, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America (GAAP).
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the Utility's internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated February 10, 2022, expressed an unqualified opinion on the Utility's internal control
over financial reporting.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Utility's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Utility's financial statements based
on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Utility in accordance with the US
federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included performing procedures to
assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the
accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe
that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current-period audit of the financial statements that were communicated or required to
be communicated to the audit committee and that (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and (2) involved especially
challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the financial statements, taken
as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or
disclosures to which they relate.
186

Regulation and Regulated Operations – Refer to Notes 3, 4 and 14 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
The Utility follows accounting principles for rate-regulated entities and collects rates from customers to recover “revenue requirements” that have been authorized
by the California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission based on its cost of providing service. The Utility records
assets and liabilities that result from the regulated ratemaking process that would not be recorded under GAAP for nonregulated entities. The Utility capitalizes and
records, as regulatory assets, costs that would otherwise be charged to expense if it is probable that the incurred costs will be recovered in future rates. We
identified the impact of rate regulation as a critical audit matter due to the significant judgments made by management to support its assertions about affected
account balances and disclosures and the high degree of subjectivity involved in assessing the likelihood of recovery of incurred costs in current or future rates due
in part to the uncertainty related to future decisions by the rate regulators. This required specialized knowledge of accounting for rate regulation and the rate setting
process due to its inherent complexities and a high degree of auditor judgment when performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of management’s
conclusions that the costs approved by a CPUC decision for tracking purposes meet the definition of a regulatory asset under GAAP and are recorded at the
appropriate amount.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures related to the application of specialized rules to account for the effects of cost-based rate regulation related to the uncertainty of future
decisions by the rate regulators and the costs approved by a CPUC decision for tracking purposes that meet the definition of a regulatory asset and are recorded at
the appropriate amount included the following, among others:
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls over (1) the evaluation of the likelihood of (a) the recovery in future rates of costs deferred as regulatory assets and
(b) regulatory developments that may affect the likelihood of recovering costs in future rates or of a future reduction in rates; (2) management’s
determination that costs approved by a CPUC decision for tracking purposes meet the definition of a regulatory asset and are recorded at the appropriate
amount; and (3) the review of disclosures related to these matters.
•
We read relevant regulatory orders issued by the CPUC for the Utility and other public utilities in California, procedural filings, filings made by
intervenors, and other publicly available information to assess the likelihood of recovery in future rates based on precedents of the CPUC’s treatment of
similar costs under similar circumstances. We evaluated the external information and compared to management’s recorded regulatory asset balances for
completeness.
•
For regulatory matters in process (e.g., applications for cost recovery), we inspected the Utility’s filings with the CPUC and the filings with the CPUC by
intervenors that may affect the Utility’s future rates, for any evidence that might contradict management’s assertions.
•
For regulatory assets approved by a CPUC decision for tracking purposes, we selected samples of costs and evaluated whether they met the definition of a
regulatory asset by comparing the costs to the description of the costs approved by a CPUC decision and were recorded at the appropriate amount.
•
We evaluated whether the Utility’s disclosures related to the impacts of rate regulation, including the balances recorded and regulatory developments,
were appropriate and consistent with the information obtained in our procedures.
Wildfire-Related Contingencies—Refer to Note 14 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
The Utility has recorded provisions for loss contingencies related to the 2019 Kincade fire, 2020 Zogg fire and 2021 Dixie fire. The Utility has recorded an
estimated probable loss of $2,325 million as of December 31, 2021, which represents the lower end of the range of reasonably possible losses in connection with
the fires.
187

We identified wildfire-related contingencies and the related disclosures as a critical audit matter because (1) of the significant judgments made by management to
estimate losses and (2) the outcome of the wildfire-related contingencies materially affects the Utility’s financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
This required the application of a high degree of auditor judgment and extensive audit effort when performing audit procedures to evaluate the reasonableness of
management’s estimated losses and disclosure related to wildfire-related contingencies.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures related to management’s judgments regarding its estimated losses for wildfire-related contingencies and related disclosures included the
following, among others:
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls over (1) the Utility’s determination of whether a loss was probable or reasonably possible; (2) the determination of
the significant assumptions, including the information gained through investigations into the cause of the fires, information from claimants, and the advice
of legal counsel that may affect the valuation of the liability; and (3) the disclosures related to the wildfires.
•
We evaluated management’s judgments related to whether a loss was probable or reasonably possible for the wildfires by inquiring of management and
the Utility’s legal counsel regarding the amounts of probable and reasonably possible losses, including the potential impact of information gained through
investigations into the cause of the fire, information from claimants, the advice of legal counsel, and reading external information for any evidence that
might contradict management’s assertions.
•
We evaluated the estimation methodology for determining the amount of probable loss through inquiries with management; we tested the significant
assumptions used in the valuation of the liability. With the assistance of our real estate valuation specialists, we assessed the appropriateness the data
sources utilized to determine the assumption utilized in management’s estimate.
•
We read the legal letters from the Utility’s external and internal legal counsel regarding known information and evaluated whether the information therein
was consistent with the information obtained in our procedures.
•
We evaluated whether the Utility’s disclosures were appropriate and consistent with the information obtained in our procedures.
Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless Licenses Agreement—Refer to Notes 3 and 4 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
The Utility has granted an exclusive license to a third party to sublicense and market wireless communications equipment attachment locations on the Utility’s
structures and add additional cell sites to the license. The Utility received $947 million in proceeds, and recorded $370 million as a financing obligation, $106
million as a contract liability (deferred revenue), and $471 million as regulatory liabilities.
We identified the accounting for the sale of the wireless licenses as a critical audit matter due to the significant judgments made by management in the application
of accounting guidance. This required specialized knowledge of accounting for the sale of future revenue and leases as well as rate regulation due to its inherent
complexities and extensive audit effort when performing audit procedures to evaluate the accounting treatment associated with the transaction.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures related to the application of accounting guidance for the Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless Licenses Agreement included the following:
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls over the evaluation of the accounting treatment for the Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless Licenses Agreement.
188

•
With the assistance of professionals in our firm having expertise in accounting for the sale of future revenue and leases, we evaluated the conclusions
regarding the sale of future revenue, deferred revenue and regulatory liability accounting treatment applied to the Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless
Licenses Agreement by performing the following:
◦
Reading the contract terms and conditions included in the agreements
◦
Evaluating the conclusions regarding the accounting guidance used to account for the transaction
•
We evaluated whether the Company’s disclosures were appropriate and consistent with the information obtained in our procedures.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
San Francisco, California
February 10, 2022
We have served as the Utility’s auditor since 1999.
189

REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of PG&E Corporation and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria
established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). In
our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria
established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated financial
statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, of the Company and our report dated February 10, 2022, expressed an unqualified opinion on those
financial statements.
Basis for Opinion
The Company’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are
required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control
based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
San Francisco, California
February 10, 2022
190

REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of Pacific Gas and Electric Company and subsidiaries (the “Utility”) as of December 31, 2021, based
on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(COSO). In our opinion, the Utility maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on
criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB), the consolidated financial
statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, of the Utility and our report dated February 10, 2022, expressed an unqualified opinion on those
financial statements.
Basis for Opinion
The Utility’s management is responsible for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal
control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express
an opinion on the Utility’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are
required to be independent with respect to the Utility in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities
and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control
based on the assessed risk, and performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable
basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (3) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
San Francisco, California
February 10, 2022
191

ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCE DISCLOSURE
Not applicable.
ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Based on an evaluation of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation’s and the
Utility’s respective principal executive officers and principal financial officers have concluded that such controls and procedures are effective to ensure that
information required to be disclosed by PG&E Corporation and the Utility in reports that the companies file or submit under the 1934 Act is (i) recorded,
processed, summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC rules and forms, and (ii) accumulated and communicated to PG&E
Corporation’s and the Utility’s management, including PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s respective principal executive officers and principal financial
officers, or persons performing similar functions, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Management of PG&E Corporation and the Utility have prepared an annual report on internal control over financial reporting.  Management’s report, together with
the report of the independent registered public accounting firm, appears in Item 8 of this 2021 Form 10-K under the heading “Management’s Report on Internal
Control Over Financial Reporting” and “Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.”
Registered Public Accounting Firm’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
Deloitte & Touche LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, has audited PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s internal control over financial
reporting as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring
Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There were no changes in internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the quarter ended December 31, 2021 that have materially affected, or are
reasonably likely to materially affect, PG&E Corporation’s or the Utility’s internal control over financial reporting.
ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION
Not applicable.
ITEM 9C. DISCLOSURE REGARDING FOREIGN JURISDICTIONS THAT PREVENT INSPECTIONS
None.
192

PART III 
ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Information regarding executive officers of PG&E Corporation and the Utility is set forth under “Information About Our Executive Officers” at the end of Part I of
this 2021 Form 10-K.  Other information regarding directors will be included under the heading “Election of Directors of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2022 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by
reference.  Information regarding compliance with Section 16 of the Exchange Act will be included under the heading “Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership
Reporting Compliance” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2022 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
Website Availability of Code of Ethics, Corporate Governance and Other Documents
The following documents are available both on the Corporate Governance section of PG&E Corporation’s website (www.pgecorp.com/corp/about-us/corporate-
governance.page) and on the Utility’s website (www.pge.com/en_US/about-pge/company-information/company-information.page, under the Corporate
Governance and the Compliance & Ethics tabs): (1) PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s code of conduct (which meets the definition of “code of ethics” of Item
406(b) of the SEC Regulation S-K) adopted by PG&E Corporation and the Utility and applicable to their directors and employees, including their respective
principal executive officers, principal financial officers, controllers, and other executive officers, (2) PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s respective corporate
governance guidelines, and (3) key Board committee charters, including charters for the companies’ Audit Committees and the PG&E Corporation Sustainability
and Governance Committee and the People and Compensation Committee.
If any amendments are made to, or any waivers are granted with respect to, provisions of the “code of ethics” by PG&E Corporation or the Utility and that apply to
its respective principal executive officers, principal financial officers, or controllers, PG&E Corporation or the Utility, as appropriate, will post the amended code
of ethics and any waivers at www.pgecorp.com/corp/about-us/compliance-ethics/program.page.
Procedures for Shareholder Recommendations of Nominees to the Boards of Directors
There were no material changes to the procedures described in PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2021 Annual Meetings
of Shareholders by which security holders may recommend nominees to PG&E Corporation’s or Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Boards of Directors.
Audit Committees and Audit Committee Financial Expert
Information regarding the Audit Committees of PG&E Corporation and the Utility and the “audit committee financial experts” as defined by the SEC will be
included under the heading “Committees and Memberships” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2022 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information
is incorporated herein by reference. 
ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Information responding to Item 11, for each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, will be included under the headings “Compensation Discussion and Analysis,”
“Compensation Committee Report,” “Summary Compensation Table - 2021,” “Grants of Plan-Based Awards in 2021,” “Outstanding Equity Awards at Fiscal Year
End - 2021,” “Option Exercises and Stock Vested during 2021,” “Pension Benefits - 2021,” “Non-Qualified Deferred Compensation - 2021,” “Potential Payments
Upon Resignation, Retirement, Termination, Change in Control, Death, or Disability,” “Compensation of Non-Employee Directors,” and “Principal Executive
Officers’ (PEO) Pay Ratio - 2021” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2022 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by
reference.
ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS
Information regarding the beneficial ownership of securities for each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility is set forth under the headings “Share Ownership
Information – Security Ownership of Management” and “Share Ownership Information – Principal Shareholders” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2022
Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
193

Equity Compensation Plan Information
The following table provides information as of December 31, 2021 concerning shares of PG&E Corporation common stock authorized for issuance under PG&E
Corporation’s existing equity compensation plans. 
 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Plan Category
Number of Securities to be Issued
Upon Exercise of Outstanding
Options, Warrants and Rights
Weighted Average Exercise
Price of Outstanding Options,
Warrants and Rights
Number of Securities Remaining
Available for Future Issuance
Under Equity Compensation Plans
(Excluding Securities Reflected in
Column (a))
Equity compensation plans approved by
shareholders
31,167,681 
$
40.05 
58,552,721 
Equity compensation plans not approved by
shareholders
— 
 
— 
 
— 
 
Total equity compensation plans
31,167,681 
$
40.05 
58,552,721 
Includes 160 phantom stock units, 9,658,300 restricted stock units and 19,313,387 performance shares.  The weighted average exercise price reported in column (b) does not take these awards
into account. For performance shares, amounts reflected in this table assume payout in shares at 200% of target or, for performance shares granted in 2021, reflects the estimated payout
percentage of zero percent for performance shares using a total shareholder return and financial metric, 200% for performance shares using operational metrics. The actual number of shares
issued can range from zero percent to 200% of target depending on achievement of performance objectives. For performance-based stock options, amounts reflected in this table reflect actual
payout of 102%. Restricted stock units and performance shares are generally settled in net shares. Upon vesting, shares with a value equal to required tax withholding will be withheld and, in
lieu of issuing the shares, taxes will be paid on behalf of employees. Shares not issued due to share withholding or performance achievement below maximum will be available again for
issuance.
This is the weighted average exercise price for the 2,195,834 options outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Represents the total number of shares available for issuance under all PG&E Corporation’s equity compensation plans as of December 31, 2021. Stock-based awards granted under these plans
include restricted stock units, performance shares, stock options, and phantom stock units. The LTIP, which became effective on May 12, 2014, authorizes up to 17 million shares to be issued
pursuant to awards granted under the LTIP. In addition, 5.5 million shares related to awards outstanding under the 2006 long-term incentive plan at December 31, 2013, or awards granted
under the 2006 long-term incentive plan from January 1, 2014, through May 11, 2014, were cancelled, forfeited or expired and became available for issuance under the LTIP. A further 30
million shares were authorized for issuance under the LTIP on July 1, 2020, as part of the Plan. Lastly, an additional 44 million shares were authorized for issuance under the new 2021 LTIP
plan on June 1, 2021.
For more information, see Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Information responding to Item 13, for each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, will be included under the headings “Related Party Transactions,”
“Independence,” and “Committees and Memberships” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2022 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which information is
incorporated herein by reference.
ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
Information responding to Item 14, for each of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, will be included under the heading “Information Regarding the Independent
Auditor for PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company” in the Joint Proxy Statement relating to the 2022 Annual Meetings of Shareholders, which
information is incorporated herein by reference.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
194

PART IV
ITEM 15. EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
a.    The following documents are filed as a part of this report:
1.
The following consolidated financial statements, supplemental information and report of independent registered public accounting firm are filed as part of
this report in Item 8:
 
Consolidated Statements of Income for the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 for each of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company.
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 for each of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company.
Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2021 and 2020 for each of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 for each of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company.
Consolidated Statements of Equity for the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 for PG&E Corporation.
Consolidated Statements of Shareholders’ Equity for the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 for Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Management’s Report on Internal Controls. 
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (Deloitte & Touche LLP).
2.
The following financial statement schedules are filed as part of this report:
Condensed Financial Information of Parent as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Consolidated Valuation and Qualifying Accounts for each of PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the Years Ended December 31, 2021,
2020, and 2019.
3.
Exhibits required by Item 601 of Regulation S-K
Exhibit Number
Exhibit Description
3.1
Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation of PG&E Corporation, effective as of May 29, 2002, as amended by the
Amendment dated June 22, 2020 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8 K dated June 20, 2020 (File No.
1-12609) Exhibit 3.1)
3.2
Bylaws of PG&E Corporation, Amended and Restated as of June 22, 2020 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s
Form 8-K dated June 20, 2020 (File No. 1-12609) Exhibit 3.3)
3.3
Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, effective as of June 22, 2020
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 20, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit
3.2)
3.4
 Bylaws of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Amended and Restated as of May 20, 2021 (incorporated by reference in
Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-Q dated May 20, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 3.1)
3.5
Amended and Restated Limited Liability Company Agreement of PG&E Recovery Funding LLC, dated as of October 27,
2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 4, 2021 (File No. 1-2348),
Exhibit 3.2)
195

4.1
Indenture, dated as of August 6, 2018, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust
Company, N.A. (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated August 6, 2018 (File No. 1-
2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.2
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 6, 2018, relating to the issuance by Pacific Gas and Electric Company of
$500,000,000 aggregate principal amount of 4.25% Senior Notes due August 1, 2023 and $300,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of 4.65% Senior Notes due August 1, 2028 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K
dated August 6, 2018 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.2)
4.3
Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 1, 2020, to the Indenture, dated as of August 6, 2018, between Pacific Gas and
Electric Company and BOKF, N.A., as trustee (including forms of certain series of Reinstated Senior Notes) (incorporated by
reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated July 2, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.5)
4.4
Indenture, dated as of April 22, 2005, supplementing, amending and restating the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of March 11,
2004, as supplemented by a First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 23, 2004, and a Second Supplemental Indenture,
dated as of April 12, 2004, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Trust Company, N.A.
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2005 (File No. 1-
2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.5
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 13, 2007, relating to the issuance of $700,000,000 principal amount of Pacific
Gas and Electric Company’s 5.80% Senior Notes due March 1, 2037 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s Form 8-K dated March 14, 2007 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.6
Third Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 3, 2008, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 of Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s 6.35% Senior Notes due February 15, 2038 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form
8-K dated March 3, 2008 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.7
Sixth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 6, 2009, relating to the issuance of $550,000,000 aggregate principal amount of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 6.25% Senior Notes due March 1, 2039 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 6, 2009 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.8
Eighth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 18, 2009, relating to the issuance of $550,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 5.40% Senior Notes due January 15, 2040 (incorporated by reference to Pacific
Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 18, 2009 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.9
Ninth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 1, 2010, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal amount of
its 5.80% Senior Notes due March 1, 2037 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated
April 1, 2010 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.10
Ninth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 3, 2021, relating to the $800,000,000 aggregate principal amount of 3.000% First
Mortgage Bonds due June 15, 2028 (the “First Mortgage Bonds”), between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and the Trustee
(including the form of First Mortgage Bonds) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated
June 1, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.11
Twelfth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 18, 2010, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due October 1, 2020 and $250,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of its 5.40% Senior Notes due January 15, 2040 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form
8-K dated November 18, 2010 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.12
Thirteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of May 13, 2011, relating to the issuance of $300,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 4.25% Senior Notes due May 15, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated May 13, 2011 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.13
Fourteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of September 12, 2011, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 3.25% Senior Notes due September 15, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific
Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated September 12, 2011 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
196

4.14
Sixteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of December 1, 2011, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 4.50% Senior Notes due December 15, 2041 (incorporated by reference to Pacific
Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated December 1, 2011 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.15
Seventeenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of April 16, 2012, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 4.45% Senior Notes due April 15, 2042 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated April 16, 2012 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.16
Eighteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 16, 2012, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 2.45% Senior Notes due August 15, 2022 and $350,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of its 3.75% Senior Notes due August 15, 2042 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form
8-K dated August 16, 2012 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.17
Nineteenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 14, 2013, relating to the issuance of $375,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 3.25% Senior Notes due June 15, 2023 and $375,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of its 4.60% Senior Notes due June 15, 2043 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K
dated June 14, 2013 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.18
Twentieth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 12, 2013, relating to the issuance of $300,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 3.85% Senior Notes due November 15, 2023 and $500,000,000 aggregate
principal amount of its 5.125% Senior Notes due November 15, 2043 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s Form 8-K dated November 12, 2013 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.19
Twenty-First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of February 21, 2014, relating to the issuance of $450,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 3.75% Senior Notes due February 15, 2024 and $450,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of its 4.75% Senior Notes due February 15, 2044 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form
8-K dated February 21, 2014 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.20
Twenty-Third Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 18, 2014, relating to the issuance of $350,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 3.40% Senior Notes due August 15, 2024 and $225,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of its 4.75% Senior Notes due February 15, 2044 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form
8-K dated August 18, 2014 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.21
Twenty-Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 6, 2014, relating to the issuance of $500,000,000 aggregate
principal amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 4.30% Senior Notes due March 15, 2045 (incorporated by reference to
Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 6, 2014 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.22
Twenty-Fifth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 12, 2015, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due June 15, 2025 and $100,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of its 4.30% Senior Notes due March 15, 2045 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-
K dated June 12, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.23
Twenty-Sixth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 5, 2015, relating to the issuance of $200,000,000 aggregate
principal amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 3.50% Senior Notes due June 15, 2025 and $450,000,000 aggregate
principal amount of its 4.25% Senior Notes due March 15, 2046 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s Form 8-K dated November 5, 2015 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.24
Twenty-Seventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 1, 2016, relating to the issuance of $600,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 2.95% Senior Notes due March 1, 2026 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 1, 2016 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.25
Twenty-Eighth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of December 1, 2016, relating to the issuance of $250,000,000 aggregate
principal amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Floating Rate Senior Notes due November 30, 2017 and $400,000,000
aggregate principal amount of its 4.00% Senior Notes due December 1, 2046 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated December 1, 2016 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
197

4.26
Twenty-Ninth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 10, 2017, relating to the issuance of $400,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s 3.30% Senior Notes due March 15, 2027 and $200,000,000 aggregate principal
amount of its 4.00% Senior Notes due December 1, 2046 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form
8-K dated March 10, 2017 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.27
Thirtieth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 1, 2020, to the Amended and Restated Indenture, dated as of April 22, 2005,
between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and BOKF, N.A., as trustee (including forms of certain series of Reinstated Senior
Notes as defined therein) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File
No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.3)
4.28
Indenture, dated as of November 29, 2017, relating to the issuance of $500,000,000 aggregate principal amount of by Pacific Gas
and Electric Company’s Floating Rate Senior Notes due November 28, 2018, $1,150,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its
3.30% Senior Notes due December 1, 2027 and $850,000,000 aggregate principal amount of its 3.95% Senior Notes due
December 1, 2047 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 29, 2017 (File
No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.29
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 1, 2020, to the Indenture, dated as of November 29, 2017, between Pacific Gas and
Electric Company and BOKF, N.A., as trustee (including forms of certain series of Reinstated Senior Notes as defined therein)
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.4)
4.30
Senior Note Indenture, dated as of February 10, 2014, between PG&E Corporation and U.S. Bank National Association
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form S-3 dated February 11, 2014 (File No. 333-193880), Exhibit 4.1)
4.31
Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon
Trust Company, N.A., as trustee (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 19, 2020
(File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.32
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 19, 2020, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, relating to the
1.75% First Mortgage Bonds due June 16, 2022, 2.10% First Mortgage Bonds due August 1, 2027, 2.50% First Mortgage Bonds
due February 1, 2031, 3.30% First Mortgage Bonds due August 1, 2040 and 3.50% First Mortgage Bonds due August 1, 2050,
between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. (including the form of
Mortgage Bonds of each series) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 19, 2020
(File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.2)
4.33
Second Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 1, 2020, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, between
Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee (including forms of the
Senior Notes Collateral Bonds as defined therein) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K
dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.6)
4.34
Third Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 1, 2020, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, relating to 3.75%
First Mortgage Bond due July 1, 2028 and 3.45% First Mortgage Bond due July 1, 2025 (collectively, the “Short-Term Exchange
Mortgage Bonds”) and 4.95% First Mortgage Bond due July 1, 2050 and 4.55% First Mortgage Bond due July 1, 2030
(collectively, the “Long-Term Exchange Mortgage Bonds”) between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New
York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee (including forms of the Short-Term Exchange Mortgage Bonds and the Long-Term
Exchange Mortgage Bonds) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020
(File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.35
Fourth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 1, 2020, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, relating to
3.15% First Mortgage Bond due July 1, 2026 and 4.50% First Mortgage Bond due July 1, 2040 (collectively, the “Funded Debt
Mortgage Bonds”) between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as
trustee (including forms of the Funded Debt Mortgage Bonds) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s
Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.2)
4.36
Fifth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of July 1, 2020, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, between Pacific
Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee (including forms of the collateral
bonds securing the $1,500,000,000 18-month term loan facility and the $1,500,000,000 364-day term loan facility) (incorporated
by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.7)
198

4.37
Sixth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of August 1, 2020, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, between
Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 4.15)
4.38
Pledge Agreement, dated as of October 5, 2020, by and between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and MUFG Bank, Ltd.
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated October 5, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 4.1)
4.39
Eighth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of March 11, 2021, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, relating to
the $1,500,000,000 aggregate principal amount of 1.367% First Mortgage Bonds due March 10, 2023, $450,000,000 aggregate
principal amount of 3.25% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1, 2031 Bonds and $450,000,000 aggregate principal amount of 4.20%
First Mortgage Bonds due June 1, 2041 Bonds, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon
Trust Company, N.A.(including the form of First Mortgage Bonds of each series) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 8, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.40
Ninth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 3, 2021, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, relating to the
$800,000,000 aggregate principal amount of 3.000% First Mortgage Bonds due June 15, 2028 (the “2028 Bonds”), between
Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. (including the form of 2028 Bonds)
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 1, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.41
Tenth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 22, 2021, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, relating to the
collateral bonds, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. (including
the forms of collateral bonds securing the revolving credit facility) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s Form 8-K dated June 22, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.42
Eleventh Supplemental Indenture, dated as of October 29, 2021, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020, relating
to the collateral bond, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A.
(including the form of collateral bond securing the 18-month term loan facility) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.2)
4.43
Twelfth Supplemental Indenture, dated as of November 15, 2021, to the Indenture of Mortgage, dated as of June 19, 2020,
relating to the $300,000,000 aggregate principal amount of Floating Rate Mortgage Bonds due November 14, 2022 (the “Floating
Rate Mortgage Bonds”) and the $900,000,000 aggregate principal amount of 1.70% First Mortgage Bonds due November 15,
2023 (the “2023 Bonds”), between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A.
(including the forms of Floating Rate Mortgage Bonds and 2023 Bonds) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s Form 8-K dated November 10, 2021 File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.1)
4.44
Indenture, dated as of June 23, 2020, between PG&E Corporation and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as
trustee (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated June 19, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 4.1)
4.45
First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of June 23, 2020, to the Indenture, dated as of June 23, 2020, relating to the 5.000% Senior
Secured Notes due July 1, 2028 (the “2028 Notes”) and the 5.250% Senior Secured Notes due July 1, 2030 (the “2030 Notes”;
together with the 2028 Notes, the “Notes”), by and among PG&E Corporation, The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company,
N.A., and JP Morgan Chase Bank N.A., as collateral agent (including the form of Notes for each series) (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated June 19, 2020 (File No. 1-2609), Exhibit 4.2)
4.46
Escrow Deposit and Disbursement Agreement, dated as of June 23, 2020, by and among PG&E Corporation, The Bank of New
York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as escrow agent (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated June 19,
2020 (File No. 1-2609), Exhibit 4.3)
4.47
Calculation Agency Agreement, dated as June 19, 2020, by and between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of New
York Mellon Trust Company, N.A, as calculation agent (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form
8-K dated June 19, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.3)
4.48
Escrow Deposit and Disbursement Agreement, dated as of June 19, 2020, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, The
Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as escrow agent (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s Form 8-K dated June 19, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.4)
199

4.49
Indenture, dated as of November 12, 2021, by and between PG&E Recovery Funding LLC and The Bank of New York Melon
Trust Company, N.A. (including forms of the Senior Secured Recovery Bonds) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 12, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 4.1)
4.50
Series Supplement, dated as of November 12, 2021, by and between PG&E Recovery Funding LLC and The Bank of New York
Melon Trust Company, N.A. (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 12,
2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 4.2)
4.51(a)
Description of PG&E Corporation’s Securities – Common Stock and Equity Units
4.51(b)
Description of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Securities – Preferred Stock
10.1
Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of April 27, 2015, among (1) PG&E Corporation, as borrower, (2)
Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent and a lender, (3) Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated, Citigroup
Global Markets Inc., J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, and Wells Fargo Securities LLC, as joint lead arrangers and joint
bookrunners, (4) Citibank N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as co-syndication agents and lenders, (5) Wells Fargo Bank,
National Association, as documentation agent and lender, and (6) the following other lenders: Barclays Bank PLC, BNP
Paribas, Goldman Sachs Bank USA, Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A., Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., The Bank of New York
Mellon, N.A., Mizuho Corporate Bank, Ltd., Royal Bank of Canada, U.S. Bank, National Association, MUFG Union Bank,
N.A., TD Bank, N.A., Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, New York Branch, and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015 (File No. 1-12609),
Exhibit 10.1)
10.2
Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of April 27, 2015, among (1) Pacific Gas and Electric Company, as
borrower, (2) Citibank N.A., as administrative agent and a lender, (3) Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Incorporated,
Citigroup Global Markets Inc., J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, and Wells Fargo Securities LLC, as joint lead arrangers and joint
bookrunners, (4) Bank of America, N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as co-syndication agents and lenders, (5) Wells
Fargo Bank, National Association, as documentation agent and lender, and (6) the following other lenders: Barclays Bank PLC,
BNP Paribas, Goldman Sachs Bank USA, Morgan Stanley Bank, N.A., Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., The Bank of New
York Mellon, N.A., Mizuho Corporate Bank, Ltd., Royal Bank of Canada, U.S. Bank National Association, MUFG Union
Bank, N.A., TD Bank, N.A., Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, New York Branch, and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking
Corporation (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2015
(File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.2)
10.3
Term Loan Agreement, dated as of April 16, 2018, by and among PG&E Corporation, the several banks and other financial
institutions or entities from time to time parties thereto, Mizuho Bank, Ltd., Royal Bank of Canada and Sumitomo Mitsui
Banking Corporation, as joint lead arrangers and joint bookrunners and Mizuho Bank, Ltd., as administrative agent
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated April 16, 2018 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
10.4
Term Loan Agreement, dated as of February 23, 2018, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the several banks and
other financial institutions or entities from time to time parties thereto, The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd. and U.S. Bank
National Association, as joint lead arrangers and joint bookrunners and The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, Ltd, as
administrative agent (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated February 23, 2018 (File
No. 1-02348), Exhibit 10.1)
10.5
Transmission Control Agreement among the California Independent System Operator Corporation (CAISO) and the
Participating Transmission Owners, including Pacific Gas and Electric Company, effective as of March 31, 1998, as amended
(CAISO, FERC Electric Tariff No. 7) (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year
ended December 31, 2004 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.8)
10.6
*
Agreement to Enter Into Lease and Purchase Option, dated June 5, 2020, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and TMG
Bay Area Investments II, LLC (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 5, 2020
(File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.1)
10.7
*
Office Lease, dated as of October 23, 2020, by and between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and BA2 300 Lakeside LLC
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609),
Exhibit 10.12)
10.8
Calculation Agency Agreement, dated as of November 16, 2020, between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and The Bank of
New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A, as calculation agent (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s
Form 8-K dated November 16, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 4.2)
200

10.9
Repricing Amendment, dated February 1, 2021, by and among PG&E Corporation, the Consenting Lenders, the New Lenders
(each as defined therein) and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A, as administrative agent (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.2)
10.10
Underwriting Agreement, dated March 8, 2021, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, BNP Paribas Securities Corp.,
Citigroup Global Markets Inc., Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC and MUFG Securities Americas Inc. (incorporated by
reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated March 8, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 1.1)
10.11
Underwriting Agreement, dated June 1, 2021, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Barclays Capital Inc., BofA
Securities, Inc., Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 1, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 1.1)
10.12
Underwriting Agreement, dated November 4, 2021, by and among PG&E Recovery Funding LLC, Pacific Gas and Electric
Company, Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC and Citigroup Global Markets Inc. (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas & Electric
Company’s Form 8-K dated November 4, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 1.1)
10.13
Underwriting Agreement, dated November 10, 2021, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Barclays Capital Inc.,
Citigroup Global Markets Inc., MUFG Securities Americas Inc. and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC (incorporated by reference to
Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November 10, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 1.1)
10.14
Equity Distribution Agreement, dated April 30, 2021, by and among PG&E Corporation, Barclays Capital Inc., BofA Securities,
Inc., Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, as sales agents and forward sellers, and Barclays
Bank PLC, Bank of America, N.A., Credit Suisse Capital LLC and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as forward
purchasers (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated April 30, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 1.1)
10.15
Pledge Agreement, dated as of July 1, 2020, by and among PG&E Corporation, J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., as collateral
agent, revolving administrative agent and term administrative agent, The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., and
the secured representatives party thereto from time to time (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated
June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 4.8)
10.16
Purchase Contract and Unit Agreement, dated July 1, 2020, between PG&E Corporation and The Bank of New York Mellon
Trust Company, N.A., as purchase contract agent and attorney-in-fact for the holders from time to time as provided therein
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 4.9)
10.17
Custodial Agreement, dated July 1, 2020, between The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as purchase contract
agent and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as custodian (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s
Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 4.12)
10.18
Tax Benefits Payment Agreement, dated July 1, 2020, between PG&E Corporation and the Fire Victim Trust (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
10.19
Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of August 6, 2018, among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Goldman Sachs & Co.
LLC, Mizuho Securities USA LLC, RBC Capital Markets, LLC and SMBC Nikko Securities America, Inc., as representatives of
the initial purchasers (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated August 6, 2018 (File No.
1-2348), Exhibit 4.5)
10.20
Registration Rights Agreement, dated July 1, 2020, between the Fire Victim Trust and PG&E Corporation (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.2)
10.21
Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement, dated as of July 8, 2021, by and between PG&E Corporation and the
PG&E Fire Victim Trust (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated July 8, 2021 (File No. 1-12609),
Exhibit 4.1)
10.22
Credit Agreement, dated as of July 1, 2020, by and among PG&E Corporation, the several lenders from time to time party
thereto, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as collateral agent (incorporated
by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.3)
201

10.23
Amendment No. 1 to Credit Agreement, dated as of June 22, 2021, by and among PG&E Corporation, the several banks and
other financial institutions or entities party thereto from time to time, JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent and
collateral agent (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated June 22, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit
10.1)
10.24
Term Loan Agreement, dated June 23, 2020, by and among PG&E Corporation, J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., as
administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated June 19,
2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
10.25
Credit Agreement, dated as of July 1, 2020, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the several lenders from time to
time party thereto, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. and Citibank, N.A., as co-administrative agents, and Citibank, N.A., as
designated agent (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No. 1-
2348), Exhibit 10.4)
10.26
Amendment No. 1 to Credit Agreement, dated as of June 22, 2021, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the several
banks and other financial institutions or entities party thereto from time to time, JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., as co-
administrative agents and Citibank, N.A,, as designated agent (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s
Form 8-K dated June 22, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.2)
10.27
Term Loan Credit Agreement, dated as of July 1, 2020, among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the several lenders from time
to time party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated June 30, 2020 (File No.1-2348), Exhibit 10.4)
10.28
Amendment No. 1 to Credit Agreement, dated as of October 29, 2021, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the
several banks and other financial institutions or entities party thereto from time to time and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as
administrative agent (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2021
(File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.5)
10.29
Amendment No. 2 to Credit Agreement, dated as of December 31, 2021, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the
Consenting Lenders, the other Lenders (each as defined therein) and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent
10.30
Amendment No. 3 to Credit Agreement, dated as of February 8, 2022, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company, the
Consenting Lenders (each as defined therein) and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent
10.31
Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as of October 5, 2020, by and between PG&E AR Facility, LLC, as buyer, and Pacific Gas
and Electric Company in its capacity as initial Servicer and in its capacity as Originator (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form 8-K dated October 5, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
10.32
Amendment No. 1 to Purchase and Sale Agreement, dated as of January 14, 2021, by and between PG&E AR Facility, LLC, as
buyer, and Pacific Gas and Electric Company in its capacity as initial Servicer and in its capacity as Originator (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.75)
10.33
Receivables Financing Agreement, dated as of October 5, 2020, by and among PG&E AR Facility, LLC, as borrower, Pacific
Gas and Electric Company, in its individual capacity and as initial Servicer, the Persons from time to time party thereto as
Lenders and Group Agents and MUFG Bank, Ltd., as Administrative Agent on behalf of the Credit Parties (each as defined
therein) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated October 5, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.2)
10.34
Amendment No. 1 to Receivables Financing Agreement, dated as of January 14, 2021, by and among PG&E AR Facility, LLC,
as borrower, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, in its individual capacity and as initial Servicer, the Persons from time to time
party thereto as Lenders and Group Agents and MUFG Bank, Ltd., as Administrative Agent on behalf of the Credit Parties (each
as defined therein) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (File
No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.77)
10.35
Amendment No. 2 to Receivables Financing Agreement, dated as of February 12, 2021, by and among PG&E AR Facility, LLC,
as borrower, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, in its individual capacity and as initial Servicer, the Persons from time to time
party thereto as Lenders and Group Agents and MUFG Bank, Ltd., as Administrative Agent on behalf of the Credit Parties (each
as defined therein) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (File
No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.78)
202

10.36
Amendment No. 3 to Receivables Financing Agreement, dated as of May 5, 2021, by and among PG&E AR Facility, LLC, as
borrower, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, in its individual capacity and as initial Servicer, the Persons from time to time
party thereto as Lenders and Group Agents and MUFG Bank, Ltd., as Administrative Agent on behalf of the Credit Parties (each
as defined therein) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2021
(File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.2)
10.37
Amendment No. 4 to Receivables Financing Agreement, dated as of September 15, 2021, by and among PG&E AR Facility,
LLC, as borrower, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, in its individual capacity and as initial Servicer, the Persons from time to
time party thereto as Lenders and Group Agents and MUFG Bank, Ltd., as Administrative Agent on behalf of the Credit Parties
(each as defined therein) incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30,
2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.3)
10.38
Collection Account Intercreditor Agreement, dated as of October 5, 2020, by and among Pacific Gas and Electric Company,
MUFG Bank, Ltd., and each trustee, indenture trustee, lender administrative agent, collateral agent, purchaser or other party
described in Exhibit A therein (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated October 5, 2020 (File No. 1-
12609), Exhibit 10.3)
10.39
PG&E Fire Victim Trust Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement, dated as of July 8, 2021, by and among PG&E
Corporation, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, PG&E ShareCo LLC and the PG&E Fire Victim Trust (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated July 8, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
10.40
Recovery Property Servicing Agreement between PG&E Recovery Funding LLC and Pacific Gas and Electric Company, as
Servicer, dated as of November 12, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated
November 12, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.1)
10.41
Recovery Property Purchase and Sale Agreement between PG&E Recovery Funding LLC and Pacific Gas and Electric
Company, as Seller, dated as of November 12, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K
dated November 12, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.2)
10.42
Administration Agreement between PG&E Recovery Funding LLC and Pacific Gas and Electric Company, as administrator,
dated as of November 12, 2021 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 8-K dated November
12, 2021 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.3)
10.43
Master Transaction Agreement, dated as of February 2, 2021, by and between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Golden
State Licensing, LLC. (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020
(File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.80)
10.44
Purchase Agreement, dated as of May 21, 2021, by and between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Hines Atlas US LP
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated May 21, 2021 (File No. 1-2609), Exhibit 10.1)
10.45
First Amendment to Purchase Agreement, dated as of September 14, 2021, by and between Pacific Gas and Electric Company
and HNG Atlas US LP (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2021
(File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.4)
10.46
Repricing Amendment, dated February 1, 2021, by and among PG&E Corporation, the Consenting Lenders, the New Lenders
(each as defined therein) and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A, as administrative agent (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quartered ended March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.2)
10.47
**
PG&E Corporation Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan, as amended effective as of June 3, 2019 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2019 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.9)
10.48
**
PG&E Corporation Defined Contribution Executive Supplemental Retirement Plan, as amended effective as of June 3, 2019
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2019 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit
10.10)
10.49
**
PG&E Corporation Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan amended effective as of September 19, 2001, and frozen after
December 31, 2004 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004) (File
No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.10)
10.50
**
PG&E Corporation 2005 Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan, as amended effective September 15, 2015 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.3)
203

10.51
**
Description of Short-Term Incentive Plan for Officers of PG&E Corporation and its subsidiaries, effective January 1, 2021
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated February 9, 2021 (File No. 1-12609)
10.52
**
Amendment to PG&E Corporation Short-Term Incentive Programs and Other Bonus Programs, effective January 1, 2009
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 (File No. 1-12609),
Exhibit 10.27)
10.53
**
Amendment to Pacific Gas and Electric Company Short-Term Incentive Programs and Other Bonus Programs, effective January
1, 2009 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008
(File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.28)
10.54
**
Pacific Gas and Electric Company Officer Relocation Handbook, effective December 15, 2019 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.99)
10.55
**
Amendment to the Postretirement Life Insurance Plan of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, effective January 1, 2019.
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (File No. 1-12609),
Exhibit 10.100)
10.56
**
Amendment to the Postretirement Life Insurance Plan of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, effective February 6, 2015
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2014 (File No. 1-
2348), Exhibit 10.37)
10.57
**
Postretirement Life Insurance Plan of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, as amended and restated on February 14, 2012
(incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2012 (File No. 1-
2348), Exhibit 10.7)
10.58
**
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2018 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit
10.07)
10.59
**
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2021 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2021 File No. 1-12609), Exhibit
10.13)
10.60
**
Form of Stock Option Agreement for 2018 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated
by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.08)
10.61
**
Form of Restricted Stock Unit Agreement for 2021 grants to Non-Employee Directors under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-
Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2021 (File
No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.8)
10.62
**
Form of Performance Share Agreement subject to financial goals for 2018 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018 (File No. 1-
12609), Exhibit 10.04)
10.63
**
Form of Performance Share Agreement subject to safety goals for 2018 grants under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term
Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018 (File No. 1-
12609), Exhibit 10.05)
10.64
**
Form of Performance Share Agreement subject to total shareholder return goals for 2018 grants under the PG&E Corporation
2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31,
2018 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.06)
10.65
**
Form of Performance Share Unit Agreement subject to customer experience, public safety and financial goals for 2021 grants
under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q
dated March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.14)
10.66
**
Form of Performance Share Unit Agreement subject to total shareholder return goals for 2021 grants under the PG&E
Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.15)
10.67
**
PG&E Corporation 2010 Executive Stock Ownership Guidelines as adopted effective January 1, 2011 (incorporated by reference
to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2010 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.3)
10.68
**
PG&E Corporation Executive Stock Ownership Program Guidelines as amended effective September 15, 2010 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2010 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.2)
204

10.69
**
PG&E Corporation Golden Parachute Restriction Policy effective as of February 15, 2006 (incorporated by reference to PG&E
Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2005 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.49)
10.70
**
Amendment to PG&E Corporation Golden Parachute Restriction Policy dated December 31, 2008 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.58)
10.71
**
PG&E Corporation 2005 Deferred Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors, effective as of January 1, 2005 (as amended
to comply with Internal Revenue Code Section 409A regulations effective as of January 1, 2009) (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation's Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2008 (File No.1-12609), Exhibit 10.24)
10.72
**
Amended and Restated PG&E Corporation Director Grantor Trust Agreement dated October 1, 2015 (incorporated by reference
to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.01)
10.73
**
Amended and Restated PG&E Corporation Officer Grantor Trust Agreement dated October 1, 2015 (incorporated by reference
to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2015 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.2)
10.74
**
PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company Executive Incentive Compensation Recoupment Policy effective
February 19, 2019 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (File
No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.119)
10.75
**
Resolution of the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation regarding indemnification of officers and directors dated December
18, 1996 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2004 (File No. 1-
12609), Exhibit 10.40)
10.76
**
Resolution of the Board of Directors of Pacific Gas and Electric Company regarding indemnification of officers and directors
dated July 19, 1995 (incorporated by reference to Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December
31, 2004 (File No. 1-2348), Exhibit 10.41)
10.77
**
Form of Director and Officer Indemnification Agreement (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the
quarter ended June 30, 2019 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.8)
10.78
**
Offer Letter between PG&E Corporation and Patricia K. Poppe, effective November 13, 2020 (incorporated by reference to
PG&E Corporation’s Form 8-K dated November 18, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.1)
10.79
**
Offer Letter between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Adam L. Wright, dated January 16, 2021 (incorporated by reference
to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.7)
10.80
**
Offer Letter between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Marlene M. Santos, dated January 26, 2021 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.9)
10.81
**
Offer Letter between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Jason M. Glickman, dated March 24, 2021 (incorporated by
reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.12)
10.82
**
Offer Letter between PG&E Corporation and Ajay Waghray, dated July 29, 2020.
10.83
**
Offer Letter between Pacific Gas and Electric Company and Julius Cox, dated January 8, 2021.
10.84
**
Offer Letter between PG&E Corporation and Carla Peterman, dated April 14, 2021
10.85
**
Offer Letter between PG&E Corporation and Sumeet Singh, dated June 30, 2020
10.86
**
Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Patricia K. Poppe, dated January 15,
2021 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q dated September 30, 2021 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.6)
10.87
**
Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between Adam L. Wright and PG&E Corporation, dated March 1, 2021
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-12609, Exhibit
10.8)
10.88
**
Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Marlene M. Santos, dated March 15,
2021 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-12609),
Exhibit 10.10)
205

10.89
**
Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Christopher A. Foster, dated March
22, 2021 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2021 (File No. 1-
12609), Exhibit 10.11)
10.90
Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and William L. Smith, dated August 3, 2020
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609),
Exhibit 10.31)
10.91
***
Amended and Restated Performance Share Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and William L. Smith, dated
August 3, 2020 (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (File
No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.127)
10.92
**
Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Julius Cox, dated March 1, 2021
10.93
**
Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and Carla Peterman, dated June 1, 2021
10.94
**
Non-Annual Restricted Stock Unit Award Agreement between PG&E Corporation and John Simon, dated August 14, 2020
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609),
Exhibit 10.32)
10.95
**
PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan (as adopted effective May 12, 2014 and as last amended effective July 1,
2020) (incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2020 (File No. 1-
12609), Exhibit 10.40)
10.96
**
PG&E Corporation 2021 Long-Term Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Appendix A to PG&E Corporation’s
definitive proxy statement on Schedule 14A filed on April 8, 2021)
10.97
**
Form of 2020 Performance Share Award Agreement under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan
(incorporated by reference to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609),
Exhibit 10.41)
10.98
**
PG&E Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy, as amended effective as of September 24, 2020 (incorporated by reference
to PG&E Corporation’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2020 (File No. 1-12609), Exhibit 10.42)
10.99
**
PG&E Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy, as amended effective as of November 1, 2021
21
Subsidiaries of the Registrant
23.1
PG&E Corporation Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (Deloitte & Touche LLP)
23.2
Pacific Gas and Electric Company Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (Deloitte & Touche LLP)
24
Powers of Attorney
31.1
Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of PG&E Corporation required by Section 302
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
31.2
***
Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of Pacific Gas and Electric Company required by
Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
32.1
***
Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of PG&E Corporation required by Section 906
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
32.2
Certifications of the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of Pacific Gas and Electric Company required by
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
101.INS
XBRL Instance Document - the instance document does not appear in the Interactive Data File because its XBRL tags are
embedded within the Inline XBRL document.
101.SCH
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
101.CAL
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
101.LAB
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Labels Linkbase Document
101.PRE
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
206

101.DEF
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File (formatted as Inline XBRL and contained in Exhibit 101)
*
In accordance with Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K, certain schedules (or similar attachments) to this exhibit have been
omitted from this filing. Such omitted schedules (or similar attachments) include information relating to the Property. The
registrants will provide a copy of any omitted schedule to the Securities and Exchange Commission or its staff upon request. In
accordance with Item 601(b)(10)(iv) of Regulation S-K, certain provisions or terms of the Lease Agreement attached as an
exhibit to the Agreement have been redacted. Such redacted information includes proprietary information about the Property.
The registrants will provide an unredacted copy of the exhibit on a supplemental basis to the Securities and Exchange
Commission or its staff upon request.
**
Management contract or compensatory plan, contract or arrangement.
***
Pursuant to Item 601(b)(32) of SEC Regulation S-K, these exhibits are furnished rather than filed with this report.
207

ITEM 16. FORM 10-K SUMMARY
None.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrants have duly caused this Annual Report on
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 to be signed on their behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrants and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
PG&E CORPORATION
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
(Registrant)
(Registrant)
/s/ PATRICIA K. POPPE
/s/ ADAM L. WRIGHT
Patricia K. Poppe
Adam L. Wright
By:
Chief Executive Officer
By:
Executive Vice President, Operations and Chief Operating Officer
Date:
February 10, 2022
Date:
February 10, 2022
/s/ MARLENE M. SANTOS
Marlene M. Santos
By:
Executive Vice President and Chief Customer Officer
Date:
February 10, 2022
/s/ JASON M. GLICKMAN
Jason M. Glickman
By:
Executive Vice President, Engineering, Planning, and Strategy
Date:
February 10, 2022
Signature
Title
Date
A.  Principal Executive Officers
/s/ PATRICIA K. POPPE
Chief Executive Officer
February 10, 2022
  Patricia K. Poppe
(PG&E Corporation)
/s/ ADAM L. WRIGHT
Executive Vice President, Operations and Chief Operating
Officer
February 10, 2022
  Adam L. Wright
(Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
208

/s/ MARLENE M. SANTOS
Executive Vice President and Chief Customer Officer
February 10, 2022
  Marlene M. Santos
(Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
/s/ JASON M. GLICKMAN
Executive Vice President, Engineering, Planning, and Strategy
February 10, 2022
  Jason M. Glickman
(Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
B. Principal Financial Officers
/s/ CHRISTOPHER A. FOSTER
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
February 10, 2022
  Christopher A. Foster
(PG&E Corporation)
/s/ DAVID S. THOMASON
Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and
February 10, 2022
  David S. Thomason
Controller (Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
C. Principal Accounting Officer
/s/ DAVID S. THOMASON
Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and
February 10, 2022
  David S. Thomason
Controller (Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
C.  Directors (PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and
Electric Company, unless otherwise noted)
*
/s/ RAJAT BAHRI
Director
February 10, 2022
  Rajat Bahri
*
/s/ CHERYL F. CAMPBELL
Director
February 10, 2022
  Cheryl F. Campbell
*
/s/ KERRY W. COOPER
Director
February 10, 2022
  Kerry W. Cooper
*
/s/ JESSICA L. DENECOUR
Director
February 10, 2022
  Jessica L. Denecour
*
/s/ MARK E. FERGUSON III
Director
February 10, 2022
  Mark E. Ferguson III
*
/s/ ROBERT C. FLEXON
Director
February 10, 2022
  Robert C. Flexon
Chair of the Board (PG&E Corporation)
*
/s/ W. CRAIG FUGATE
Director
February 10, 2022
  W. Craig Fugate
209

*
/s/ ARNO L. HARRIS
Director
February 10, 2022
  Arno L. Harris
*
/s/ MICHAEL R. NIGGLI
Director
February 10, 2022
  Michael R. Niggli
*
/s/ PATRICIA K. POPPE
Director
February 10, 2022
  Patricia K. Poppe
*
/s/ DEAN L. SEAVERS
Director
February 10, 2022
  Dean L. Seavers
Chair of the Board (Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
*
/s/ WILLIAM L. SMITH
Director
February 10, 2022
  William L. Smith
*
/s/ BENJAMIN F. WILSON
Director
February 10, 2022
  Benjamin F. Wilson
*
/s/ ADAM L. WRIGHT
Director (Pacific Gas and Electric Company)
February 10, 2022
  Adam L. Wright
*By:
/s/ JOHN R. SIMON
February 10, 2022
John R. Simon, Attorney-in-Fact
210

PG&E CORPORATION
SCHEDULE I — CONDENSED FINANCIAL INFORMATION OF PARENT
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF INCOME AND COMPREHENSIVE INCOME
 
Years Ended December 31,
(in millions, except per share amounts)
2021
2020
2019
Administrative service revenue
$
118 
$
127 
$
138 
Operating expenses
(124)
(103)
(114)
Interest income
— 
— 
1 
Interest expense
(230)
(149)
(21)
Other income (expense)
(54)
13 
10 
Reorganization items, net
1 
(1,649)
(26)
Equity in earnings of subsidiaries
137 
411 
(7,622)
Loss before income taxes
(152)
(1,350)
(7,634)
Income tax provision (benefit)
(64)
(46)
8 
Net loss
$
(88)
$
(1,304)
$
(7,642)
Other Comprehensive Income (Loss)
 
 
 
Pension and other postretirement benefit plans obligations (net of taxes of $3, $7, and $0, at
respective dates)
$
7 
$
(17)
$
(1)
Total other comprehensive income (loss)
7 
(17)
(1)
Comprehensive Loss
$
(81)
$
(1,321)
$
(7,643)
Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding, Basic 
2,463 
1,257 
528 
Weighted Average Common Shares Outstanding, Diluted 
2,463 
1,257 
528 
Net loss per common share, basic
$
(0.05)
$
(1.05)
$
(14.50)
Net loss per common share, diluted
$
(0.05)
$
(1.05)
$
(14.50)
Includes 477,743,590 shares of common stock issued to ShareCo.
(1)
(1)
(1) 
211

PG&E CORPORATION
SCHEDULE I — CONDENSED FINANCIAL INFORMATION OF PARENT – (Continued)
CONDENSED BALANCE SHEETS 
 
Balance at December 31,
(in millions)
2021
2020
ASSETS
 
 
Current Assets
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
$
126 
$
223 
Advances to affiliates
21 
48 
Income taxes receivable
10 
12 
Other current assets
12 
13 
Total current assets
169 
296 
Noncurrent Assets
 
 
Equipment
2 
2 
Accumulated depreciation
(2)
(2)
Net equipment
— 
— 
Investments in subsidiaries
30,232 
25,244 
Other investments
181 
186 
Operating lease right of use asset
— 
3 
Deferred income taxes
297 
237 
Total noncurrent assets
30,710 
25,670 
Total Assets
$
30,879 
$
25,966 
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
 
Current Liabilities
 
 
Long-term debt, classified as current
27 
28 
Accounts payable – other
200 
49 
Operating lease liabilities
— 
3 
Other current liabilities
69 
72 
Total current liabilities
296 
152 
Noncurrent Liabilities
 
 
Debtor-in-possession financing
4,592 
4,624 
Operating lease liabilities
— 
— 
Other noncurrent liabilities
168 
191 
Total noncurrent liabilities
4,760 
4,815 
Common Shareholders’ Equity
 
 
Common stock
35,129 
30,224 
Reinvested earnings
(9,286)
(9,198)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(20)
(27)
Total common shareholders’ equity
25,823 
20,999 
Total Liabilities and Shareholders’ Equity
$
30,879 
$
25,966 
212

PG&E CORPORATION
SCHEDULE I – CONDENSED FINANCIAL INFORMATION OF PARENT – (Continued)
CONDENSED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
(in millions) 
 
Year ended December 31,
 
2021
2020
2019
Cash Flows from Operating Activities:
 
 
 
Net loss
$
(88)
$
(1,304)
$
(7,642)
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
 
 
 
Stock-based compensation amortization
51 
28 
43 
Equity in earnings (loss) of subsidiaries
(139)
(412)
7,622 
Deferred income taxes and tax credits-net
(60)
(50)
— 
Reorganization items, net (Note 2)
(32)
1,548 
11 
Current income taxes receivable/payable
2 
— 
6 
Liabilities subject to compromise
— 
12 
28 
Other
81 
97 
(62)
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
(185)
(81)
6 
Cash Flows From Investing Activities:
 
 
 
Investment in subsidiaries
— 
(12,986)
— 
Net cash used in investing activities
— 
(12,986)
— 
Cash Flows From Financing Activities:
 
 
 
Debtor-in-possession credit facility debt issuance costs
— 
— 
(16)
Bridge facility financing fees
— 
(40)
— 
Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt
— 
4,660 
— 
Repayment of long-term debt
(28)
(664)
— 
Intercompany note from the Utility
145 
— 
— 
Common stock issued
— 
7,582 
85 
Equity Units issued
— 
1,304 
— 
Other
(29)
— 
— 
Net cash provided by financing activities
88 
12,842 
69 
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
(97)
(225)
75 
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1
223 
448 
373 
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
$
126 
$
223 
$
448 
Supplemental disclosures of cash flow information
 
 
 
Cash received (paid) for:
 
 
 
Interest, net of amounts capitalized
$
(207)
$
(105)
$
(3)
Income taxes, net
1 
— 
— 
Supplemental disclosures of noncash investing and financing activities
Operating lease liabilities arising from obtaining ROU assets
$
— 
$
— 
$
9 
Common stock issued in satisfaction of liabilities
— 
8,276 
— 
Increase to PG&E Corporation common stock and treasury stock in connection 
    with the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement
4,854 
— 
— 
213

PG&E CORPORATION
SCHEDULE II – CONSOLIDATED VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 
(in millions)
 
Additions
 
 
Description
Balance at
Beginning of
Period
Charged to Costs
and Expenses
Charged to Other
Accounts
Deductions
Balance at End
of Period
Valuation and qualifying accounts deducted from
assets:
 
 
 
 
 
2021:
 
 
 
 
 
      Allowance for uncollectible accounts
$
146 
$
136 
$
— 
$
111 
$
171 
2020:
 
      Allowance for uncollectible accounts 
$
43 
$
138 
$
— 
$
35 
$
146 
2019:
 
      Allowance for uncollectible accounts 
$
56 
$
— 
$
— 
$
13 
$
43 
Allowance for uncollectible accounts is deducted from “Accounts receivable - Customers.”
Deductions consist principally of write-offs, net of collections of receivables previously written off.
 (2)
 (1)
(1)
(1)
(1) 
(2) 
214

PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY
SCHEDULE II – CONSOLIDATED VALUATION AND QUALIFYING ACCOUNTS
For the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 
(in millions)
 
Additions
 
 
Description
Balance at
Beginning of
Period
Charged to Costs
and Expenses
Charged to Other
Accounts
Deductions
Balance at End
of Period
Valuation and qualifying accounts deducted from
assets:
 
 
 
 
 
2021:
 
 
 
 
 
      Allowance for uncollectible accounts
$
146 
$
136 
$
— 
$
111 
$
171 
2020:
      Allowance for uncollectible accounts
$
43 
$
138 
$
— 
$
35 
$
146 
2019:
      Allowance for uncollectible accounts
$
56 
$
— 
$
— 
$
13 
$
43 
Allowance for uncollectible accounts is deducted from “Accounts receivable - Customers.”
Deductions consist principally of write-offs, net of collections of receivables previously written off.
 (2)
 (1)
 (1)
 (1)
(1) 
(2) 
215

EXHIBIT 4.51(a)
DESCRIPTION OF PG&E CORPORATION’S SECURITIES REGISTERED UNDER SECTION 12 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF
1934
The following description of PG&E Corporation’s common stock (the “Common Stock”) and equity units (each an “Equity Unit”) is only a summary and does not
purport to be complete. It is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to applicable law, our Amended and Restated Articles of Incorporation effective as
of June 22, 2020 (the “Articles of Incorporation”), our Bylaws amended and restated as of June 22, 2020 (the “Bylaws”), the purchase contract agreement (the
“purchase contract agreement”), dated as of July 1, 2020 between us and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as purchase contract agent (the
“purchase contract agent”) and attorney-in-fact for the holders of purchase contracts from time to time and the custodial agreement (the “custodial agreement”),
dated as of July 1, 2020 between the purchase contract agent and The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as the custodian for the holders of the
Equity Units (the “custodian”), each of which is filed as an exhibit to this Annual Report on Form 10-K and is incorporated by reference herein. We encourage you
to read the Articles of Incorporation, the Bylaws, the purchase contract agreement and the custodial agreement for additional information.
In this section, references to “we,” “our,” “ours” and “us” refer only to PG&E Corporation and not to any of its direct or indirect subsidiaries or affiliates except as
expressly provided.
Description of the Common Stock
General
Our Articles of Incorporation authorize the issuance of 3,600,000,000 shares of Common Stock and 400,000,000 shares of preferred stock. As of December 31,
2021, there were approximately 1,985,400,540 shares of our Common Stock, no par value, outstanding and no shares of preferred stock outstanding. All
outstanding shares of our Common Stock are fully paid and nonassessable.
We may issue our Common Stock from time to time upon such terms and for such consideration as may be determined by our Board of Directors. Such further
issuances, up to the aggregate amounts authorized by our Articles of Incorporation, will not require approval by our shareholders. We may also issue Common
Stock from time to time under dividend reinvestment and employee benefit plans.
Voting Rights
Except as otherwise provided by law, holders of our Common Stock have voting rights on the basis of one vote per share on each matter submitted to a vote at a
meeting of shareholders, subject to any class or series voting rights of holders of our preferred stock. Our shareholders may not cumulate votes in elections of
directors. As a result, the holders of our Common Stock and (if issued) preferred stock entitled to exercise more than 50% of the voting rights in an election of
directors can elect all of the directors to be elected if they choose to do so. In such event, the holders of the remaining Common Stock and preferred stock voting
for the election of directors will not be able to elect any persons to the Board of Directors.
Dividend Rights
Holders of our Common Stock, subject to any prior rights or preferences of preferred stock outstanding, have equal rights to receive dividends if and when
declared by our Board of Directors out of funds legally available therefor.
Liquidation Rights
In the event of our liquidation, dissolution or winding up and after payment of all prior claims, holders of our Common Stock would be entitled to receive any of
our remaining assets, subject to any preferential rights of holders of outstanding shares of preferred stock.
Conversion, Redemption and Preemptive Rights
Holders of our Common Stock have no preemptive rights to subscribe for additional shares of Common Stock or any of our other securities, nor do holders of our
Common Stock have any redemption or conversion rights.

Listing
Our Common Stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol “PCG.”
Transfer Agent and Registrar
The transfer agent and registrar for our Common Stock is EQ Shareowner Services.
Limitations on Rights of Holders of Common Stock - Preferred Stock
The rights of holders of Common Stock may be materially limited or qualified by the rights of holders of preferred stock that we may issue in the future. Set forth
below is a description of PG&E Corporation’s authority to issue preferred stock and the possible terms of that stock.
Our Board of Directors is authorized, pursuant to our Articles of Incorporation, to issue up to 400,000,000 shares of preferred stock in one or more series and to fix
and determine the number of shares of preferred stock of any series, to determine the designation of any such series, to increase or decrease the number of shares of
any such series subsequent to the issue of shares of that series, and to determine or alter the rights, preferences, privileges and restrictions granted to or imposed
upon any such series.
Prior to the issuance of shares of each series of our preferred stock, our Board of Directors is required to adopt resolutions and file a certificate of determination
with the Secretary of State of the State of California. The certificate of determination will fix for each series the designation and number of shares and the rights,
preferences, privileges and restrictions of the shares including, but not limited to, the following:
•the title and stated value of the preferred stock;
•voting rights, if any, of the preferred stock;
•any rights and terms of redemption (including sinking fund provisions);
•the dividend rate(s), period(s) and/or payment date(s) or method(s) of calculation applicable to the preferred stock;
•whether dividends are cumulative or non-cumulative and, if cumulative, the date from which dividends on the preferred stock will accumulate;
•the relative ranking and preferences of the preferred stock as to dividend rights and rights upon the liquidation, dissolution or winding up of our affairs;
•the terms and conditions, if applicable, upon which the preferred stock will be convertible into our Common Stock, including the conversion price (or manner of
calculation) and conversion period;
•the provision for redemption, if applicable, of the preferred stock;
•the provisions for a sinking fund, if any, for the preferred stock;
•liquidation preferences;
•any limitations on issuance of any class or series of preferred stock ranking senior to or on a parity with the class or series of preferred stock as to dividend rights
and rights upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up of our affairs; and
•any other specific terms, preferences, rights, limitations or restrictions of the preferred stock.
All shares of preferred stock will, when issued, be fully paid and nonassessable and will not have any preemptive or similar rights.
In addition to the terms listed above, we will set forth in a prospectus supplement the following terms relating to the class or series of preferred stock being offered:

•the number of shares of preferred stock offered, the liquidation preference per share and the offering price of the preferred stock;
•the procedures for any auction and remarketing, if any, for the preferred stock;
•any listing of the preferred stock on any securities exchange; and
•a discussion of any material and/or special United States federal income tax considerations applicable to the preferred stock.
Until our Board of Directors determines the rights of the holders of a series of preferred stock, we cannot predict the effect of the issuance of any shares of such
series of preferred stock upon the rights of holders of our Common Stock. However, the effect could include one or more of the following:
•restricting dividends on our Common Stock;
•diluting the voting power of our Common Stock;
•impairing the liquidation rights of our Common Stock; or
•delaying or preventing a change in control of us without further action by our shareholders.
Our preferred stock, if issued, would rank, with respect to dividends and upon our liquidation, dissolution or winding up:
•senior to all classes or series of our Common Stock and to all of our equity securities ranking junior to the preferred stock;
•on a parity with all of our equity securities the terms of which specifically provide that the equity securities rank on a parity with the preferred stock; and
•junior to all of our equity securities the terms of which specifically provide that the equity securities rank senior to the preferred stock.
Holding Company Structure
PG&E Corporation conducts its operations primarily through its subsidiaries and substantially all of its consolidated assets are held by its subsidiaries, including
Pacific Gas and Electric Company (the “Utility”). Accordingly, PG&E Corporation’s cash flow and its ability to meet its obligations are largely dependent upon
the earnings of its subsidiaries and the distribution or other payment of these earnings to PG&E Corporation in the form of dividends or loans or advances and
repayment of loans and advances. PG&E Corporation’s subsidiaries are separate and distinct legal entities and have no obligation to pay any amounts or make any
funds available for payment pursuant to PG&E Corporation’s obligations.
Because PG&E Corporation is a holding company, its obligations will be structurally subordinated to all existing and future liabilities of its subsidiaries, including
all debt securities and issued and outstanding preferred stock of the Utility (see Exhibit 4.[51](b) for a description of such preferred stock). Furthermore, the rights
of PG&E Corporation to participate in the assets of any subsidiary upon the liquidation or reorganization of the subsidiary will be subject to the prior claims of
such subsidiary’s creditors, including any holders of preferred stock of such subsidiary. To the extent that PG&E Corporation is itself a creditor with recognized
claims against any of its subsidiaries, its claims would still be effectively subordinated to any security interest in, or mortgages or other liens on, the assets of the
subsidiary and would be subordinated to any indebtedness or other liabilities of the subsidiary that are senior to the claims held by PG&E Corporation.
Description of the Equity Units
In July and August 2020, we issued 16,000,000 Equity Units, each with a stated amount of $100. Each Equity Unit is comprised of (i) a prepaid forward stock
purchase contract (a “purchase contract”) of PG&E Corporation and (ii) a

1/48,000th undivided beneficial ownership interest in specified U.S. treasury strips that mature on a quarterly basis from, and including, August 15, 2020 through,
and including, August 15, 2023 and are held by the custodian as agent for the holders of the Equity Units (a “U.S. treasury strips component”). The following
summary of the terms of the Equity Units, the summary of the terms of the purchase contracts set forth under the caption “Description of the Purchase Contracts”
and the summary of the terms of the U.S. treasury strips components set forth under the caption “Description of the U.S. Treasury Strips Components” below
contain a description of all of the material terms of the Equity Units and their components but are not complete and are subject to, and qualified in their entirety by
reference to, the related contracts. We refer you to the purchase contract agreement and the custodial agreement, which are incorporated by reference to this
Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of the Equity Units
Each Equity Unit is comprised of:
•
a prepaid forward stock purchase contract of PG&E Corporation entitling the holder to receive a number of shares of our Common Stock on
August 16, 2023 (subject to postponement in certain limited circumstances, the “purchase contract settlement date”), or earlier if a
“fundamental change” occurs prior to the settlement date or if the holder has elected “early settlement” (in each case, as defined herein and
described below), determined by reference to the settlement rate described below; and
•
a U.S. treasury strips component.
Unless previously settled at the holder’s option as described in “Description of the Purchase Contracts-Early Settlement” or “Description of the Purchase
Contracts-Early Settlement Upon a Fundamental Change,” we will deliver to the holder, on the purchase contract settlement date, in respect of each purchase
contract not more than 10.5263 shares of our Common Stock and not less than 8.5929 shares of our Common Stock, based upon the applicable “settlement rate”
(as defined below), which is subject to adjustment as described herein, and the “applicable market value” (as defined below) of our Common Stock, as described
below under “Description of the Purchase Contracts-Delivery of Common Stock.”
Each holder of Equity Units will be paid the amount received by the custodian from the U.S. government in respect of each U.S. treasury strip underlying the
Equity Units owned by such holder on the business day immediately following the date such U.S. treasury strip matures on February 15, May 15, August 15 and
November 15 of each year, with such payments commencing on, and including, August 17, 2020, and ending on, and including, August 16, 2023, as described
below under “Description of the U.S. Treasury Strips Components.”
The stated amount of each Equity Unit must be allocated between the U.S. treasury strips component and the purchase contract based upon their relative fair
market values. We have determined that the fair market value of each U.S. treasury strips component is $17.1402 and the fair market value of each purchase
contract is $82.8574. Each holder agrees to such allocation and this position is binding upon each holder (but not on the Internal Revenue Service).
Separating and Recreating Equity Units
Upon the conditions and under the circumstances described below, a holder of 48,000 Equity Units (or any integral multiple thereof) has the right to separate its
Equity Units into its component parts, and a holder of 48,000 separate purchase contracts (or any integral multiple thereof) and the underlying U.S. treasury strips
has the right to combine these components to recreate 48,000 Equity Units (or any integral multiple thereof).
Separating Equity Units
At initial issuance, the purchase contracts and U.S. treasury strips components may be purchased and transferred only as Equity Units and will trade under the
CUSIP number for the Equity Units.
On any business day during the period beginning on, and including, the business day immediately following the date of initial issuance of the Equity Units to, but
excluding, the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding August 16, 2023, a holder of 48,000 Equity Units (or any integral multiple thereof) will have
the right to separate such Equity Units and withdraw the U.S. treasury strips underlying those Equity Units. Because each Equity Unit evidences a 1/48,000th
beneficial ownership interest in specified U.S. treasury strips, any separation of Equity Units

may be made only in integral multiples of 48,000 Equity Units. To withdraw the U.S. treasury strips evidenced by the Equity Units, the holder must:
•
deliver the relevant Equity Units to the purchase contract agent; and
•
deliver a notice to the purchase contract agent requesting that the purchase contract agent instruct the custodian to release to the holder the U.S.
treasury strips underlying those Equity Units.
The purchase contract agent will then (i) cancel the Equity Units and deliver to the holder the purchase contracts underlying those Equity Units, which we refer to
as “separate purchase contracts” and (ii) instruct the custodian to deliver to the holder the underlying U.S. treasury strips. If the holder has withdrawn the U.S.
treasury strips previously underlying an Equity Unit, it may either continue to hold the separate purchase contract in global form through the purchase contract
agent or receive a certificate for its separate purchase contract and hold it directly as the owner registered on the purchase contract register maintained on our
behalf by the purchase contract registrar. Any administrative fees and expenses related to withdrawing the U.S. treasury strips evidenced by the Equity Units that
are payable to the purchase contract agent or the custodian will be at the expense of the holder of Equity Units requesting withdrawal.
“Business day” means any day other than a Saturday, Sunday or any day on which banking institutions in New York, New York are authorized or obligated by
applicable law or executive order to close or be closed.
There is no current or expected trading market for the separate purchase contracts and we do not intend to apply to have the separate purchase contracts listed on
any securities exchange or quoted on any automated quotation system. Accordingly, we do not expect there to be a liquid market in the separate purchase contracts
at any time. Separate purchase contracts and the withdrawn U.S. treasury strips will be transferable independently from each other.
Recreating Equity Units
On any business day during the period beginning on, and including, the business day immediately following the date of initial issuance of the Equity Units to, but
excluding, the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding August 16, 2023, a holder of 48,000 separate purchase contracts (or any integral multiple
thereof) will have the right to recreate Equity Units by delivering, for every 48,000 Equity Units being recreated, (i) to the purchase contract agent, 48,000 separate
purchase contracts, and (ii) to the custodian, $66,000 face amount (or $33,000 face amount in the case of the U.S. treasury strips maturing on August 15, 2020) of
each of the U.S. treasury strips that would be then remaining as a portion of the U.S. treasury strips component of an Equity Unit. Any recreation of Equity Units
may be made only in integral multiples of 48,000 Equity Units. R'The newly deposited U.S. treasury strips used to recreate the Equity Units must have the same
CUSIP numbers as the ones originally comprising the U.S. treasury strips component.
Global Securities
Each Equity Unit and purchase contract are represented by global securities registered in the name of a nominee of The Depository Trust Company (“DTC”).
Holders are not entitled to receive definitive physical certificates for the Equity Units and purchase contracts, except under the limited circumstances described
under “Book-Entry Procedures and Settlement.” Beneficial interests in an Equity Unit and, after separation, the separate purchase contract, will be represented
through book-entry accounts of, and transfers will be effected through, direct or indirect participants in DTC.
Deemed Actions by Holders by Acceptance
Each holder of Equity Units or separate purchase contracts, by acceptance of such securities, is deemed to have:
•
irrevocably authorized and directed the purchase contract agent to execute, deliver and perform on its behalf the purchase contract agreement,
and appointed the purchase contract agent as its attorney-in-fact for any and all such purposes;

•
in the case of a purchase contract that is a component of an Equity Unit, or that is evidenced by a separate purchase contract, irrevocably
authorized and directed the purchase contract agent to execute, deliver and hold on its behalf the separate purchase contract or the component
purchase contract evidencing such purchase contract, and appointed the purchase contract agent as its attorney-in-fact for any and all such
purposes;
•
consented to, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and provisions of the purchase contract agreement;
•
in the case of a holder of an Equity Unit, agreed, for all purposes, including U.S. federal income tax purposes, to treat:
•
an Equity Unit as an investment unit composed of two separate instruments, in accordance with its form;
•
the allocation of the stated amount per Equity Unit between the purchase contract and the U.S. treasury strips component so that such
holder’s initial tax basis in each purchase contract will be $82.8574 and such holder’s initial tax basis in each U.S. treasury strips
component will be $17.1402;
•
represented and warranted that neither the beneficial holder of the purchase contracts (including for these purposes a purchase contract that is a
component of any Equity Unit) nor, to the knowledge of such beneficial holder, any other person, would become a “Substantial Shareholder”
(as defined in the Amended Articles) as a result of such beneficial holder’s acquisition of purchase contracts (treating the beneficial holder and
any such other person as actually holding, solely for purposes of this representation, the number of shares of our Common Stock that would be
received upon settlement at the maximum settlement rate of all purchase contracts acquired or beneficially owned by such beneficial holder or
any such other person, as applicable, but treating all other purchase contracts as still unsettled), and, for the avoidance of doubt, taking into
account such beneficial holder’s and any such other person’s (i) current ownership of our Common Stock and any of the Utility’s preferred
stock and (ii) other acquisitions of our Common Stock and any of the Utility’s preferred stock (if any) concurrent with or in connection with
such beneficial holder’s acquisition of purchase contracts; and
•
appointed the custodian to hold on its behalf and to receive payments related to the U.S. treasury strips components and agreed to indemnify
the custodian from and against any liability it may incur in connection with such appointment in the absence of gross negligence or willful
misconduct on its part.
Listing of Securities
Our Equity Units are listed on the NYSE under the symbol “PCGU.” However, listing on the NYSE does not guarantee that a trading market will develop, and the
underwriters may discontinue market making at any time in their sole discretion without prior notice to Equity Unit holders. Accordingly, there can be no
assurance that a liquid trading market will develop for the Equity Units (or, if developed, that a liquid trading market will be maintained), that the holder will be
able to sell Equity Units at a particular time or that the prices the holder receives when the holder sells will be favorable.
Title
The purchase contract agent may treat the registered owner of any Equity Unit, which at initial issuance was a nominee of DTC, or, upon withdrawal of the U.S.
treasury strips, the registered owner of any separate purchase contract, as the absolute owner thereof for the purpose of making payment and settling the purchase
contracts and for all other purposes. Similarly, the custodian may treat the registered owner of any Equity Unit as the absolute owner thereof for the purpose of
making payments of the U.S. treasury strips components and deliveries of the underlying U.S. treasury strips, if applicable, and for all other purposes.

Accounting for the Equity Units
We record the issuance of the purchase contract portion of the Equity Units as Common Stock, net of issuance costs of the purchase contracts, in our financial
statements. All of the proceeds from the issuance of the U.S. treasury strips components were paid to the custodian, and we did not receive any proceeds from such
issuance.
Based on U.S. GAAP, we do not expect the purchase contract component of the Equity Units to be revalued under fair value accounting principles.
Our earnings per share calculations will reflect the shares issuable upon settlement of the purchase contracts portion of the Equity Units. Our basic earnings per
share will include the minimum shares issuable under the purchase contract for each period and our diluted earnings per share will include any incremental shares
that would be issuable assuming a settlement of the purchase contract at the end of each accounting period, if dilutive.
Replacement of Equity Unit Certificates
In the event that physical certificates evidencing the Equity Units have been issued, any mutilated equity unit certificate will be replaced by us at the expense of the
holder upon surrender of the certificate to the purchase contract agent. Equity Unit certificates that have been destroyed, lost or stolen will be replaced by us at the
expense of the holder upon delivery to us and the purchase contract agent of evidence of their destruction, loss or theft satisfactory to us and the purchase contract
agent. In the case of a destroyed, lost or stolen Equity Unit certificate, an indemnity satisfactory to us and the purchase contract agent may be required at the
expense of the holder of the Equity Units before a replacement will be issued.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, we will not be obligated to replace any Equity Unit certificates on or after the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding
August 16, 2023 or any early settlement date. In those circumstances, the purchase contract agreement will provide that, in lieu of the delivery of a replacement
Equity Unit certificate, the purchase contract agent, upon delivery of the evidence and indemnity described above, will deliver or arrange for delivery of the shares
of Common Stock issuable pursuant to the purchase contracts included in the Equity Units evidenced by the Equity Unit certificate.
Miscellaneous
The purchase contract agreement provides that we will pay all fees and expenses related to the offering of the Equity Units and the enforcement by the purchase
contract agent of the rights of the holders of the Equity Units or the separate purchase contracts, other than expenses (including legal fees) of the underwriters.
Should the holder elect to separate or recreate Equity Units, the holder will be responsible for any fees or expenses payable in connection with that separation or
recreation, and we will have no liability therefor.
Description of the Purchase Contracts
The purchase contracts are issued pursuant to the terms and provisions of the purchase contract agreement. The following summary contains a description of all of
the material terms of the purchase contracts but is not complete and is subject to, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, all of the provisions of the purchase
contract agreement, including the definitions in the purchase contract agreement of certain terms. We refer you to the purchase contract agreement which is
incorporated by reference to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Each purchase contract will initially form a part of an Equity Unit. On any business day during the period beginning on, and including, the business day
immediately following the date of initial issuance of the Equity Units to, but excluding, the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding August 16, 2023,
the holder will have the right to separate 48,000 Equity Units (or any integral multiple thereof) and withdraw the U.S. treasury strips underlying those Equity Units.
Following such separation, purchase contracts may be transferred separately from the U.S. treasury strips components.
Delivery of Common Stock
Unless settled early at the holder’s option, for each purchase contract we will deliver to the holder on August 16, 2023 (subject to postponement in certain limited
circumstances described below, the “purchase contract settlement date”), a number of shares of our Common Stock. The number of shares of our Common Stock
issuable upon settlement of each purchase contract (the “settlement rate”) will be determined by us as follows:

•
if the applicable market value of our Common Stock is greater than the threshold appreciation price, then the holder will receive 8.5929 shares
of Common Stock for each purchase contract (the “minimum settlement rate”);
•
if the applicable market value of our Common Stock is greater than or equal to the reference price but less than or equal to the threshold
appreciation price, then the holder will receive a number of shares of Common Stock for each purchase contract equal to the Equity Unit stated
amount of $100, divided by the applicable market value; and
•
if the applicable market value of our Common Stock is less than the reference price, then the holder will receive 10.5263 shares of Common
Stock for each purchase contract (the “maximum settlement rate”).
The maximum settlement rate and minimum settlement rate are each subject to adjustment as described under “-Anti-Dilution Adjustments to the Fixed Settlement
Rates” below. Each of the minimum settlement rate and the maximum settlement rate is referred to as a “fixed settlement rate.”
The reference price is equal to $100 divided by the maximum settlement rate and is approximately equal to $9.5000.
The threshold appreciation price is equal to $100 divided by the minimum settlement rate. The threshold appreciation price, which is initially approximately
$11.6375, represents an appreciation of approximately 22.50% over the reference price.
For illustrative purposes only, the following table shows the number of shares of Common Stock issuable upon settlement of a purchase contract at assumed
applicable market values, based on a reference price of $9.5000 and a threshold appreciation price of $11.6375. The table assumes that there will be no adjustments
to the fixed settlement rates described below under “-Anti-Dilution Adjustments to the Fixed Settlement Rates” below or settled early at the option of holders as
described under “-Early Settlement” or “-Early Settlement Upon a Fundamental Change” below. There can be no assurance that the actual applicable market value
will be within the assumed range set forth below.
A holder of an Equity Unit or a separate purchase contract, as applicable, would receive on the purchase contract settlement date the following numbers of shares
of Common Stock for each Equity Unit or separate purchase contract at the following assumed applicable market values:
Assumed Applicable Market Value
Number of Shares of 
Common Stock
$2.00
10.5263
$4.00
10.5263
$6.00
10.5263
$8.00
10.5263
$9.50
10.5263
$10.50
9.5238
$11.64
8.5929
$13.00
8.5929
$15.00
8.5929
$18.00
8.5929
$21.00
8.5929
$25.00
8.5929
$30.00
8.5929
$35.00
8.5929

As the above table illustrates, if, on the purchase contract settlement date, the applicable market value is greater than the threshold appreciation price, we would be
obligated to deliver 8.5929 shares of Common Stock for each purchase contract.
If, on the purchase contract settlement date, the applicable market value is less than or equal to the threshold appreciation price but greater than or equal to the
reference price of approximately $9.5000, we would be obligated to deliver a number of shares of our Common Stock on the purchase contract settlement date
equal to $100, divided by the applicable market value. As a result, we would retain all appreciation in the market value of our Common Stock underlying each
purchase contract between the reference price and the threshold appreciation price.
If, on the purchase contract settlement date, the applicable market value is less than the reference price of approximately $9.5000, we would be obligated to deliver
upon settlement of the purchase contract 10.5263 shares of Common Stock for each purchase contract, regardless of the market price of our Common Stock. As a
result, the holder would suffer the full decline in market value of the Common Stock below the reference price.
Because the applicable market value of the Common Stock is determined over the “valuation period” (as defined below), the number of shares of Common Stock
delivered for each purchase contract may be greater than or less than the number that would have been delivered based on the closing price (or daily VWAP) of the
Common Stock on the last trading day of such valuation period. In addition, the holder will bear the risk of fluctuations in the market price of the shares of
Common Stock deliverable upon settlement of the purchase contracts between the end of such valuation period and the date such shares are delivered.
The term “applicable market value” means the arithmetic average of the daily VWAPs of our Common Stock on each trading day of the valuation period.
The term “valuation period” means each of the 20 consecutive trading days beginning on, and including, the 21st scheduled trading day immediately preceding
August 16, 2023.
The “daily VWAP” of our Common Stock on any trading day means the per share volume-weighted average price as displayed under the heading “Bloomberg
VWAP” on Bloomberg page “PCG <equity> AQR” (or its equivalent successor if such page is not available) in respect of the period from the scheduled open of
trading until the scheduled close of trading of the primary trading session on such trading day (or if such volume-weighted average price is unavailable, the market
value of one share of our Common Stock on such trading day determined, using a volume-weighted average method, by a nationally recognized independent
investment banking firm retained for this purpose by us). The “daily VWAP” will be determined without regard to after-hours trading or any other trading outside
of the regular trading session trading hours. The “average VWAP” per share over a certain period means the arithmetic average of the daily VWAP per share for
each trading day in such period.
“Trading day” means a day on which (i) there is no “market disruption event” (as defined below) and (ii) trading in our Common Stock (or other security for which
a daily VWAP must be determined) generally occurs on the NYSE or, if our Common Stock (or such other security) is not then listed on the NYSE, on the
principal other U.S. national or regional securities exchange on which our Common Stock (or such other security) is then listed or, if our Common Stock (or such
other security) is not then listed on a U.S. national or regional securities exchange, on the principal other market on which our Common Stock (or such other
security) is then traded. If our Common Stock (or such other security) is not so listed or traded, “trading day” means a “business day.”
“Scheduled trading day” means a day that is scheduled to be a trading day on the NYSE or, if our Common Stock is not then listed on the NYSE, on the principal
other U.S. national or regional securities exchange on which our Common Stock is then listed or, if our Common Stock is not then listed on a U.S. national or
regional securities exchange, on the principal other market on which our Common Stock is then traded. If our Common Stock is not so listed or admitted for
trading, “scheduled trading day” means a “business day.”
“Market disruption event” means (i) a failure by the primary U.S. national or regional securities exchange or market on which our Common Stock is listed or
admitted for trading to open for trading during its regular trading session or (ii) the occurrence or existence prior to 1:00 p.m., New York City time, on any
scheduled trading day for our Common Stock for more than one half-hour period in the aggregate during regular trading hours of any suspension or limitation
imposed on trading (by reason of movements in price exceeding limits permitted by the relevant stock exchange, relevant market or otherwise) in our Common
Stock or in any options contracts or futures contracts relating to our Common Stock.
On the purchase contract settlement date, our Common Stock will be issued and delivered to the holder or the holder’s designee, upon (i) surrender of certificates
representing the purchase contracts, if such purchase contracts

are held in certificated form, and (ii) payment by the holder of any transfer or similar taxes payable in connection with the issuance of our Common Stock to any
person other than the holder. As long as the purchase contracts are evidenced by one or more global purchase contract certificates deposited with DTC, procedures
for settlement will be governed by DTC’s applicable procedures.
If one or more of the 20 consecutive scheduled trading days in the valuation period is not a trading day, the purchase contract settlement date will be postponed
until the second business day immediately following the last trading day of the valuation period.
Prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the last trading day of the valuation period, the shares of Common Stock underlying each purchase contract will not be
outstanding, and the holder of such purchase contract will not have any voting rights, rights to dividends or other distributions or other rights of a holder of our
Common Stock by virtue of holding such purchase contract. The person in whose name any shares of our Common Stock shall be issuable upon settlement of the
purchase contract on the purchase contract settlement date will be treated as the holder of record of such shares as of 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the last
trading day of the 20 consecutive trading day period during which the applicable market value is determined.
We will pay any documentary, stamp or similar issue or transfer tax due on the issue of any shares of our Common Stock upon settlement of the purchase
contracts, unless the tax is due because the holder requests any shares to be issued in a name other than the holder’s name, in which case the holder will pay that
tax.
Early Settlement
Prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding August 16, 2023, any holder of 48,000 Equity Units (or any
integral multiple thereof) or a holder of one or more separate purchase contracts, may elect to settle such Equity Units or separate purchase contracts early and
receive a number of shares of Common Stock per purchase contract equal to the “early settlement rate.” The early settlement rate is equal to the minimum
settlement rate on the early settlement date, subject to adjustment as described below under “-Anti-Dilution Adjustments to the Fixed Settlement Rates,” unless the
holder elects to settle the holder’s purchase contracts early in connection with a fundamental change, in which case the holder will receive upon settlement of the
holder’s purchase contracts a number of shares of our Common Stock based on the “fundamental change early settlement rate” as described under “-Early
Settlement Upon a Fundamental Change.” We refer to this right as the “early settlement right.”
The holder’s right to receive Common Stock upon early settlement of a purchase contract is subject to (i) delivery of a written and signed notice of election (an
“early settlement notice”) to the purchase contract agent electing early settlement of such purchase contract, (ii) if such purchase contract or the Equity Unit that
includes such purchase contract is held in certificated form, surrendering the certificates representing the purchase contract and (iii) payment by the holder of any
transfer or similar taxes payable in connection with the issuance of our Common Stock to any person other than the holder. As long as the purchase contracts or the
Equity Units are evidenced by one or more global certificates deposited with DTC, procedures for early settlement will be governed by DTC’s applicable
procedures.
Upon surrender of the Equity Unit or the separate purchase contract, as applicable, and payment of any applicable transfer or similar taxes due because of any issue
of such shares in a name of a person other than the holder, the holder will receive the applicable number of shares of Common Stock (and any cash payable for
fractional shares) due upon early settlement on the second business day following the “early settlement date” (as defined below).
If the holder complies with the requirements for effecting the early settlement right prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on any business day, then that day will
be considered the “early settlement date.” If the holder complies with such requirements at or after 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on any business day or at any
time on a day that is not a business day, then the next succeeding business day will be considered the “early settlement date.” Prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City
time, on the early settlement date, the shares of Common Stock underlying each purchase contract will not be outstanding, and the holder of such purchase contract
will not have any voting rights, rights to dividends or other distributions or other rights of a holder of our Common Stock by virtue of holding such purchase
contract. The person in whose name any shares of our Common Stock shall be issuable upon such early settlement of the purchase contract will be treated as the
holder of record of such shares as of 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the relevant early settlement date.
Because each Equity Unit evidences a 1/48,000th beneficial ownership interest in specified U.S. treasury strips, any early settlement of Equity Units may be made
only in integral multiples of 48,000 Equity Units.

Upon early settlement at the holder’s election of purchase contracts held as components of Equity Units, the custodian will deliver the U.S. treasury strips
evidenced by those Equity Units to such holder free and clear of any liens or other encumbrances on the second business day following the early settlement date.
Early Settlement Upon a Fundamental Change
If a “fundamental change” occurs and the holder elects to settle the holder’s purchase contracts early in connection with such fundamental change in accordance
with the procedures described under “-Early Settlement” above, the holder will receive per purchase contract a number of shares of our Common Stock or cash,
securities or other property, as applicable, equal to the “fundamental change early settlement rate,” as described below. An early settlement will be deemed for
these purposes to be “in connection with” such fundamental change if the holder delivers the holder’s early settlement notice to the purchase contract agent, and
otherwise satisfies the requirements for effecting early settlement of the holder’s purchase contracts, during the period beginning on, and including, the effective
date of the fundamental change and ending at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the 35th business day thereafter (or, if earlier, the second scheduled trading day
immediately preceding August 16, 2023) (the “fundamental change early settlement period”). We refer to this right as the “fundamental change early settlement
right.”
If the holder complies with the requirements for effecting the fundamental change early settlement right prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on any business
day during the fundamental change early settlement period, then that day will be considered the “fundamental change early settlement date.” If the holder complies
with such requirements at or after 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on any business day during the fundamental change early settlement period or at any time on a
day during the fundamental change early settlement period that is not a business day, then the next succeeding business day will be considered the “fundamental
change early settlement date.”
Any early settlement of Equity Units in connection with a fundamental change may be made only in integral multiples of 48,000 Equity Units.
We will provide the purchase contract agent, custodian and the holders of Equity Units and separate purchase contracts with a notice of a fundamental change
within five business days after its effective date and issue a press release announcing such effective date. The notice will also set forth, among other things, (i) the
applicable fundamental change early settlement rate, (ii) if not Common Stock, the kind and amount of cash, securities and other property receivable by the holder
upon settlement and (iii) the deadline by which each holder’s fundamental change early settlement right must be exercised.
A “fundamental change” will be deemed to have occurred upon the occurrence of any of the following:
•
any “person” or “group” within the meaning of Section 13(d) of the Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), other than us,
any of our wholly owned subsidiaries and any of our and their employee benefit plans, files a Schedule TO or any other schedule, form or
report under the Exchange Act disclosing that such person or group has become the direct or indirect “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rule
13d-3 under the Exchange Act) of more than 50% of the outstanding shares of our Common Stock;
•
the consummation of (A) any recapitalization, reclassification or change of our Common Stock (other than changes resulting from a
subdivision or combination) as a result of which our Common Stock would be converted into, or exchanged for, stock, other securities, other
property or assets; (B) any share exchange, consolidation or merger of us pursuant to which our Common Stock will be converted into cash,
securities or other property or assets; or (C) any sale, lease or other transfer in one transaction or a series of transactions of all or substantially
all of the consolidated assets of us and our subsidiaries, taken as a whole, to any person other than one of our wholly owned subsidiaries; or
•
our Common Stock (or other Common Stock receivable upon settlement of the holder’s purchase contracts, if applicable) ceases to be listed or
quoted on any of the NYSE, the NASDAQ Global Select Market or the NASDAQ Global Market (or any of their respective successors).
A transaction or transactions described in either of the first two bullets above will not constitute a fundamental change, however, if (i) at least 90% of the
consideration received or to be received by stockholders of our Common Stock (excluding cash payments for fractional shares) in connection with such transaction
or transactions consists of shares of Common Stock that are listed on any of the NYSE, the NASDAQ Global Select Market or the NASDAQ Global Market (or
any of their respective successors), or will be so listed when issued or exchanged in connection with such transaction or transactions and (ii) as a result of such
transaction or transactions such consideration becomes the consideration receivable upon settlement of the holder’s purchase contracts, if applicable, excluding
cash payments for fractional shares.

If any transaction in which our Common Stock is replaced by the securities of another entity occurs, following completion of any related fundamental change early
settlement period (or, in the case of a transaction that would have been a fundamental change but for the immediately preceding paragraph, following the effective
date of such transaction), references to us in the definition of “fundamental change” above shall instead be references to such other entity.
The “fundamental change early settlement rate” will be determined by us by reference to the table below, based on the date on which the fundamental change
occurs or becomes effective (the “fundamental change effective date”) and the “stock price” in the fundamental change, which will be:
•
in the case of a fundamental change described in the second bullet of the definition of “fundamental change” in which all holders of shares of
our Common Stock receive only cash in the fundamental change, the stock price will be the cash amount paid per share of our Common Stock;
and
•
in all other cases, the stock price will be the arithmetic average of the daily VWAPs of our Common Stock over the five consecutive trading
day period ending on the trading day immediately preceding such fundamental change effective date.
The stock prices set forth in the column headings of the table below will be adjusted as of any date on which the fixed settlement rates are adjusted. The adjusted
stock prices will equal the stock prices applicable immediately prior to such adjustment, multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the maximum
settlement rate immediately prior to the adjustment giving rise to the stock price adjustment and the denominator of which is the maximum settlement rate as so
adjusted. The fundamental change early settlement rates per purchase contract in the table below will be adjusted in the same manner and at the same time as the
fixed settlement rates as set forth under “-Anti-Dilution Adjustments to the Fixed Settlement Rates.”
The following table sets forth the fundamental change early settlement rate per purchase contract for each stock price and fundamental change effective date set
forth below:
Stock Price
Fundamental Change
Effective Date
$
2.00 
$
4.00 
$
6.00 
$
8.00 
$
9.50 
$
10.50 $
11.64 $
13.00 $
15.00 $
18.00 
July 1, 2020
10.3248
9.9939
9.5052
9.0924
8.8699
8.7592
8.663
8.5811
8.5065
8.4547
August 16, 2020
10.3372
10.0252
9.5399
9.12
8.8914
8.7774
8.6781
8.5936
8.5167
8.4633
February 16, 2021
10.3813
10.1499
9.6883
9.2397
8.9836
8.8538
8.7404
8.6438
8.5564
8.4966
August 16, 2021
10.417
10.2681
9.852
9.3763
9.0862
8.9361
8.8043
8.6924
8.5927
8.5265
February 16, 2022
10.4472
10.3753
10.0399
9.5445
9.2088
9.0297
8.8715
8.7386
8.6236
8.5521
August 16, 2022
10.4738
10.4551
10.2454
9.7595
9.3615
9.137
8.9374
8.7734
8.6408
8.5695
February 16, 2023
10.5002
10.4998
10.4479
10.0823
9.5949
9.276
8.9882
8.7694
8.6265
8.5775
August 16, 2023
10.5263
10.5263
10.5263
10.5263
10.5263
9.5238
8.5929
8.5929
8.5929
8.5929
The exact stock prices and fundamental change effective dates may not be set forth in the table above, in which case:
•
if the applicable stock price is between two stock prices in the table or the applicable fundamental change effective date is between two
fundamental change effective dates in the table, the fundamental change early settlement rate will be determined by straight line interpolation
between the fundamental change early settlement rates set forth for the higher and lower stock prices and the earlier and later fundamental
change effective dates, as applicable, based on a 365- or 366-day year, as applicable;

•
if the applicable stock price is greater than $35.00 per share (subject to adjustment in the same manner and at the same time as the stock prices
set forth in the column headings of the table above), then the fundamental change early settlement rate will be the minimum settlement rate; or
•
if the applicable stock price is less than $2.00 per share (subject to adjustment in the same manner and at the same time as the stock prices set
forth in the column headings of the table above, the “minimum stock price”), the fundamental change early settlement rate will be determined
as if the stock price equaled the minimum stock price, and using straight line interpolation, as described in the first bullet of this paragraph, if
the fundamental change effective date is between two fundamental change effective dates in the table.
The maximum number of shares of our Common Stock deliverable under a purchase contract is 10.5263, subject to adjustment in the same manner and at the same
time as the fixed settlement rates as set forth under “-Anti-Dilution Adjustments to the Fixed Settlement Rates.”
Our obligation to settle the purchase contracts at the fundamental change early settlement rate could be considered a penalty, in which case the enforceability
thereof would be subject to general principles of reasonableness of economic remedies.
We will deliver the shares of our Common Stock, securities, cash or other property payable as a result of the holder’s exercise of the fundamental change early
settlement right on the second business day following the fundamental change early settlement date. Prior to 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the fundamental
change early settlement date, the shares of Common Stock underlying each purchase contract will not be outstanding, and the holder of such purchase contract will
not have any voting rights, rights to dividends or other distributions or other rights of a holder of our Common Stock by virtue of holding such purchase contract.
The person in whose name any shares of our Common Stock or other securities, if applicable, shall be issuable following exercise of a holder’s fundamental
change early settlement right will be treated as the holder of record of such shares or other securities, if applicable, as of 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the
fundamental change early settlement date.
Upon early settlement of purchase contracts held as components of Equity Units at the holder’s election upon a fundamental change, the custodian will deliver the
U.S. treasury strips evidenced by those Equity Units to such holder free and clear of any liens or other encumbrances on the second business day following the
fundamental change early settlement date.
If the holder does not elect to exercise the holder’s fundamental change early settlement right, the holder’s purchase contracts will remain outstanding and will be
subject to normal settlement on any subsequent early settlement date or any subsequent fundamental change early settlement date, as the case may be.
Anti-Dilution Adjustments to the Fixed Settlement Rates
Each fixed settlement rate will be adjusted as described below, except that we will not make any adjustments to the fixed settlement rates if holders of the purchase
contracts participate (other than in the case of a share split or share combination or a tender or exchange offer described in clause (5) below), at the same time and
upon the same terms as holders of our Common Stock and solely as a result of holding the purchase contracts, in any of the transactions described below without
having to settle their purchase contracts as if they held a number of shares of Common Stock equal to (i) the maximum settlement rate as of the record date for such
transaction, multiplied by (ii) the number of purchase contracts held by such holder.
(1)
If we exclusively issue shares of our Common Stock as a dividend or distribution on shares of our Common Stock, or if we effect a share split or
share combination, each fixed settlement rate will be adjusted based on the following formula:
CR1 = CR0 x
OS1
OS0
where,

CR0
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately prior to the close of business on the record date (as defined below) of such dividend or
distribution, or immediately prior to the open of business on the effective date of such share split or share combination, as applicable;
CR1
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately after the close of business on such record date or immediately after the open of business
on such effective date, as applicable;
OS0
=
the number of shares of our Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the close of business on such record date or immediately
prior to the open of business on such effective date, as applicable, before giving effect to such dividend, distribution, share split or share
combination; and
OS1
=
the number of shares of our Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to such dividend, distribution, share split or
share combination.
Any adjustment made under this clause (1) shall become effective immediately after the close of business on the record date for such dividend or distribution, or
immediately after the open of business on the effective date for such share split or share combination, as applicable. If any dividend or distribution of the type
described in this clause (1) is declared but not so paid or made, each fixed settlement rate shall be immediately readjusted, effective as of the date our board of
directors or a committee thereof determines not to pay such dividend or distribution, to such fixed settlement rate that would then be in effect if such dividend or
distribution had not been declared. For the purposes of this clause (1), the number of shares of our Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the close of
business on the relevant record date or immediately prior to the open of business on the relevant effective date, as the case may be, and the number of shares of our
Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to such dividend, distribution, share split or share combination shall, in each case, not include shares
that we hold in treasury. We will not pay any dividend or make any distribution on shares of our Common Stock that we hold in treasury.
“Effective date” as used in this clause (1) means the first date on which the shares of our Common Stock trade on the relevant stock exchange, regular way,
reflecting the relevant share split or share combination, as applicable.
“Record date” means, with respect to any dividend, distribution or other transaction or event in which the holders of our Common Stock (or other applicable
security) have the right to receive any cash, securities or other property or in which our Common Stock (or such other security) is exchanged for or converted into
any combination of cash, securities or other property, the date fixed for determination of holders of our Common Stock (or such other security) entitled to receive
such cash, securities or other property (whether such date is fixed by our board of directors or a duly authorized committee thereof, statute, contract or otherwise).
(2)
If we issue to all or substantially all holders of our Common Stock any rights, options or warrants entitling them, for a period of not more than
45 calendar days after the announcement date of such issuance, to subscribe for or purchase shares of our Common Stock at a price per share
that is less than the average VWAP per share of our Common Stock for the ten consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the
trading day immediately preceding the date of announcement of such issuance, each fixed settlement rate will be increased based on the
following formula:
CR1 = CR0 x
OS0 + X
OS0 + Y
where,

CR0
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately prior to the close of business on the record date for such issuance;
CR1
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately after the close of business on such record date;
OS0
=
the number of shares of our Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the close of business on such record date;
X
=
the total number of shares of our Common Stock issuable pursuant to such rights, options or warrants; and
Y
=
the number of shares of our Common Stock equal to (i) the aggregate price payable to exercise such rights, options or warrants, divided
by (ii) the average VWAP per share of our Common Stock over the ten consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the
trading day immediately preceding the date of announcement of the issuance of such rights, options or warrants.
Any increase made under this clause (2) will be made successively whenever any such rights, options or warrants are issued and shall become effective
immediately after the close of business on the record date for such issuance. To the extent that such rights, options or warrants are not exercised prior to their
expiration or shares of Common Stock are not delivered after the exercise of such rights, options or warrants, each fixed settlement rate shall be decreased to such
fixed settlement rate that would then be in effect had the increase with respect to the issuance of such rights, options or warrants been made on the basis of delivery
of only the number of shares of Common Stock actually delivered, if any. If such rights, options or warrants are not so issued, each fixed settlement rate shall be
immediately readjusted, effective as of the date our board of directors or a committee thereof determines not to issue such rights, options or warrants to such fixed
settlement rate that would then be in effect if such record date for such issuance had not occurred.
For the purpose of this clause (2), in determining whether any rights, options or warrants entitle the holders of our Common Stock to subscribe for or purchase
shares of our Common Stock at less than such average VWAP per share for the ten consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day
immediately preceding the date of announcement of such issuance, and in determining the aggregate offering price of such shares of our Common Stock, there
shall be taken into account any consideration received by us for such rights, options or warrants and any amount payable on exercise or conversion thereof, the
value of such consideration, if other than cash, to be determined by our board of directors in good faith.
(3)
If we distribute shares of our capital stock, evidences of our indebtedness, other assets or property of ours or rights, options or warrants to
acquire our capital stock or other securities, to all or substantially all holders of our Common Stock, excluding:
•
dividends, distributions or issuances as to which the provisions set forth in clause (1) or (2) shall apply;
•
dividends or distributions paid exclusively in cash as to which the provisions set forth in clause (4) below shall apply;

•
any distributions upon conversion of, or in exchange for, our Common Stock in connection with a recapitalization, reclassification,
change, consolidation, merger or other combination, share exchange, or sale, lease or other transfer or disposition resulting in the change
in the consideration due upon settlement of the purchase contracts as described below under “-Recapitalizations, Reclassifications and
Changes of Our Common Stock”;
•
except as otherwise described below, rights issued pursuant to a shareholder rights plan adopted by us; and
•
spin-offs as to which the provisions set forth below in this clause (3) shall apply;
then each fixed settlement rate will be increased based on the following formula:
CR1 = CR0 x
SP0
SP0 - FMV
where,
CR0
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately prior to the close of business on the record date for such distribution;
CR1
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately after the close of business on such record date;
SP0
=
the average VWAP per share of our Common Stock over the ten consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading
day immediately preceding the ex-date (as defined below) for such distribution; and
FMV
=
the fair market value (as determined by our board of directors in good faith) of the shares of capital stock, evidences of indebtedness,
assets, property, rights, options or warrants so distributed, expressed as an amount per share of our Common Stock on the ex-date for
such distribution.
“Ex-date” means the first date on which the shares of our Common Stock trade on the applicable exchange or in the applicable market, regular way, without the
right to receive the issuance, dividend or distribution in question, from us or, if applicable, from the seller of our Common Stock on such exchange or market (in
the form of due bills or otherwise) as determined by such exchange or market.
Any increase made under the portion of this clause (3) above will become effective immediately after the close of business on the record date for such distribution.
If such distribution is not so paid or made, each fixed settlement rate shall be immediately readjusted, effective as of the date our board of directors or a committee
thereof determines not to pay such dividend or distribution, to be such fixed settlement rate that would then be in effect if such distribution had not been declared.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if “FMV” (as defined above) is equal to or greater than “SP0” (as defined above), in lieu of the foregoing increase, each holder
shall receive, in respect of each purchase contract, at the same time and upon the same terms as holders of our Common Stock, without having to settle such
purchase contract, the amount and kind of our capital stock, evidences of our indebtedness, other assets or property of ours or rights, options or warrants to acquire
our capital stock or other securities that such holder would have received if such holder owned a number of shares of Common Stock equal to the maximum
settlement rate in effect on the record date for the distribution.
If we issue rights, options or warrants that are only exercisable upon the occurrence of certain triggering events, then:

•
we will not adjust the fixed settlement rates pursuant to the foregoing in this clause (3) until the earliest of these triggering events occurs; and
•
we will readjust the fixed settlement rates to the extent any of these rights, options or warrants are not exercised before they expire; provided
that the rights, options or warrants trade together with our Common Stock and will be issued in respect of future issuances of the shares of our
Common Stock.
With respect to an adjustment pursuant to this clause (3) where there has been a payment of a dividend or other distribution on our Common Stock of shares of
capital stock of any class or series, or similar equity interest, of or relating to a subsidiary or other business unit, that are, or, when issued, will be, listed or admitted
for trading on a U.S. national securities exchange, which we refer to as a “spin-off,” each fixed settlement rate will be increased based on the following formula:
CR1 = CR0 x
FMV0 + MP0
MP0
where,
CR0
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately prior to the open of business on the ex-date for the spin-off;
CR1
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately after the open of business on the ex-date for the spin-off;
FMV0
=
the average VWAP per share of the capital stock or similar equity interest distributed to holders of our Common Stock applicable to
one share of our Common Stock over the ten consecutive trading day period commencing on, and including, the ex-date for the spin-
off, or the “valuation period”; and
MP0
=
the average VWAP per share of our Common Stock over the valuation period.
The increase to each fixed settlement rate under the preceding paragraph will be calculated as of the close of business on the last trading day of the valuation period
but will be given retroactive effect as of immediately after the open of business on the ex-date of the spin-off. Because we will make the adjustment to each fixed
settlement rate with retroactive effect, we will delay the settlement of any purchase contract where any date for determining the number of shares of our Common
Stock issuable to a holder occurs during the valuation period until the second business day after the last trading day of such valuation period. If such dividend or
distribution is not so paid, each fixed settlement rate shall be decreased, effective as of the date our board of directors or a committee thereof determines not to
make or pay such dividend or distribution, to be such fixed settlement rate that would then be in effect if such dividend or distribution had not been declared.
(4)
If any cash dividend or distribution is made to all or substantially all holders of our Common Stock, each fixed settlement rate will be adjusted
based on the following formula:
CR1 = CR0 x
SP0
SP0 - C
where,

CR0
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately prior to the close of business on the record date for such dividend or distribution;
CR1
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately after the close of business on the record date for such dividend or distribution;
SP0
=
the average VWAP per share of our Common Stock over the ten consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the Trading
Day immediately preceding the ex-date for such distribution; and
C
=
the amount in cash per share we distribute to all or substantially all holders of our Common Stock.
Any increase made under this clause (4) shall become effective immediately after the close of business on the record date for such dividend or distribution. If such
dividend or distribution is not so paid, each fixed settlement rate shall be decreased, effective as of the date our board of directors or a committee thereof
determines not to make or pay such dividend or distribution, to be such fixed settlement rate that would then be in effect if such dividend or distribution had not
been declared.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if “C” (as defined above) is equal to or greater than “SP0” (as defined above), in lieu of the foregoing increase, each holder shall
receive, in respect of each purchase contract, at the same time and upon the same terms as holders of shares of our Common Stock, without having to settle such
purchase contract, the amount of cash that such holder would have received if such holder owned a number of shares of our Common Stock equal to the maximum
settlement rate on the record date for such cash dividend or distribution.
(5)
If we or any of our subsidiaries make a payment in respect of a tender or exchange offer for our Common Stock, to the extent that the cash and
value of any other consideration included in the payment per share of Common Stock exceeds the average VWAP per share of our Common
Stock over the ten consecutive trading day period commencing on, and including, the trading day next succeeding the last date on which tenders
or exchanges may be made pursuant to such tender or exchange offer, or the “expiration date”, each fixed settlement rate will be increased based
on the following formula:
CR1 = CR0 x
AC + (SP1x OS1)
OS0 x SP1
where,

CR0
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately prior to the close of business on the expiration date;
CR1
=
such fixed settlement rate in effect immediately after the close of business on the expiration date;
AC
=
the aggregate value of all cash and any other consideration (as determined by our board of directors in good faith) paid or payable for
shares purchased in such tender or exchange offer;
OS0
=
the number of shares of our Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the expiration date (prior to giving effect to the purchase
of all shares accepted for purchase or exchange in such tender or exchange offer);
OS1
=
the number of shares of our Common Stock outstanding immediately after the expiration date (after giving effect to the purchase of all
shares accepted for purchase or exchange in such tender or exchange offer); and
SP1
=
the average VWAP of our Common Stock over the ten consecutive trading day period commencing on, and including, the trading day
next succeeding the expiration date (the “averaging period”).
The increase to each fixed settlement rate under the preceding paragraph will be calculated at the close of business on the last trading day of the averaging period
but will be given retroactive effect as of immediately after the close of business on the expiration date. Because we will make the adjustment to each fixed
settlement rate with retroactive effect, we will delay the settlement of any purchase contracts where any date for determining the number of shares of our Common
Stock issuable to a holder occurs during the averaging period until the second business day after the last trading day of such averaging period. For the avoidance of
doubt, no adjustment under this clause (5) will be made if such adjustment would result in a decrease in any fixed settlement rate.
In the event that we or one of our subsidiaries is obligated to purchase shares of Common Stock pursuant to any such tender offer or exchange offer, but we or such
subsidiary is permanently prevented by applicable law from effecting any such purchases, or all such purchases are rescinded, then each fixed settlement rate shall
again be adjusted to be such fixed settlement rate that would then be in effect if such tender offer or exchange offer had not been made (or had been made only in
respect of the purchases that have been made and not rescinded).
We may, to the extent permitted by law and the rules of NYSE or any other securities exchange on which our Common Stock or the purchase contracts is then
listed, increase each fixed settlement rate by any amount for a period of at least 20 business days if such increase is irrevocable during such 20 business days and
our board of directors (or a committee thereof) determines that such increase would be in our best interest. In addition, we may make such increases in each fixed
settlement rate as we deem advisable in order to avoid or diminish any income tax to holders of our Common Stock resulting from any dividend or distribution of
shares of our Common Stock (or issuance of rights or warrants to acquire shares of our Common Stock) or from any event treated as such for income tax purposes
or for any other reason. We may only make such a discretionary adjustment if we make the same proportionate adjustment to each fixed settlement rate.
Beneficial owners of the purchase contracts may, in certain circumstances, including upon a distribution of cash dividends to holders of our shares of Common
Stock, be deemed to have received a distribution subject to U.S. federal income tax as a dividend as a result of an adjustment or the nonoccurrence of an
adjustment to the fixed settlement rates. See “Material United States Federal Income Tax Consequences.”
If we have a rights plan in effect upon settlement of the purchase contracts into Common Stock, the holder will receive, in addition to any shares of Common Stock
received in connection with such settlement, the rights under the rights plan. However, if, prior to any settlement, the rights have separated from the shares of
Common Stock in accordance with the provisions of the applicable rights plan, each fixed settlement rate will be adjusted at the time of separation as if we
distributed to all or substantially all holders of our Common Stock, shares of our capital stock, evidences of indebtedness, assets, property, rights, options or
warrants as described in clause (3) above, subject to

readjustment in the event of the expiration, termination or redemption of such rights. We do not currently have a stockholder rights plan in effect.
Adjustments to the fixed settlement rates will be calculated to the nearest 1/10,000th of a share of our Common Stock, and corresponding adjustments to the
reference price and the threshold appreciation period will be calculated to the nearest $0.0001.
The fixed settlement rate will not be adjusted:
•
upon the issuance of any shares of our Common Stock pursuant to any present or future plan providing for the reinvestment of dividends or
interest payable on our securities and the investment of additional optional amounts in Common Stock under any plan;
•
upon the issuance of any shares of our Common Stock or options, rights or warrants to purchase those shares pursuant to any present or future
benefit or other incentive plan or program of or assumed by us or any of our subsidiaries;
•
subject to the second immediately preceding paragraph, upon the issuance of any shares of our Common Stock pursuant to any option, warrant,
right or exercisable, exchangeable or convertible security not described in the preceding bullet and outstanding as of the date the purchase
contracts were first issued;
•
for a change in the par value of our Common Stock;
•
for stock repurchases that are not tender or exchange offers referred to in clause (5) of the adjustments above, including structured or derivative
transactions or pursuant to a stock repurchase program approved by our board of directors that is not a tender or exchange offer referred to in
clause (5).
Except as otherwise provided above, we will be responsible for making all calculations called for under the purchase contracts. These calculations include, but are
not limited to, determinations of the fundamental change early settlement rate, the stock price in connection with a fundamental change, the daily VWAP, the
average VWAPs and the fixed settlement rates of the purchase contracts.
We will be required, within ten business days after the fixed settlement rates are adjusted, to provide or cause to be provided written notice of the adjustment to the
holders of the purchase contracts. We will also deliver to the purchase contract agent a certificate setting forth in reasonable detail the method by which the
adjustment to each fixed settlement rate was determined and setting forth each adjusted fixed settlement rate.
For the avoidance of doubt, if an adjustment is made to the fixed settlement rates, no separate inversely proportionate adjustment will be made to the reference
price or the threshold appreciation price because the reference price is equal to $100 divided by the maximum settlement rate (as adjusted in the manner described
herein) and the threshold appreciation price is equal to $100 divided by the minimum settlement rate (as adjusted in the manner described herein).
Whenever the terms of the purchase contracts require us to calculate the daily VWAP per share of our Common Stock over a span of multiple days, our board of
directors will make appropriate adjustments in good faith (including, without limitation, to the applicable market value, the early settlement rate or the fundamental
change early settlement rate (as the case may be)) to account for any adjustments to the fixed settlement rates (as the case may be) that become effective, or any
event that would require such an adjustment if the record date, ex-date, effective date or expiration date (as the case may be) of such event occurs, during the
relevant period used to calculate such prices or values (as the case may be).
If:
•
the record date for a dividend or distribution on shares of our Common Stock occurs after the end of the 20 consecutive trading day period used
for calculating the applicable market value and before the purchase contract settlement date; and

•
that dividend or distribution would have resulted in an adjustment of the number of shares issuable to the holders of the purchase contracts had
such record date occurred on or before the last trading day of such 20-trading day period,
then we will deem the holders of the purchase contracts to be holders of record of our Common Stock for purposes of that dividend or distribution. In this case, the
holders of the purchase contracts would receive the dividend or distribution on our Common Stock together with the number of shares of our Common Stock
issuable upon settlement of the purchase contracts.
Recapitalizations, Reclassifications and Changes of Our Common Stock
In the event of:
•
any consolidation or merger of us with or into another person;
•
any sale, transfer, lease or conveyance to another person of all or substantially all of our property and assets;
•
any reclassification of our Common Stock into securities (other than a share split or share combination), including securities other than our
Common Stock; or
•
any statutory exchange of our securities with another person (other than in connection with a consolidation or merger),
in each case, as a result of which our Common Stock would be converted into, or exchanged for, stock, other securities or other property or assets (including cash
or any combination thereof) (each, a “reorganization event”), each purchase contract outstanding immediately prior to such reorganization event shall, without the
consent of the holders of the purchase contracts, become a contract to purchase the kind of stock, other securities or other property or assets (including cash or any
combination thereof) that a holder of our Common Stock would have been entitled to receive in connection with such reorganization event (such stock, other
securities or other property or assets (including cash or any combination thereof), the “exchange property”, with each “unit of exchange property” meaning the
kind and amount of exchange property that a holder of one share of our Common Stock would have received in such reorganization event) and, prior to or at the
effective time of such reorganization event, we or the successor or purchasing person, as the case may be, shall execute with the purchase contract agent a
supplemental agreement pursuant to the purchase contract agreement and the purchase contracts to provide for such change in the right to settle the purchase
contracts.
If the transaction causes our Common Stock to be converted into, or exchanged for, the right to receive more than a single type of consideration (determined based
in part upon any form of stockholder election), the exchange property underlying the purchase contracts will be deemed to be the weighted average of the types and
amounts of consideration actually received by the holders of our Common Stock in such reorganization event.
The number of units of exchange property we will deliver upon the settlement of each purchase contract following the effective date of such reorganization event
will be determined as if references to our Common Stock deliverable upon settlement of the purchase contracts on the purchase contract settlement date, early
settlement date or fundamental change early settlement date, as the case may be, were to units of exchange property (without interest thereon and without any right
to dividends or distributions thereon which have a record date prior to the date on which holders of the purchase contracts become holders of record of the
underlying shares of our Common Stock). For the purpose of determining which bullet of the definition of settlement rate in the second paragraph under “-Delivery
of Common Stock” will apply upon settlement of each purchase contract, and for the purpose of calculating the settlement rate if the second bullet is applicable, the
value of a unit of exchange property will be determined in good faith by our board of directors (which determination will be final), except that if a unit of exchange
property includes Common Stock or American Depositary Receipts, or “ADRs”, that are traded on a U.S. national securities exchange, the value of such Common
Stock or ADRs will be the average over the 20 consecutive trading day period used for calculating the applicable market value of the volume-weighted average
prices for such Common Stock or ADRs, as displayed on the applicable Bloomberg screen (as determined in good faith by our board of directors (which
determination will be final)); or, if such price is not available, the average market value per share of such

Common Stock or ADRs over such period as determined, using a volume-weighted average method, by a nationally recognized independent investment banking
firm retained by us for this purpose. The provisions of this paragraph will apply to successive reorganization events, and the provisions summarized under “-Anti-
dilution Adjustments to the Fixed Settlement Rates” will apply to any shares of common equity or ADRs of us or any successor received by the holders of shares
of our Common Stock in any such reorganization event. We (or any successor to us) will, as soon as reasonably practicable (but in any event within five calendar
days) after the occurrence of any reorganization event provide written notice to the holders of the purchase contracts of such occurrence and of the kind and
amount of cash, securities or other property that constitute the exchange property. Failure to deliver such notice will not affect the operation of the provisions
described in this section.
It is possible that certain consolidations, mergers, combinations or other transactions could result in tax gains or losses to the holders either as a result of the
transaction or the conversion thereafter. Holders are encouraged to consult with their own tax advisors regarding the tax consequences of the ownership,
disposition and settlement of the purchase contracts.
Fractional Shares
No fractional shares of our Common Stock will be issued to holders upon settlement of the purchase contracts. In lieu of fractional shares otherwise issuable,
holders will be entitled to receive an amount in cash equal to the fraction of a share of our Common Stock, calculated on an aggregate basis in respect of the
purchase contracts being settled (provided that, so long as the Equity Units are in global form, we may elect to aggregate Equity Units for purposes of these
calculations on any basis permitted by the applicable procedures of DTC), multiplied by the daily VWAP of our Common Stock on the trading day immediately
preceding the purchase contract settlement date, early settlement date or fundamental change early settlement date, as the case may be.
Legal Holidays
In any case where the purchase contract settlement date, early settlement date or fundamental change early settlement date, as the case may be, shall not be a
business day, notwithstanding any term to the contrary in the purchase contract agreement or purchase contract, the settlement of the purchase contracts shall not
be effected on such date, but instead shall be effected on the next succeeding business day with the same force and effect as if made on such settlement date, and no
interest or other amounts shall accrue or be payable by us or to any holder in respect of such delay.
Consequences of Bankruptcy
Pursuant to the terms of the purchase contract agreement, the purchase contract settlement date for each purchase contract, whether held separately or as part of an
Equity Unit, will automatically accelerate upon the occurrence of specified events of bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization with respect to us. Pursuant to the
terms of the purchase contract agreement, upon acceleration, holders will be entitled under the terms of the purchase contracts to receive a number of shares of our
Common Stock per purchase contract equal to the maximum settlement rate in effect immediately prior to such acceleration (regardless of the market value of our
Common Stock at that time). However, a bankruptcy court may prevent us from delivering our Common Stock in settlement of the accelerated purchase contracts.
In such event, a holder would have a damage claim against us for the value of the Common Stock that we would have otherwise been required to deliver upon
settlement of the purchase contracts. Any such damage claim that holders have against us following such acceleration will rank pari passu with the claims of
holders of our Common Stock in the relevant bankruptcy proceeding. As such, to the extent we fail to deliver Common Stock to the holder upon such an
acceleration, the holder will only be able to recover damages to the extent holders of our Common Stock receive any recovery.
Modification
The purchase contract agreement contains provisions permitting us and the purchase contract agent to modify the purchase contract agreement or the purchase
contracts without the consent of the holders of purchase contracts (whether held separately or as a component of Equity Units) for any of the following purposes:
•
to evidence the succession of another person to us, and the assumption by any such successor of the covenants and obligations of ours in the
purchase contract agreement and the units and separate purchase contracts, if any;

•
to add to the covenants for the benefit of holders of purchase contracts or to surrender any of our rights or powers under the agreement;
•
to evidence and provide for the acceptance of appointment of a successor purchase contract agent;
•
upon the occurrence of a reorganization event, solely (i) to provide that each purchase contract will become a contract to purchase exchange
property and (ii) to effect the related changes to the terms of the purchase contracts, in each case, as required by the applicable provisions of
the purchase contract agreement;
•
to conform the provisions of the purchase contract agreement to the “Description of the Purchase Contracts” and “Description of the Equity
Units” sections in the preliminary prospectus supplement which forms a part of the registration statement on which the Equity Units are
registered, as supplemented by the related pricing term sheet;
•
to cure any ambiguity or manifest error, to correct or supplement any provisions that may be inconsistent or defective; and
•
to make any other provisions with respect to such matters or questions, so long as such action does not adversely affect the interest of the
holders in any material respect.
The purchase contract agreement contains provisions permitting us and the purchase contract agent, with the consent of the holders of not less than a majority of
the purchase contracts at the time outstanding, to modify the terms of the purchase contracts or the purchase contract agreement. However, no such modification
may, without the consent of the holder of each outstanding purchase contract affected by the modification,
•
reduce the number of shares of Common Stock deliverable upon settlement of the purchase contract (except to the extent expressly required
pursuant to the anti-dilution adjustments);
•
change the purchase contract settlement date, or adversely modify the early settlement right or the fundamental change early settlement right;
or
•
reduce the above-stated percentage of outstanding purchase contracts the consent of the holders of which is required for the modification or
amendment of the provisions of the purchase contracts or the purchase contract agreement.
In executing any modification, the purchase contract agent shall be entitled to receive an opinion of counsel and an officer’s certificate stating that such
modification is authorized or permitted under the terms of the purchase contract agreement.
Consolidation, Merger, Sale or Conveyance
Under the purchase contract agreement, we are permitted to consolidate with or merge with or into another company. We are also permitted to sell, assign, transfer,
lease or convey all or substantially all of our assets to another company. However, if we take any of these actions, we must meet the following conditions:
•
the successor entity to such consolidation or merger, or the entity which acquires all or substantially all of our assets, shall expressly assume all
of our obligations under the purchase contracts and the purchase contract agreement;
•
the successor entity to such consolidation or merger, or the entity which acquires all or substantially all of our assets, shall be a corporation
organized and existing under the laws of the United States or any state thereof or the District of Columbia; and

•
immediately after the merger, consolidation, sale, assignment, transfer, lease or conveyance, no default has occurred and is continuing under
the purchase contracts or the purchase contract agreement.
Reservation of Common Stock
We will at all times reserve and keep available out of our authorized and unissued Common Stock, solely for issuance upon settlement of the purchase contracts,
the number of shares of Common Stock that would be issuable upon the settlement of all purchase contracts then outstanding, assuming settlement at the maximum
settlement rate.
Governing Law
The purchase contract agreement, the Equity Units and the purchase contracts is governed by, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of New York.
Information Concerning the Purchase Contract Agent
The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. is the purchase contract agent. The purchase contract agent acts as the agent for the holders of Equity Units
and separate purchase contracts from time to time. The purchase contract agreement does not obligate the purchase contract agent to exercise any discretionary
actions in connection with a default under the terms of the purchase contracts or the purchase contract agreement.
The purchase contract agreement contains provisions limiting the liability of the purchase contract agent. The purchase contract agreement contains provisions
under which the purchase contract agent may resign or be replaced. This resignation or replacement would be effective upon the acceptance of appointment by a
successor purchase contract agent.
We maintain banking relationships in the ordinary course of business with the purchase contract agent and its affiliates.
Calculations in Respect of Purchase Contracts
We will be responsible for making all calculations called for under the Equity Units and any separate purchase contracts. The purchase contract agent will have no
obligation to make, review or verify any such calculations. All such calculations made by us will be made in good faith and, absent manifest error, will be final and
binding on the purchase contract agent and the holders of the Equity Units and any separate purchase contracts. We will provide a schedule of such calculations to
the purchase contract agent and the purchase contract agent will be entitled to conclusively rely upon the accuracy of such calculations without independent
verification.
Description of the U.S. Treasury Strips Components
The U.S. treasury strips underlying the Equity Units are held by the custodian as agent for the holders of the Equity Units and are subject to the terms of a custodial
agreement between the custodian and purchase contract agent. The following summary contains a description of all of the material terms of the custodial agreement
but is not complete and is subject to, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, all of the provisions of the custodial agreement, including the definitions in the
custodial agreement of certain terms. We refer you to the custodial agreement which is incorporated by reference to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Each U.S. treasury strips component will initially form a part of an Equity Unit. On any business day during the period beginning on, and including, the business
day immediately following the date of initial issuance of the Equity Units to, but excluding, the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding August 16,
2023, the holder will have the right to separate 48,000 Equity Units (or any integral multiples thereof), and withdraw the U.S. treasury strips underlying those
Equity Units. Following such separation, U.S. treasury strips may be transferred separately from purchase contracts.
Payments of U.S. Treasury Strips
The U.S. treasury strips are held by the custodian as agent for the holders of the Equity Units. The custodian will, upon instructions from the purchase contract
agent, forward to each holder of Equity Units the amount it receives from the U.S. government in respect of each U.S. treasury strip underlying the Equity Units
owned by such holder

on the business day immediately following the date such U.S. treasury strip matures on February 15, May 15, August 15 and November 15 of each year, with such
payments commencing on, and including, August 17, 2020, and ending on, and including, August 16, 2023. We expect that the amount payable per Equity Unit per
full quarter as described in the immediately preceding sentence will be equal to $1.3750, which represents an annual rate of return on the stated amount per Equity
Unit of 5.50%. The amount payable per Equity Unit on August 17, 2020 was equal to $0.6875. These payments will consist of the pro rata amount of all amounts
received by the custodian in respect of the U.S. treasury strips. So long as the Equity Units remain in the form of one or more book-entry, global Equity Unit
certificates as described in “-Book-Entry Procedures and Settlement” below, the record date will be the business day prior to the relevant payment date. If the
Equity Units do not remain in the form of one or more book-entry, global Equity Unit certificates, the relevant record date will be the fifteenth day (whether or not
a business day) prior to the relevant payment date.
We have no obligation, responsibility or liability with respect to the purchase of the U.S. treasury strips and their delivery into the custody of the custodian, the
performance or non-performance of the duties of the custodian or any payment of the U.S. treasury strips components. Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC has purchased
the U.S. treasury strips to be sold to the purchasers of the Equity Units and delivered to the custodian, The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A.
Each Equity Unit will initially evidence its holder’s 1/48,000th beneficial ownership interest in the following U.S. treasury strips, which will constitute one U.S.
treasury strips component:
Maturity
Face Amount
CUSIP
August 15, 2020
$
33,000 
912803AU7
November 15, 2020
$
66,000 
912820WZ6
February 15, 2021
$
66,000 
912803AV5
May 15, 2021
$
66,000 
912803AW3
August 15, 2021
$
66,000 
912821AG0
November 15, 2021
$
66,000 
912820ZH3
February 15, 2022
$
66,000 
912833LG3
May 15, 2022
$
66,000 
912821BZ7
August 15, 2022
$
66,000 
912820RU3
November 15, 2022
$
66,000 
912820SH1
February 15, 2023
$
66,000 
912820B30
May 15, 2023
$
66,000 
912820F36
August 15, 2023
$
66,000 
912820G84
Role of Custodian
The custodian is the agent of the holders of the Equity Units evidencing the U.S. treasury strips and is not a trustee, and no trust was intended to be created or was
created by the terms of the custodial agreement. The custodian has no managerial role nor any discretion with respect to the U.S. treasury strips and has no right to
deal with the U.S. treasury strips except as specifically provided in the custodial agreement. The custodian agrees to hold the U.S. treasury strips and exercise the
due care of a professional custodian for hire. Under the custodial agreement, the custodian is required to remit all payments received from the U.S. government in
respect of the U.S. treasury strips to the holders of the Equity Units without making any deduction as instructed by the purchase contract agent.
Ownership of U.S. Treasury Strips
The U.S. treasury strips will at all times be the sole and exclusive property of the holders of the Equity Units. The custodian may not transfer, assign, pledge, set
off or otherwise dispose of any of the U.S. treasury strips or any interests therein, except as expressly permitted by the provisions of the custodial agreement.
Withdrawal of U.S. Treasury Strips

On any business day during the period beginning on, and including, the business day immediately following the date of initial issuance of the Equity Units to, but
excluding, the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding August 16, 2023, a holder of 48,000 Equity Units (or any integral multiple thereof) will have
the right to separate such Equity Units and withdraw the U.S. treasury strips underlying those Equity Units. To withdraw the U.S. treasury strips underlying Equity
Units, holders must follow the procedures outlined under the above caption “Description of the Equity Units-Separating and Recreating Equity Units-Separating
Equity Units.” The purchase contract agent will then (i) cancel the Equity Units and deliver to the holder the purchase contracts evidenced by the Equity Units and
(ii) instruct the custodian to deliver to the holder such holder’s U.S. treasury strips. Any administrative fees and expenses related to withdrawing the U.S. treasury
strips evidenced by the Equity Units that are payable to the purchase contract agent or the custodian will be at the expense of the holder of Equity Units requesting
withdrawal. To recreate the Equity Units, holders must follow the procedures outlined under the above caption “Description of the Equity Units-Separating and
Recreating Equity Units-Recreation of Equity Units.” Because each Equity Unit evidences a 1/48,000th beneficial ownership interest in specified U.S. treasury
strips, any separation or recreation of Equity Units may be made only in integral multiples of 48,000 Equity Units.
Certain Other Provisions of the Custodial Agreement
Delivery of U.S. Treasury Strips
Payments of the U.S. treasury strips components will be made by the custodian to the depositary as long as the Equity Units remain in book-entry form. In
addition, if the Equity Units do not remain in book-entry form, payments may be made, at the option of the custodian, by check mailed to the address of the person
entitled to the payments as shown on the Equity Unit register.
If the purchase contract settlement date is accelerated, U.S. treasury strips will be delivered by the custodian upon presentation and surrender of the Equity Unit
certificates evidencing the related Equity Units at the office of the purchase contract agent or, in the case of book-entry Equity Units, upon presentation and
surrender of the Equity Units in accordance with the procedures of the depositary. Following such acceleration and delivery, the custodian will sell (or, at the
expense of holders, retain the services of a broker dealer that will sell) such U.S. treasury strips, and the custodian will distribute the net cash proceeds of such sale
(less any expenses incurred by the custodian in connection with such sale) on a pro rata basis to holders of Equity Units (or in accordance with the procedures of
the depositary in the case of global Equity Units). Until the Equity Unit certificate is presented and surrendered or the holder provides satisfactory evidence that the
Equity Unit certificate has been destroyed, lost or stolen, together with any indemnity that may be required by the purchase contract agent, the U.S. treasury strips
will be held by the custodian for the account of the holder. The custodian will have no obligation to invest or to pay interest on any amounts held by the custodian
pending delivery.
Modification
The custodial agreement contains provisions prohibiting the custodian and the purchase contract agent, except under limited circumstances, from modifying or
amending the terms of the custodial agreement without the consent of the holder of each outstanding Equity Unit affected by the modification or amendment.
Governing Law
The custodial agreement is governed by, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of New York.
Information Concerning the Custodian
The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., whose designated office is located at 400 South Hope Street, Suite 500, Los Angeles, CA 90071, acts as the
custodian of the U.S. treasury strips on behalf of the holders of Equity Units from time to time.
The custodial agreement does not obligate the custodian to perform any discretionary actions in connection with the terms of the Equity Units or the custodial
agreement. The custodial agreement also contains provisions limiting the liability of the custodian and the circumstances under which the custodian may resign or
be replaced. No such resignation or replacement will be effective until a successor custodian is appointed.
We maintain banking relationships in the ordinary course of business with the custodian and its affiliates.
Book Entry Procedures and Settlement

Except in the limited circumstances described herein, the Equity Units and the purchase contracts are issued in the form of one or more global Equity Unit
certificates and global purchase contract certificates, respectively, held by the purchase contract agent, as custodian for, and registered in the name of, The
Depository Trust Company (“DTC”), as depositary, or its nominee.
The depositary has advised us as follows: The depositary is a limited-purpose trust company organized under the Banking Law of the State of New York, a
member of the Federal Reserve System, a “clearing corporation” within the meaning of the New York Uniform Commercial Code and a “clearing agency”
registered pursuant to Section 17A of the U.S. Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”). The depositary was created to hold securities of its
participants (defined below) and to facilitate the clearance and settlement of transactions among its participants in such securities through electronic book-entry
changes in accounts of the participants, thereby eliminating the need for physical movement of certificates. The depositary’s participants include securities brokers
and dealers, banks, trust companies, clearing corporations and some other organizations, some of whom (and/or their representatives) own the depositary. Access
to the depositary’s book-entry system is also available to others, such as banks, brokers, dealers and trust companies that clear through or maintain a custodial
relationship with a participant, either directly or indirectly.
No Equity Unit represented by global Equity Unit certificates and no purchase contract represented by global purchase contract certificates may be exchanged in
whole or in part for definitive Equity Units or purchase contracts, as the case may be, and no transfer of global Equity Unit certificates and global purchase contract
certificates in whole or in part may be registered, in the name of any person other than the depositary or any nominee of the depositary unless:
•
the depositary has notified the purchase contract agent that it is unwilling or unable to continue as depositary for such global Equity Unit
certificates or global purchase contract certificates, as the case may be, or has ceased to be qualified to act as such as required by the purchase
contract agreement;
•
there shall have occurred and be continuing a default by us in respect of our obligations under the purchase contract agreement; or
•
the beneficial holder of Equity Units elects to withdraw the U.S. treasury strips evidenced by one or more of its Equity Units and elects to hold
the purchase contracts in definitive form.
All Equity Units and purchase contracts represented by one or more global Equity Unit certificates and global purchase contract certificates, respectively, or any
portion thereof are registered in such names as the depositary may have directed.
The laws of some jurisdictions require that some purchasers of Equity Units take physical delivery of the Equity Units in definitive form. These laws may impair a
holder’s ability to transfer beneficial interests in Equity Units so long as they are represented by global Equity Unit certificates.
As long as the depositary (or its nominee) is the registered owner of the global Equity Unit certificates and the global purchase contract certificates, the depositary
(or its nominee) will be considered the sole owner and holder of the global Equity Unit certificates, the global purchase contract certificates and all Equity Units
and purchase contracts represented thereby for all purposes under the Equity Units and purchase contracts and the purchase contract agreement. Except in the
limited circumstances referred to above, owners of beneficial interests in global Equity Unit certificates and owners of beneficial interests in global purchase
contract certificates:
•
are not be entitled to have the global purchase contract certificates or the purchase contracts represented thereby registered in their respective
names;
•
will not receive or be entitled to receive physical delivery of Equity Unit certificates or purchase contract certificates, as the case may be, in
exchange therefor; and
•
are not be considered to be owners or holders of global Equity Unit certificates or any Equity Units represented thereby or global purchase
contract certificates or any purchase contracts represented thereby, for any purpose under the Equity Units, the purchase contracts or the
purchase contract agreement.

All transfers and deliveries of shares of our Common Stock (and any cash amount paid by us in lieu of fractional shares) issued on settlement of the purchase
contracts evidenced by the Equity Units in global form and all transfers and deliveries of the U.S. treasury strips evidenced by the Equity Units in global form will
be made to the depositary (or its nominee) as the holder thereof. All transfers and deliveries of shares of our Common Stock (and any cash amount paid by us in
lieu of fractional shares) pursuant to the purchase contracts represented by the global purchase contract certificates will be made by the purchase contract agent to
the depositary (or its nominee) as the holder thereof. Cash payments in respect of the U.S. treasury strips component of Equity Units in global form will be made
by the custodian, at the direction of the purchase contract agent, to the depositary (or its nominee) as the holder of such Equity Units.
Ownership of beneficial interests in the global Equity Unit certificates and global purchase contract certificates is limited to participants or persons that may hold
beneficial interests through institutions that have accounts with the depositary or its nominee, which we refer to as participants. Ownership of beneficial interests in
global Equity Unit certificates and global purchase contract certificates will be shown only on, and the transfer of those ownership interests will be effected only
through, records maintained by the depositary or its nominee (with respect to participants’ interests) or any such participant (with respect to interests of persons
held by such participants on their behalf). Procedures for settlement of purchase contracts on the purchase contract settlement date or upon early settlement for
holders who hold in book-entry form will be governed by arrangements among the depositary, participants and persons that may hold beneficial interests through
participants designed to permit such settlement without the physical movement of certificates. Payments, transfers, deliveries, exchanges and other matters relating
to beneficial interests in global Equity Unit certificates may be subject to various policies and procedures adopted by the depositary from time to time. None of
PG&E Corporation, the purchase contract agent or the custodian or any of their respective agents will have any responsibility or liability for any aspect of the
depositary’s or any participant’s records relating to, or for payments made on account of, beneficial interests in global Equity Unit certificates or global purchase
contract certificates, or for maintaining, supervising or reviewing any of the depositary’s records or any participant’s records relating to such beneficial ownership
interests.
Notices
So long as the global securities are held on behalf of DTC or any other clearing system, notices to holders of securities represented by a beneficial interest in the
global securities may be given by delivery of the relevant notice to DTC or the alternative clearing system, as the case may be.

EXHIBIT 4.51(b)
DESCRIPTION OF PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY’S
SECURITIES REGISTERED UNDER
SECTION 12 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
Description of Preferred Stock
The following description of Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s (the “Utility”) preferred stock is only a summary and does not purport to be complete. It
is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to applicable law, our Restated Articles of Incorporation effective as of June 22, 2020 (the “Articles of
Incorporation”) and Bylaws amended and restated as of May 20, 2021 (the “Bylaws”), each of which is filed as an exhibit to this Annual Report on Form 10-K and
is incorporated by reference herein. We encourage you to read the Articles of Incorporation and the Bylaws for additional information.
In this section, references to “we,” “our,” “ours” and “us” refer only to the Utility and not to any of its direct or indirect parents, subsidiaries or affiliates
except as expressly provided.
General
Our Articles of Incorporation authorize the issuance of 800,000,000 shares of common stock with a par value of $5 per share, 75,000,000 shares of first
preferred stock with a par value of $25 per share (the “First Preferred Stock”), and 10,000,000 of $100 first preferred stock, cumulative, with a par value of $100
per share (the “$100 First Preferred Stock” and, together with the First Preferred Stock, the “Preferred Stock”).
All outstanding shares of our common stock are owned by PG&E Corporation. There are no shares of $100 First Preferred Stock outstanding. First
Preferred Stock is issued and outstanding in the following series:
•5% series A redeemable (“5% First Preferred Series A Stock”)
•5% redeemable (“5% First Preferred Stock”)
•4.80% redeemable (“4.8% First Preferred Stock”)
•4.50% redeemable (“4.5% First Preferred Stock”)
•4.36% series A redeemable (“4.36% First Preferred Series A Stock”)
•6% nonredeemable (“6% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock”)
•5.50% nonredeemable (“5.5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock”)
•5% nonredeemable (“5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock”)
As of December 31, 2021, the Utility’s First Preferred Stock outstanding included:
•4,211,661 shares of 6% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock;
•1,173,163 shares of 5.5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock;
•400,000 shares of 5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock;
•1,778,172 shares of 5% First Preferred Series A Stock;
•934,322 shares of 5% First Preferred Stock;

•793,031 shares of 4.8% First Preferred Stock;
•611,142 shares of 4.5% First Preferred Stock; and
•418,291 shares of 4.36% First Preferred Series A Stock.
Under the Articles of Incorporation, the Board of Directors of the Utility is authorized without further shareholder action to provide for the issuance of
Preferred Stock up to the amounts authorized by the Articles of Incorporation, in one or more series, with such rights, preferences, privileges and restrictions as
shall be stated and expressed in the resolution or resolutions providing for the issue of such Preferred Stock, or series thereof, adopted, at any time or from time to
time, by the Board of Directors.
Voting Rights
Except as otherwise provided by law, holders of our Preferred Stock have voting rights on the basis of one vote per share on each matter submitted to a
vote at a meeting of shareholders. Our shareholders may not cumulate votes in elections of directors. As a result, the holders of our Preferred Stock entitled to
exercise more than 50% of the voting rights in an election of directors can elect all of the directors to be elected if they choose to do so. In such event, the holders
of the remaining Preferred Stock voting for the election of directors will not be able to elect any persons to the Board of Directors.
Dividend Rights
The owners and holders of shares of Preferred Stock, when issued as fully paid, are entitled to receive, from the date of issue of such share, out of funds
legally available therefor, cumulative preferential dividends, when and as declared by the Board of Directors, at the following rates upon the par value of their
respective shares, and not more:
•5% per year upon the 5% First Preferred Series A Stock, 5% First Preferred Stock and 5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock
•4.8% per year upon the 4.8% First Preferred Stock
•4.5% per year upon the 4.5% First Preferred Stock
•4.36% per year upon the 4.36% First Preferred Stock
•6% per year upon the 6% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock
•5.5% per year upon the 5.5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock
Such dividends shall be declared and shall be either paid or set apart for payment before any dividend upon the shares of common stock shall be either
declared or paid. All shares of Preferred Stock rank equally in priority with regard to preference in dividend rights, except that shares of different classes or
different series thereof may differ as to the amounts of dividends to which they are entitled.
Liquidation Rights
Upon the liquidation or dissolution of the Utility at any time and in any manner, the owners and holders of Preferred Stock issued as fully paid will be
entitled to receive an amount equal to the par value of such shares plus an amount equal to all accumulated and unpaid dividends thereon to and including the date
fixed for such distribution or payment before any amount shall be paid to the holders of the Utility’s common stock. All shares of Preferred Stock rank equally in
priority with regard to preference in liquidation rights, except that shares of different classes or different series thereof may differ as to the amounts of liquidation
payments to which they are entitled. All shares of Preferred Stock rank senior to common stock with regard to liquidation rights.
If any share or shares of Preferred Stock shall at any time be issued as only partly paid, the owners and holders of such partly paid share or shares shall
have the right to receive dividends and to share in the assets of the Utility upon its liquidation or dissolution in all respects like the owners and holders of fully paid
shares of Preferred

Stock, except that such right shall be only in proportion to the amount paid on account of the subscription price for which such partly paid share or shares shall
have been issued.
Conversion, Redemption and Preemptive Rights
None of the 6% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock, 5.5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock and 5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock is subject
to redemption.
The remaining outstanding series of First Preferred Stock, and any Preferred Stock issued in the future, may be redeemed at the Utility’s option, at any
time or from time to time, at the redemption price fixed for such series of Preferred Stock together with accumulated and unpaid dividends at the rate fixed therefor
to and including the date fixed for redemption. If less than all the outstanding shares of any such series are to be redeemed, the shares to be redeemed shall be
determined pro rata or by lot in such manner as the Board of Directors may determine. There is no restriction on the repurchase or redemption of Preferred Stock
by the Utility while there is any arrearage in the payment of dividends or sinking fund payments.
Unless the certificate of determination for any series of Preferred Stock shall otherwise provide, notice of every redemption shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City and County of San Francisco, State of California, and in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of
Manhattan, City and State of New York, at least once in each of two (2) successive weeks, commencing not earlier than sixty (60) nor later than thirty (30) days
before the date fixed for redemption; successive publications need not be made in the same newspaper. A copy of such notice shall be mailed within the same
period of time to each holder of record, as of the record date, of the shares to be redeemed, but the failure to mail such notice to any shareholder shall not invalidate
the redemption of such shares.
From and after the date fixed for redemption, unless default be made by the Utility in paying the amount due upon redemption, dividends on the shares
called for redemption shall cease to accrue, and such shares shall be deemed to be redeemed and shall be no longer outstanding, and the holders thereof shall cease
to be shareholders with respect to such shares and shall have no rights with respect thereto except the right to receive from the Utility upon surrender of their
certificates the amount payable with respect thereto upon redemption without interest.
None of the Preferred Stock has preemptive rights or conversion rights.
Non-Assessability
Shares of Preferred Stock, the subscription price of which shall have been paid in full, whether such price be par or more or less than par, shall be issued
as fully paid shares and shall never be subject to any call or assessment for any purpose whatever. Shares of Preferred Stock, only a part of the subscription price of
which shall have been paid, shall be subject to calls for the unpaid balance of the subscription price thereof. But no call made on partly paid Preferred Stock or
partly paid common stock shall be recoverable by action or be enforceable otherwise than by sale or forfeiture of delinquent stock in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Corporations Code of California.
If at any time, whether by virtue of any amendment of the Articles of Incorporation or any amendment or change of the law of the State of
California relating to corporations or otherwise, any assessment shall, in any event whatsoever, be levied and collected on any subscribed and issued shares of
Preferred Stock after the subscription price thereof shall have been paid in full, the rights of the owners and holders thereof to receive dividends and their rights to
share in the assets upon the liquidation or dissolution of the Utility shall, immediately upon the payment of such assessment and by virtue thereof, be increased in
the same ratio as the total amount of the assessment or assessments so levied and collected shall bear to the par value of such shares of Preferred Stock.
Listing
The outstanding series of First Preferred Stock are listed on the NYSE American as follows:
•5% First Preferred Series A Stock is listed under the trading symbol PCG-PE
•5% First Preferred Stock is listed under trading symbol PCG-PD
•4.8% First Preferred Stock is listed under trading symbol PCG-PG

•4.5% First Preferred Stock is listed under trading symbol PCG-PH
•4.36% First Preferred Series A Stock is listed under trading symbol PCG-PI
•6% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock is listed under trading symbol PCG-PA
•5.5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock is listed under trading symbol PCG-PB
•5% Nonredeemable First Preferred Stock is listed under trading symbol PCG-PC
Transfer Agent
The transfer agent for our Preferred Stock is EQ Shareowner Services.

EXHIBIT 10.29
AMENDMENT NO. 2 TO CREDIT AGREEMENT
This AMENDMENT NO. 2, dated as of December 31, 2021 (this “Amendment”), is entered into by and among PACIFIC GAS AND
ELECTRIC  COMPANY,  a  California  corporation  (the  “Borrower”),  the  Consenting  Lenders  (as  defined  below),  the  other  Lenders  (as
defined below) party hereto, and JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A. (“JPMCB”), as administrative agent (in such capacity and including any
successors in such capacity, the “Administrative Agent”).
RECITALS:
WHEREAS, reference is hereby made to the Term Loan Credit Agreement, dated as of July 1, 2020, among the Borrower, the
lenders party thereto from time to time, the Administrative Agent and the other parties thereto (as amended by that certain Amendment No. 1
to Credit Agreement dated as of October 29, 2021 (the “Amendment No. 1”), the “Credit Agreement”, capitalized terms used (including in
the preamble and recitals hereto) but not defined herein shall have the meanings assigned to such terms in the Credit Agreement (as amended
hereby));
WHEREAS, the Borrower, the Lenders party thereto and the Administrative Agent previously entered into the Amendment No. 1
pursuant to which the Lenders party thereto agreed to extend the maturity date of the Loans held by such Lenders, which Loans are the 18-
Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A);
WHEREAS, each Consenting Lender holding 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B) (the “Existing Loans”) immediately prior to the
Amendment  No.  2  Effective  Date  that  executes  and  delivers  an  executed  counterpart  to  this  Amendment  agrees  to  the  terms  of  this
Amendment upon the effectiveness of this Amendment on the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date (such lenders, the “Consenting Lenders”),
whereby the maturity date of the Existing Loans held by the Consenting Lenders will be extended from January 1, 2022 to October 1, 2022
(the Existing Loans so extended, the “Extended Loans”);
WHEREAS, the Required Lenders party hereto agree to the other changes set forth herein;
WHEREAS, JPMCB (or an Affiliate thereof) is acting as a joint lead arranger and bookrunner (in such capacity, the “Left Lead
Arranger”) in respect of this Amendment and Barclays Bank PLC, BofA Securities, Inc., Goldman Sachs Bank USA, Wells Fargo Securities,
LLC and Citibank, N.A. are acting as joint lead arrangers and bookrunners (in such capacities, together with the Left Lead Arranger, the
“Lead Arrangers”) in respect of this Amendment; and
WHEREAS,  this  Amendment  is  an  amendment  made  with  the  consent  of  the  Consenting  Lenders,  the  Required  Lenders,  the
Borrower and the Administrative Agent pursuant to Section 10.1 of the Credit Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and for other good and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufficiency of
which is hereby acknowledged), the parties hereto hereby agree as follows:
A.
Amendments to Credit Agreement.
(i)
On the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date (as defined below), the Credit Agreement is hereby amended to:
(A)
Amend Section 1.1 of the Credit Agreement by adding the following defined terms in correct alphabetical order:

“Amendment No. 2”: that certain Amendment No. 2 to Credit Agreement, dated as of the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date,
among the Borrower, each Lender party thereto, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.
“Amendment No. 2 Effective Date”: December 31, 2021.
(B)
Amend and restate the definition of “18-Month Tranche Maturity Date” contained in Section 1.1 of the Credit Agreement
in its entirety as follows:
“18-Month Tranche Maturity Date”: October 1, 2022.
(C)
Amend and restate Section 2.1(b) of the Credit Agreement in its entirety as follows:
(b)    Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, each 18-Month Tranche Lender (severally and not jointly) agrees to
make a term loan (the “18-Month Tranche Loans”) to the Borrower in Dollars on the Effective Date in an aggregate amount
equal  to  the  amount  of  such  18-Month  Tranche  Lender’s  18-Month  Tranche  Commitment.  Loans  under  the  18-Month
Tranche may be ABR Loans or Eurodollar Rate Loans, as further provided herein. 18-Month Tranche Loans borrowed under
this Section 2.1(b) and paid or prepaid may not be reborrowed. As of the Amendment No. 1 Effective Date, a portion of the
18-Month Tranche Loans in an aggregate amount of $1,315,735,897.44 (the “18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A)”)
shall have  an  18-Month Tranche  Maturity Date of  October  1, 2022  and  a portion  of the 18-Month Tranche  Loans  in an
aggregate  amount  of  $184,264,102.56  (the  “18-Month  Tranche  Loans  (Tranche  B)”)  shall  have  an  18-Month  Tranche
Maturity Date of January 1, 2022. As of the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date, the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B)
shall have an 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date of October 1, 2022.
(D)
Amend Section 2.6 of the Credit Agreement by adding the following as a new clause (d):
(d)    On June 1, 2022, the Borrower agrees to pay to the Administrative Agent, for the account of each Lender that holds any
18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B) outstanding on such date, a fee equal to 0.075% of the principal amount of such Loans.
(E)
Amend the penultimate paragraph of Section 10.1 of the Credit Agreement by adding the following new parenthetical at the
end of clause (iv) thereof:
(for the avoidance of doubt, such replacement shall be effective subject to the conditions in the other clauses set forth in this
proviso, regardless of whether such replaced Lender enters into an Assignment and Assumption)
(ii)
Effective on January 1, 2022, the Credit Agreement is hereby amended to delete the stricken text (indicated textually in the
same manner as the following example: stricken text) and to add the double-underlined text (indicated textually in the same manner as the
following example: double-underlined text) as set forth in the pages of the Credit Agreement attached as Exhibit A hereto.
B.
Prepayments and Assignments. On or prior to the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date, the Borrower shall prepay $59.26
million in principal amount of the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B) (as defined in the Credit Agreement prior to giving effect to this
Amendment). On the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date and immediately preceding the effectiveness of this Amendment, all Lenders holding
the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B) that are not Consenting Lenders shall be replaced with one or more Consenting Lenders pursuant
to the penultimate paragraph of Section 10.1 of the Credit Agreement (as amended hereby) such that immediately after the effectiveness of
this Amendment, the allocation of the 18-Month Tranche Loans are as set forth as Schedule 1.1 hereto.
2

C.
Conditions Precedent. This Amendment shall become effective as of the date first above written when, and only when, each
of  the  following  conditions  precedent  shall  have  been  satisfied  or,  to  the  extent  permitted  under  the  Credit  Agreement,  waived  (the
“Amendment No. 2 Effective Date”):
1.
Executed Counterparts. The Administrative Agent shall have received a counterpart to this Amendment duly executed by
the Borrower, the Consenting Lenders, the Required Lenders and the Administrative Agent;
2.
Organizational Documents; Certificates. The Administrative Agent shall have received (i) a certificate of the Borrower,
dated the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date (with a recent short-form good standing certificate of the Borrower), similar to the one delivered
pursuant to Section 5.1(f) of the Credit Agreement, with appropriate insertions and attachments and (ii) a certificate of a Responsible Officer,
dated the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date, confirming the satisfaction of the conditions precedent set forth in clauses (3) and (4) below;
3.
Representations and Warranties. The representations and warranties of the Borrower contained in Section 4 of the Credit
Agreement (other than the representations and warranties set forth in Sections 4.2, 4.6(b) and 4.13) shall be true and correct in all material
respects  immediately  prior  to  and  immediately  after  giving  effect  to  this  Amendment; provided that  each  of  such  representations  and
warranties that contains a materiality qualification shall be true and correct on and as of the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date (or, to the
extent such representations and warranties specifically relate to an earlier date, such representations and warranties were true and correct in
all material respects, or true and correct, as the case may be, as of such earlier date);
4.
No Default. No Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing immediately prior to, and immediately
after giving effect to, the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date;
5.
Fees and Expenses. On or prior to the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date, the Borrower shall have paid all reasonable out-of-
pocket  costs  and  expenses  of  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  Lead  Arrangers  required  to  be  paid  or  reimbursed  by  the  Borrower  in
connection with the preparation, negotiation, execution and delivery of this Amendment and related documentation (including, in each case,
without  limitation,  the  reasonable  fees  and  disbursements  of  counsel  for  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  Lead  Arrangers  with  respect
thereto);
6.
KYC Information. At least three (3) Business Days prior to the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date, the Administrative Agent
and each Consenting Lender shall have received all documentation and information relating to the Borrower as is reasonably requested in
writing by the Administrative Agent and/or any such Consenting Lender at least ten (10) Business Days prior to the Amendment No. 2
Effective Date that is required by Governmental Authorities under applicable “know your customer” and anti-money laundering rules and
regulations, including the Patriot Act and the Beneficial Ownership Regulation. If the Borrower qualifies as a “legal entity customer” under
the Beneficial Ownership Regulation and the Administrative Agent or any Consenting Lender so request at least five (5) Business Days prior
to the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date, then at least three (3) Business Days prior to the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date, the Borrower
shall have delivered to the Administrative Agent and/or any such Consenting Lender a Beneficial Ownership Certification in relation to the
Borrower.
7.
Bond Documents. The Administrative Agent shall have received evidence reasonably satisfactory to it that the Borrower has
caused to be delivered to the Trustee under the FMB Indenture the items described in Section IV Extension Procedures for the Bonds of the
Thirty-Fourth Series of the Eleventh Supplemental Indenture.
D. Other Terms.
1.
Reference to the Effect on the Loan Documents.
(i)
As  of  the  Amendment  No.  2  Effective  Date,  each  reference  in  the  Credit  Agreement  to  “this  Agreement,”
“hereunder,” “hereof,” “herein,” or words of like import, and each
3

reference  in  the  other  Loan  Documents  to  the  “Credit  Agreement”  (including,  without  limitation,  by  means  of  words  like  “thereunder,”
“thereof” and words of like import), shall mean and be a reference to the Credit Agreement as amended hereby, and this Amendment and the
Credit Agreement shall be read together and construed as a single instrument.
(ii) Except as expressly amended hereby or specifically waived or consented to above, all of the terms and provisions of
the Credit Agreement and all other Loan Documents are and shall remain in full force and effect and are hereby ratified and confirmed.
(iii) The execution, delivery and effectiveness of this Amendment shall not, except as expressly provided herein, operate
as a waiver of any right, power or remedy of the Lenders, the Borrower, the Lead Arrangers or the Administrative Agent under any of the
Loan Documents, nor constitute a waiver or amendment of any other provision of any of the Loan Documents or for any purpose except as
expressly set forth herein.
(iv) This Amendment is a Loan Document.
2.
Execution in Counterparts. This Amendment may be executed in any number of counterparts and by different parties in
separate counterparts, each of which when so executed shall be deemed to be an original and all of which taken together shall constitute one
and  the  same  agreement.  Delivery  of  an  executed  counterpart  of  a  signature  page  of  (x)  this  Amendment  and/or  (y)  any  document,
amendment,  approval,  consent,  information,  notice,  certificate,  request,  statement,  disclosure  or  authorization  related  to  this  Amendment
and/or the transactions contemplated hereby (each an “Ancillary Document”) that is an electronic sound, symbol, or process attached to, or
associated with, a contract or other record and adopted by a Person with the intent to sign, authenticate or accept such contract or record
(each, an “Electronic Signature”) transmitted by telecopy, emailed pdf. or any other electronic means that reproduces an image of an actual
executed signature page shall be effective as delivery of a manually executed counterpart of this Amendment or such Ancillary Document, as
applicable. The words “execution,” “signed,” “signature,” “delivery,” and words of like import in or relating to this Amendment and/or any
Ancillary Document shall be deemed to include Electronic Signatures, deliveries or the keeping of records in any electronic form (including
deliveries by telecopy, emailed pdf. or any other electronic means that reproduces an image of an actual executed signature page), each of
which shall be of the same legal effect, validity or enforceability as a manually executed signature, physical delivery thereof or the use of a
paper-based recordkeeping system, as the case may be.
3.
Ratification. This Amendment shall be effective pursuant to Section 10.1 of the Credit Agreement (and approved and ratified
by the Consenting Lenders, the Required Lenders and the Administrative Agent for all purposes under the Loan Documents).
4.
Governing Law. THIS  AMENDMENT  AND  THE  RIGHTS  AND  OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE  PARTIES  HEREUNDER
SHALL BE GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED AND INTERPRETED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAW OF THE STATE OF
NEW YORK.
5.
Section Titles. The section titles contained in this Amendment are and shall be without substantive meaning or content of any
kind whatsoever and are not a part of the agreement between the parties hereto, except when used to reference a section.
6.
Notices. All communications and notices hereunder shall be given as provided in the Credit Agreement.
7.
Severability. The fact that any term or provision of this Amendment is held invalid, illegal or unenforceable as to any person
in any situation in any jurisdiction shall not affect the validity, enforceability or legality of the remaining terms or provisions hereof or the
validity, enforceability or legality of such offending term or provision in any other situation or jurisdiction or as applied to any person.
8.
Successors. The terms of this Amendment shall be binding upon, and shall inure to the benefit of, the parties hereto and their
respective successors and assigns.
4

9.
Jurisdiction; Waiver of Jury Trial. The jurisdiction and waiver of right to trial by jury provisions in Section 10.12 and
Section 10.15, respectively, of the Credit Agreement are incorporated herein by reference mutatis mutandis.
[THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
5

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each of the undersigned has caused its duly authorized officer to execute and deliver this Amendment as
of the date first set forth above.
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY, 
as the Borrower
By:    /s/ Margaret K. Becker                        
Name: Margaret K. Becker
Title: Vice President and Treasurer
Signature Page to Amendment No. 2 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company

JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A., 
as Administrative Agent
By:
/s/ Arina Mavilian
Name:    Arina Mavilian
Title: Authorized Signatory

BANK OF AMERICA, N.A., as a
Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Holli Balzer
Name:    Holli Balzer
Title:    Vice President

MIZUHO BANK, LTD., as a Consenting
Lender
By:
/s/ Edward Sacks
Name:    Edward Sacks
Title:    Authorized Signatory

BNP PARIBAS, as a Lender
By:
/s/ Denis O’Meara
Name:    Denis O’Meara
Title:    Managing Director
By:
/s/ Francis DeLaney
Name:    Francis DeLaney
Title:    Managing Director

BARCLAYS BANK PLC, as a Lender
By:
/s/ Jake Lam
Name:    Jake Lam
Title:    Assistant Vice President

MUFG UNION BANK, N.A., as a
Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Nietzsche Rodricks
Name:    Nietzsche Rodricks
Title:    Managing Director

WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION, as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Gregory R. Gredvig
Name:    Gregory R. Gredvig
Title:    Director

GOLDMAN SACHS BANK USA, as a
Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Dan Martis
Name:    Dan Martis
Title:    Authorized Signatory

BANK OF MONTREAL, CHICAGO
BRANCH, as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Darren Thomas
Name:    Darren Thomas
Title:    Director

CITIBANK, N.A., as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Richard Rivera
Name:    Richard Rivera
Title:    Vice President

PERPETUAL PRIVATE CREDIT POOLED
FUND, as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Lon Erickson
Name:    Lon Erickson
Title:    Vice President

THORNBURG LIMITED TERM INCOME
FUND, as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Lon Erickson
Name:    Lon Erickson
Title:    Vice President

THORNBURG STRATEGIC INCOME
FUND, as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Lon Erickson
Name:    Lon Erickson
Title:    Vice President

EXHIBIT A
$3,000,000,000
TERM LOAN CREDIT AGREEMENT
among
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY, 
as Borrower,
the Several Lenders from Time to Time Parties Hereto,
JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A., 
as Administrative Agent,
BOFA SECURITIES, INC.,
BARCLAYS BANK PLC,
CITIBANK, N.A.,
and GOLDMAN SACHS BANK USA, 
as Co-Syndication Agents,
and
BNP PARIBAS,
CREDIT SUISSE AG, NEW YORK BRANCH,
MIZUHO BANK, LTD.,
MUFG UNION BANK, N.A.,
and WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, 
as Co-Documentation Agents
Dated as of July 1, 2020
as amended by Amendment No. 12 to Credit Agreement dated as of October 29December 31, 2021
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., 
BofA Securities, Inc., 
Barclays Bank PLC, 
Citibank, N.A. 
and Goldman Sachs Bank USA 
as Joint Lead Arrangers and 
Joint Bookrunners

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SECTION 1.    DEFINITIONS    1
1.1    Defined Terms    1
1.2    Other Definitional Provisions and Interpretative Provisions    30
1.3    Divisions    31
1.4    Interest Rates; LIBOR Notification    31
SECTION 2.    AMOUNT AND TERMS OF THE TERM LOANS    32
2.1    Loans    32
2.2    Procedures for Borrowing    32
2.3    [Reserved]    33
2.4    [Reserved]    33
2.5    [Reserved]    33
2.6    Fees, Etc.    33
2.7    Termination of Commitments    33
2.8    Prepayments    33
2.9    Conversion and Continuation Options    34
2.10    Limitations on Eurodollar Tranches    35
2.11    Interest Rates and Payment Dates    35
2.12    Computation of Interest and Fees    36
2.13    Inability to Determine Interest Rate    36
2.14    Pro Rata Treatment and Payments; Notes    38
2.15    Change of Law    39
2.16    Taxes    41
2.17    Indemnity    45
2.18    Change of Lending Office    45
2.19    Replacement of Lenders    46

2.20    Defaulting Lenders    46
SECTION 3.    [RESERVED]    47
SECTION 4.    REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES    47
4.1    Financial Condition    47
4.2    No Change    48
4.3    Existence; Compliance with Law    48
4.4    Power; Authorization; Enforceable Obligations    48
4.5    No Legal Bar    49
4.6    Litigation    49
4.7    No Default    49
4.8    Taxes    49
4.9    Federal Regulations    50
4.10    ERISA    50
4.11    Investment Company Act; Other Regulations    50
4.12    Use of Proceeds    51
4.13    Environmental Matters    51
4.14    Regulatory Matters    51
4.15    Sanctions; Anti-Corruption    51
4.16    Affected Financial Institutions    51
4.17    Solvency    51
4.18    Disclosure    51
4.19    Status of Obligations    52
4.20    Ownership of Property    52
SECTION 5.    CONDITIONS PRECEDENT    52
5.1    Conditions to the Effective Date    52
SECTION 6.    AFFIRMATIVE COVENANTS    54
6.1    Financial Statements    54

6.2    Certificates; Other Information    55
6.3    Payment of Taxes.    56
6.4    Maintenance of Existence; Compliance    56
6.5    Maintenance of Property; Insurance    56
6.6    Inspection of Property; Books and Records; Discussions    56
6.7    Notices    57
6.8    Maintenance of Licenses, etc.    57
6.9    Further Assurances    57
SECTION 7.    NEGATIVE COVENANTS    58
7.1    Indebtedness    58
7.2    Consolidated Capitalization Ratio    60
7.3    Liens    60
7.4    Fundamental Changes    60
7.5    Sale and Lease Back Transactions    60
7.6    Swap Agreements    61
7.7    Amendments to FMB Indenture    61
SECTION 8.    EVENTS OF DEFAULT    61
SECTION 9.    THE AGENTS    64
9.1    Appointment and Authority    64
9.2    Delegation of Duties    64
9.3    Exculpatory Provisions    64
9.4    Reliance by Administrative Agent    65
9.5    Notice of Default    66
9.6    Non-Reliance on Agents and Other Lenders    66
9.7    Indemnification    66
9.8    Agent in Its Individual Capacity    67
9.9    Successor Agents    67

9.10    Documentation Agents and Syndication Agents    68
9.11    Administrative Agent May File Proofs of Claim    68
9.12    Certain ERISA Matters    69
9.13    Erroneous Payment    69
SECTION 10.    MISCELLANEOUS    70
10.1    Amendments and Waivers    70
10.2    Notices    72
10.3    No Waiver; Cumulative Remedies    74
10.4    Survival of Representations and Warranties    74
10.5    Payment of Expenses and Taxes    75
10.6    Successors and Assigns; Participations and Assignments.    76
10.7    Adjustments; Set off    80
10.8    Counterparts; Binding Effect    81
10.9    Severability    81
10.10    Integration    82
10.11    GOVERNING LAW    82
10.12    Submission To Jurisdiction; Waivers    82
10.13    Acknowledgments    83
10.14    Confidentiality    83
10.15    WAIVERS OF JURY TRIAL    84
10.16    USA Patriot Act; Beneficial Ownership Regulation    84
10.17    Judicial Reference    84
10.18    No Advisory or Fiduciary Responsibility    84
10.19    Acknowledgement Regarding Any Supported QFCs    85
10.20    Acknowledgement and Consent to Bail-In of Affected Financial Institutions    85


SCHEDULES:
1.1    Commitments
7.5    Sale and Lease Back Transactions
EXHIBITS:
A    [Reserved]
B    [Reserved]
C    Form of Compliance Certificate
D    Form of Closing Certificate
E    Form of Assignment and Assumption
F    [Reserved]
G    Forms of U.S. Tax Compliance Certificates
H    Form of Note
I    Form of Solvency Certificate

This  TERM  LOAN  CREDIT  AGREEMENT  (this  “Agreement”),  dated  as  of  July  1,  2020,  among  PACIFIC  GAS  AND
ELECTRIC COMPANY, a California corporation (the “Borrower”), the several banks and other financial institutions or entities
from time to time parties to this Agreement (the “Lenders”) and JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A., as administrative agent (in
such capacity, together with any permitted successor thereto, the “Administrative Agent”).
W I T N E S S E T H:
WHEREAS, on January 29, 2019, the Borrower and PG&E Corporation, a California corporation and the holder of all of the issued
and outstanding common stock of the Borrower (“PCG”) filed voluntary petitions for relief in the United States Bankruptcy Court
for the Northern District of California (the “Bankruptcy Court”), and commenced their respective cases under chapter 11 of title 11
of the United States Code;
WHEREAS, on June 19, 2020, the Borrower and PCG filed the Debtors’ and Shareholder Proponents’ Joint Chapter 11 Plan of
Reorganization  Dated  June  19,  2020  [Docket  No.  8048]  (together  with  all  exhibits,  schedules,  annexes,  supplements,  and  other
attachments thereto, and as may be further amended, modified or otherwise changed in accordance with this Agreement, the “Plan
of Reorganization”);
WHEREAS, on June 20, 2020, the Plan of Reorganization was confirmed by the Bankruptcy Court and was consummated on the
Effective Date;
WHEREAS, in connection with the foregoing, the Borrower has requested that the Lenders provide the term loans set forth herein
and the Lenders are willing to make available to the Borrower such term loans upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth
herein; and
WHEREAS, in connection with and pursuant to Amendment No. 1, the Borrower has requested that this Agreement be amended as
set forth in Amendment No. 1.
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1.
DEFINITIONS
1.1
Defined Terms.  As  used  in  this  Agreement,  the  terms  listed  in  this  Section  1.1  shall  have  the  respective
meanings set forth in this Section 1.1.
“18-Month  Tranche  Commitment”:  as  to  each  18-Month  Tranche  Lender,  its  obligation  to  make  Loans  under  the  18-Month
Tranche to the Borrower on the Effective Date pursuant to Section 2.1(b), in an aggregate principal amount equal to the amount set
forth  opposite  such  18-Month  Tranche  Lender’s  name  on  Schedule  1.1,  as  such  amount  may  be  adjusted  from  time  to  time  in
accordance with this Agreement. As of the Effective Date, the aggregate amount of the 18-Month Tranche Commitments for all 18-
Month Tranche Lenders is $1,500,000,000.
“18-Month Tranche Lender”: a Lender with an 18-Month Tranche Commitment or holding 18-Month Tranche Loans.
“18-Month Tranche Loans”: as defined in Section 2.1(b).
“18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A)”: as defined in Section 2.1(b).

“18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B)”: as defined in Section 2.1(b).
“18-Month Tranche Maturity Date”: (a) with respect to the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A), October 1, 2022 and (b)
with respect to the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B), January 1, 2022.
“364-Day Tranche Commitment”: as to each 364-Day Tranche Lender, its obligation to make Loans under the 364-Day Tranche to
the  Borrower  on  the  Effective  Date  pursuant  to  Section  2.1(a),  in  an  aggregate  principal  amount  equal  to  the  amount  set  forth
opposite such 364-Day Tranche Lender’s name on Schedule 1.1, as such amount may be adjusted from time to time in accordance
with this Agreement. As of the Effective Date, the aggregate amount of the 364-Day Tranche Commitments for all 364-Day Tranche
Lenders is $1,500,000,000.
“364-Day Tranche Lender”: a Lender with a 364-Day Tranche Commitment or holding 364-Day Tranche Loans.
“364-Day Tranche Loans”: as defined in Section 2.1(a).
“364-Day Tranche Maturity Date”: the date that is 364 days after the Effective Date.
“ABR”: for any day, a rate per annum equal to the greatest of (a) the Prime Rate in effect on such day, (b) the NYFRB Rate in effect
on such day plus ½ of 1% and (c) the Eurodollar Rate for a one month Interest Period commencing on such day (or if such day is not
a Business Day, the immediately preceding Business Day) plus 1%; provided that for the purpose of this definition, the Eurodollar
Rate for any day shall be based on the Eurodollar Screen Rate (or if the Eurodollar Screen Rate is not available for such one month
Interest Period, the Interpolated Rate) at approximately 11:00 a.m. London time on such day. Any change in the ABR due to a
change in the Prime Rate, the NYFRB Rate or the Eurodollar Rate shall be effective from and including the effective date of such
change in the Prime Rate, the NYFRB Rate or the Eurodollar Rate, respectively. If ABR is being used as an alternate rate of interest
pursuant to Section 2.13 (for the avoidance of doubt, only until any amendment has become effective pursuant to Section 2.13(b)),
then ABR shall be the greater of clauses (a) and (b) above and shall be determined without reference to clause (c) above. If the ABR
as determined pursuant to the foregoing would be less than 1.00%, such rate shall be deemed to be 1.00% for purposes of this
Agreement.
“ABR Loans”: Loans the rate of interest applicable to which is based upon the ABR.
“Administrative Agent”: as defined in the preamble hereto.
“Affected Financial Institution”: (a) any EEA Financial Institution or (b) any UK Financial Institution.
“Affiliate”:  with  respect  to  a  specified  Person,  another  Person  that  directly,  or  indirectly  through  one  or  more  intermediaries,
Controls or is Controlled by or is under common Control with the Person specified.
“Agent Parties”: as defined in Section 10.2(d)(ii).
“Agents”: the collective reference to the Syndication Agents, the Documentation Agents, and the Administrative Agent.

“Agreement”: as defined in the preamble hereto.
“Amendment No. 1”: that certain Amendment No. 1 to Credit Agreement, dated as of the Amendment No. 1 Effective Date, among
the Borrower, each Lender party thereto, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.
“Amendment No. 1 Effective Date”: October 29, 2021.
“Amendment No. 2”: that certain Amendment No. 2 to Credit Agreement, dated as of the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date,
among the Borrower, each Lender party thereto, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.
“Amendment No. 2 Effective Date”: December [●], 2021.
“Anti-Corruption Laws”: as defined in Section 4.15.
“Applicable Margin”: for any day, (a) (i) with respect to any ABR Loans under the 364-Day Tranche, 1.00% per annum and (ii)
with respect to Eurodollar Loans under the 364-Day Tranche, 2.00% per annum and (b) (i) with respect to any ABR Loans under the
18-Month Tranche, 1.25% per annum and (ii) with respect to Eurodollar Loans under the 18-Month Tranche, 2.25% per annum.
“Approved Fund”: with respect to any Lender, any Person (other than a natural person) that is engaged in making, purchasing,
holding or otherwise investing in commercial loans and similar extensions of credit in the ordinary course of its business that is
administered  or  managed  by  (a)  such  Lender,  (b)  an  Affiliate  of  such  Lender  or  (c)  an  entity  or  an  Affiliate  of  any  entity  that
administers or manages such Lender.
“Arrangers”: the Joint Lead Arrangers and Joint Bookrunners identified on the cover hereto.
“A/R Securitization Assets”: (i) any accounts receivable, notes receivable, rights to future accounts receivable, notes receivable or
residuals or other similar rights to payments due or any other rights to payment or related assets in respect of the provision of gas and
electric service to consumers or otherwise (whether then existing or arising in the future) of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries
and the proceeds thereof and (ii) all collateral securing such receivable or asset, all contracts and contract rights, guarantees or other
obligations in respect of such receivable or asset, lockbox accounts and records with respect to such receivables or asset and any
other assets customarily transferred (or in respect of which security interests are customarily granted) together with receivables or
assets in connection with a securitization transaction involving such assets.
“A/R Securitization Subsidiary”: PG&E AR Facility, LLC and any other Subsidiary formed and operating solely for the purpose of
entering into A/R Securitization Transactions and engaging in activities ancillary thereto.
“A/R Securitization Transaction”: any financing transaction or series of financing transactions entered into by the Borrower or any
Subsidiary of the Borrower pursuant to which the Borrower may sell, convey or otherwise transfer to any Person (including, without
limitation, an A/R Securitization Subsidiary), or may grant a security interest in any A/R Securitization Assets and that are (other
than to the extent of the Standard A/R Securitization Obligations) non-recourse to the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries (other than
an A/R Securitization Subsidiary).

“Assignee”: as defined in Section 10.6(b).
“Assignment and Assumption”: an Assignment and Assumption, substantially in the form of Exhibit E.
“Available Tenor”: as of any date of determination and with respect to the then-current Benchmark, as applicable, (x) if the then-
current Benchmark is a term rate, any tenor for such Benchmark that is or may be used for determining the length of an Interest
Period or (y) otherwise, any payment period for interest calculated with reference to such Benchmark, as applicable, pursuant to this
Agreement as of such date.
“Bail-In Action”: the exercise of any Write-Down and Conversion Powers by the applicable Resolution Authority in respect of any
liability of an Affected Financial Institution.
“Bail-In Legislation”:  (a)  with  respect  to  any  EEA  Member  Country  implementing  Article  55  of  Directive  2014/59/EU  of  the
European Parliament and of the Council of the European Union, the implementing law, regulation, rule or requirement for such EEA
Member Country from time to time which is described in the EU Bail-In Legislation Schedule and (b) with respect to the United
Kingdom, Part I of the United Kingdom Banking Act 2009 (as amended from time to time) and any other law, regulation or rule
applicable  in  the  United  Kingdom  relating  to  the  resolution  of  unsound  or  failing  banks,  investment  firms  or  other  financial
institutions or their affiliates (other than through liquidation, administration or other insolvency proceedings).
“Bankruptcy Court”: as defined in the first recital paragraph.
“Benchmark”: initially, the Eurodollar Base Rate; provided that if a replacement of the Benchmark has occurred pursuant to Section
2.13, then “Benchmark” means the applicable Benchmark Replacement to the extent that such Benchmark Replacement has replaced
such  prior  benchmark  rate.  Any  reference  to  “Benchmark”  shall  include,  as  applicable,  the  published  component  used  in  the
calculation thereof.
“Benchmark Replacement”: for any Available Tenor:
(1) for purposes of Section 2.13(b), the first alternative set forth below that can be determined by the Administrative Agent:
(a) the sum of: (i) Term SOFR and (ii) 0.11448% (11.448 basis points) for an Available Tenor of one-month’s duration,
0.26161% (26.161 basis points) for an Available Tenor of three-months’ duration, 0.42826% (42.826 basis points) for an
Available  Tenor  of  six-months’  duration  and  0.71513%  (71.513  basis  points)  for  an  Available  Tenor  of  twelve-months’
duration; provided, that if any Available Tenor of the Eurodollar Base Rate does not correspond to an Available Tenor of
Term  SOFR,  the  Benchmark  Replacement  for  such  Available  Tenor  of  the  Eurodollar  Base  Rate  shall  be  the  closest
corresponding Available Tenor (based on tenor) for Term SOFR, or and if such Available Tenor of the Eurodollar Base Rate
corresponds  equally  to  two  Available  Tenors  of  Term  SOFR,  the  corresponding  tenor  of  Term  SOFR  with  the  shorter
duration shall be applied;
(b)  the  sum  of:  (i)  Daily  Simple  SOFR  and  (ii)  the  spread  adjustment  selected  or  recommended  by  the  Relevant
Governmental  Body  for  the  replacement  of  the  tenor  of  the  Eurodollar  Base  Rate  with  a  SOFR-based  rate  having
approximately the same length as the interest payment period specified in clause (b) of Section

2.13 (which spread adjustment, for the avoidance of doubt, shall be 0.11448% (11.448 basis points); and
(2) for purposes of clause (c) of Section 2.13, the sum of (a) the alternate benchmark rate and (b) an adjustment (which may be a
positive  or  negative  value  or  zero),  in  each  case,  that  has  been  selected  by  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  Borrower  as  the
replacement  for  such  Available  Tenor  of  such  Benchmark  giving  due  consideration  to  any  evolving  or  then-prevailing  market
convention,  including  any  applicable  recommendations  made  by  the  Relevant  Governmental  Body,  for  U.S.  dollar-denominated
syndicated credit facilities at such time;
provided that, if the Benchmark Replacement as determined pursuant to clause (1) or (2) above would be less than the Floor, the
Benchmark Replacement will be deemed to be the Floor for the purposes of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents.
“Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes”: with respect to any Benchmark Replacement, any technical, administrative or
operational  changes (including  changes to the definition of “ABR,” the definition  of “Business Day,” the definition of “Interest
Period,” timing and frequency of determining rates and making payments of interest, timing of borrowing requests or prepayment,
conversion or continuation notices, the applicability and length of lookback periods, the applicability of breakage provisions, the
formula for calculating any successor rates identified pursuant to the definition of “Benchmark Replacement” and other technical,
administrative  or  operational  matters)  that  the  Administrative  Agent  decides  may  be  appropriate  to  reflect  the  adoption  and
implementation of such Benchmark Replacement and to permit the administration thereof by the Administrative Agent in a manner
substantially consistent with market practice (or, if the Administrative Agent decides that adoption of any portion of such market
practice is not administratively feasible or if the Administrative Agent determines that no market practice for the administration of
such Benchmark Replacement exists, in such other manner of administration as the Administrative Agent decides is reasonably
necessary in connection with the administration of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents), the formula, methodology or
convention for applying the successor Floor to the successor Benchmark Replacement.
“Benchmark Transition Event”: with respect to any then-current Benchmark other than the Eurodollar Base Rate, the occurrence
of one or more of the following events: a public statement or publication of information by or on behalf of the administrator of the
then-current  Benchmark,  the  regulatory  supervisor  for  the  administrator  of  such  Benchmark,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  the
NYFRB, an insolvency official with jurisdiction over the administrator for such Benchmark, a resolution authority with jurisdiction
over  the  administrator  for  such  Benchmark  or  a  court  or  an  entity  with  similar  insolvency  or  resolution  authority  over  the
administrator for such Benchmark, announcing or stating that (a) such administrator has ceased or will cease on a specified date to
provide  all  Available  Tenors  of  such  Benchmark,  permanently  or  indefinitely, provided that,  at  the  time  of  such  statement  or
publication,  there is no successor administrator that will continue to provide any Available Tenor of such Benchmark or (b) all
Available Tenors of such Benchmark are or will no longer be representative of the underlying market and economic reality that such
Benchmark is intended to measure and that representativeness will not be restored.
“Beneficial Owner”: as defined in Rule 13d-3 and Rule 13d-5 under the Exchange Act, except that in calculating the beneficial
ownership of any particular “person” (as that term is used in Sections 13(d) and 14(d) of the Exchange Act), such “person” will be
deemed to have beneficial ownership of all securities that such “person” has the right to acquire

by conversion or exercise of other securities, whether such right is currently exercisable or is exercisable only upon the occurrence
of a subsequent condition. The terms “Beneficially Owns” and “Beneficially Owned” have correlative meanings.
“Beneficial  Ownership  Certification”:  a  certification  regarding  beneficial  ownership  or  control  as  required  by  the  Beneficial
Ownership Regulation.
“Beneficial Ownership Regulation”: 31 C.F.R. § 1010.230.
“Benefit Plan”: any of (a) an “employee benefit plan” (as defined in ERISA) that is subject to Title I of ERISA, (b) a “plan” as
defined in and subject to Section 4975 of the Code or (c) any Person whose assets include (for purposes of ERISA Section 3(42) or
otherwise for purposes of Title I of ERISA or Section 4975 of the Code) the assets of any such “employee benefit plan” or “plan”.
“Benefitted Lender”: as defined in Section 10.7(a).
“BHC Act Affiliate”: an “affiliate” (as such term is defined under, and interpreted in accordance with, 12 U.S.C. 1841(k)).
“Bond Delivery Agreement”: (i) that certain Bond Delivery Agreement, dated as of the Effective Date, between the Borrower and
the Administrative Agent and (ii) that certain Bond Delivery Agreement, dated as of the Amendment No. 1 Effective Date, between
the Borrower and the Administrative Agent.
“Bond  Documents”:  collectively,  the  FMB  Indenture,  the  Supplemental  Indenture,  the  Senior  Bonds  and  the  Bond  Delivery
Agreement.
“Borrower”: as defined in the preamble hereto.
“Bridge Facilities”: each of the bridge facilities outstanding, as of any date of determination, pursuant to the terms of the Utility
Commitment Letter and the PCG Commitment Letter.
“Business Day”: a day other than a Saturday, Sunday or other day on which commercial banks in New York City or San Francisco,
California are authorized or required by law to close, provided, that with respect to notices and determinations in connection with,
and payments of principal and interest on, Eurodollar Loans, such day is also a day for trading by and between banks in Dollar
deposits in the London interbank eurodollar market.
“Capital Lease Obligations”: as to any Person, the obligations of such Person to pay rent or other amounts under any lease of (or
other arrangement conveying the right to use) real or personal property, or a combination thereof, which obligations are required to
be classified and accounted for as capital leases on the balance sheet of such Person under GAAP and, for the purposes of this
Agreement, the amount of such obligations at any time shall be the capitalized amount thereof at such time determined in accordance
with GAAP, subject to Section 1.2(f).
“Capital  Stock”:  any  and  all  shares,  interests,  participations  or  other  equivalents  (however  designated)  of  capital  stock  of  a
corporation, any and all equivalent ownership interests in a Person (other than a corporation) and any and all warrants, rights or
options to purchase any of the foregoing.

“Cash Management Agreement”: any agreement to establish or maintain accounts or provide cash management services, including
treasury, depository, overdraft, netting services, cash pooling arrangements, credit or debit card, purchasing card, electronic funds
transfer, automated clearing house, foreign exchange facilities and other cash management arrangements.
“Change of Control”: the occurrence of one of the following:
Section 2.
(A) PCG shall at any time not be the Beneficial Owner of 100% of the common stock of the Borrower or (B) PCG
shall at any time not be the Beneficial Owner of at least 70% of the voting Capital Stock of the Borrower; or
Section 3.
any person or group (within the meaning of the Exchange Act and the rules of the SEC thereunder as of the Effective
Date) shall become the Beneficial Owner of shares representing more than 35% of the voting power of the Capital Stock of PCG; or
Section 4.
at any point during any period of 24 consecutive months, commencing after the Effective Date, individuals who at the
beginning of such 24-month period were directors of PCG, together with any directors whose election or nomination for election to
the board of directors of PCG (whether by the board of directors of PCG or any shareholder of PCG) was approved by a majority of
the  directors  who  either  were  directors  of  PCG  at  the  beginning  of  such  24-month  period  or  whose  election  or  nomination  for
election was so approved, cease to constitute a majority of the board of directors of PCG (it being understood and agreed that, for the
avoidance of doubt, the change of directors of PCG contemplated by the Plan of Reorganization shall not constitute a Change of
Control); or
Section 5.
there shall have been (A) [reserved] or (B) a transfer of the license and/or operating assets constituting more than
10% of the Net Tangible Assets of the Borrower to the State of California, to any other Governmental Authority or to a third party at
the direction of State of California, the CPUC or any similar Governmental Authority.
“Change of Law”: the occurrence, after the Effective Date, of any of the following: (a) the adoption or taking effect of any law,
rule,  regulation,  statute,  treaty,  policy,  guideline  or  directive  by  any  Governmental  Authority,  (b)  any  change  in  any  law,  rule,
regulation,  statute,  treaty,  policy,  guideline  or  directive  or  in  the  application,  interpretation,  promulgation,  implementation,
administration or enforcement thereof by any Governmental Authority or (c) the making or issuance of any request, rule, guideline
or directive (whether or not having the force of law) by any Governmental Authority; provided that notwithstanding anything herein
to the contrary, (x) the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and all requests, rules, guidelines or directives
thereunder  or  issued  in  connection  therewith  and  (y)  all  requests,  rules,  guidelines  or  directives  promulgated  by  the  Bank  for
International Settlements, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (or any successor or similar authority) or the United States
or  foreign  regulatory  authorities,  in  each  case  pursuant  to  Basel  III,  shall  in  each  case  be  deemed  to  be  a  “Change  of  Law”,
regardless of the date enacted, adopted or issued.
“Code”: the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time.
“Commitment”: as to any Lender, its 364-Day Tranche Commitment or 18-Month Tranche Commitment.

“Commitment Letter”: that  certain  Term  Loan  Commitment  Letter  dated  as of May 26,  2020 among  Pacific  Gas  and Electric
Company, as the borrower, PG&E Corporation and the commitment parties from time to time party thereto, as amended, modified or
supplemented from time to time prior to the date hereof.
“Commonly Controlled Entity”: an entity, whether or not incorporated, that is under common control with the Borrower within the
meaning of Section 4001 of ERISA or is part of a group that includes the Borrower and that is treated as a single employer under
Section 414 of the Code.
“Communications”: as defined in Section 10.2(d)(ii).
“Compliance Certificate”: a certificate duly executed by a Responsible Officer substantially in the form of Exhibit C.
“Conduit Lender”: any special purpose corporation organized and administered by any Lender for the purpose of making Loans
otherwise required to be made by such Lender and designated by such Lender in a written instrument; provided, that the designation
by any Lender of a Conduit Lender shall not relieve the designating Lender of any of its obligations to fund a Loan under this
Agreement if, for any reason, its Conduit Lender fails to fund any such Loan, and the designating Lender (and not the Conduit
Lender) shall have the sole right and responsibility to deliver all consents and waivers required or requested under this Agreement
with respect to its Conduit Lender, and provided, further, that no Conduit Lender shall (a) be entitled to receive any greater amount
pursuant  to  Sections  2.15,  2.16,  2.17  or 10.5  than  the  designating  Lender  would  have  been  entitled  to  receive  in  respect  of  the
extensions of credit made by such Conduit Lender or (b) be deemed to have any Commitment.
“Connection Income Taxes”: Other Connection Taxes that are imposed on or measured by net income (however denominated) or
that are franchise Taxes or branch profits Taxes.
“Consolidated Capitalization”: on any date of determination, the sum of (a) Consolidated Total Debt on such date, plus without
duplication,  (b)  (i)  the  amounts  set  forth  opposite  the  captions  “common  shareholders’  equity”  (or  any  similar  caption)  and
“preferred stock” (or any similar caption) on the consolidated balance sheet, prepared in accordance with GAAP, of the Borrower
and  its  Subsidiaries  as  of  such  date,  and  (ii)  the  outstanding  principal  amount  of  any  junior  subordinated  deferrable  interest
debentures or other similar securities issued by the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries after the Effective Date.
“Consolidated Capitalization Ratio”: on any date of determination, the ratio of (a) Consolidated Total Debt to (b) Consolidated
Capitalization.
“Consolidated  Total  Debt”:  at  any  date,  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  all  obligations  of  the  Borrower  and  its  Significant
Subsidiaries at such date that in accordance with GAAP would be classified as debt on a consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower,
and  without  duplication  all  Guarantee  Obligations  of  the  Borrower  and  its  Significant  Subsidiaries  at  such  date  in  respect  of
obligations of any other Person that in accordance with GAAP would be classified as debt on a consolidated balance sheet of such
Person; provided that, the determination of “Consolidated Total Debt” shall exclude, without duplication, (a) the Securitized Bonds
and any Indebtedness under any A/R Securitization Transaction, (b) Indebtedness of the Borrower and its Significant Subsidiaries in
an amount equal to the amount of cash held as cash collateral for any fully

cash collateralized letter of credit issued for the account of the Borrower or any Significant Subsidiary, (c) imputed Indebtedness of
the  Borrower  or  any  Significant  Subsidiary  incurred  in  connection  with  power  purchase  and  fuel  agreements,  (d)  any  junior
subordinated deferrable interest debenture or other similar securities issued by the Borrower and (e) as of any date of determination,
the amount of any securities included within the caption “preferred stock” (or any similar caption) on a consolidated balance sheet,
prepared in accordance with GAAP, of the Borrower as of such date.
“Contractual Obligation”: as to any Person, any provision of any security issued by such Person or of any agreement, instrument or
other undertaking to which such Person is a party or by which it or any of its property is bound.
“Control”: the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of a
Person,  whether  through  the  ability  to  exercise  voting  power,  by  contract  or  otherwise.  “Controlling”  and  “Controlled”  have
meanings correlative thereto.
“Covered Entity”: any of the following:
(i)
a “covered entity” as that term is defined in, and interpreted in accordance with, 12 C.F.R. § 252.82(b);
Section 6.
a “covered bank” as that term is defined in, and interpreted in accordance with, 12 C.F.R. § 47.3(b); or
Section 7.
a “covered FSI” as that term is defined in, and interpreted in accordance with, 12 C.F.R. § 382.2(b).
“Covered Party”: as defined in Section 10.19.
“CPUC”: the California Public Utilities Commission or its successor.
“Daily  Simple  SOFR”:  for  any  day,  SOFR,  with  the  conventions  for  this  rate  (which  will  include  a  lookback)  being
established  by  the  Administrative  Agent  in  accordance  with  the  conventions  for  this  rate  recommended  by  the  Relevant
Governmental Body for determining “Daily Simple SOFR” for syndicated business loans; provided, that if the Administrative Agent
decides that any such convention is not administratively feasible for the Administrative Agent, then the Administrative Agent may
establish another convention in its reasonable discretion.
“Debt  Issuance”:  the  issuance  of  Securitized  Bonds  under  or  pursuant  to  the  Application  of  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric
Company for (1) Administration of Stress Test Methodology Developed Pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 451.2(b) and (2)
Determination That $7.5 Billion of 2017 Catastrophic Wildfire Costs and Expenses Are Stress Test Costs That May Be Financed
Through Issuance of Recovery Bonds Pursuant to Section 451.2(c) and Section 850 et seq. (U39E) - Application No. 20-04-023
dated as of April 30, 2020, or the contemplated subsequent and related application for the issuance of a financing order authorizing
the securitization transaction described in A.20-04-023, to be filed later in 2020 and consolidated therewith, by the Borrower or any
of its Subsidiaries.
“Debtor Relief Laws”: the Bankruptcy Code of the United States, and all other liquidation, conservatorship, bankruptcy, assignment
for the benefit of creditors, moratorium, rearrangement, receivership, insolvency, reorganization, or similar debtor

relief laws of the United States or other applicable jurisdictions from time to time in effect.
“Default”: any of the events specified in Section 8, whether or not any requirement for the giving of notice, the lapse of time, or
both, has been satisfied.
“Default Right”: the meaning assigned to that term in, and shall be interpreted in accordance with, 12 C.F.R. §§ 252.81, 47.2 or
382.1, as applicable.
“Defaulting  Lender”:  subject  to  the  penultimate  paragraph  of  Section  2.20,  any  Lender,  as  reasonably  determined  by  the
Administrative Agent, that has (a) failed to fund any portion of its Loans within two (2) Business Days of the date required to be
funded by it under this Agreement, unless such Lender notifies the Administrative Agent in writing that such failure is the result of
such  Lender’s  good  faith  determination  that  one  or  more  conditions  precedent  to  funding  (each  of  which  conditions  precedent,
together  with  any  applicable  Default,  shall  be  specifically  identified  in  such  writing)  has  not  been  satisfied,  (b)  notified  the
Borrower,  the  Administrative  Agent  or  any  other  Lender  in  writing  that  it  does  not  intend  to  comply  with  any  of  its  funding
obligations under this Agreement or has made a public statement to the effect that it does not intend to comply with its funding
obligations under this Agreement (other than a notice of a good faith dispute or related communications) or generally under other
agreements in which it commits to extend credit, unless such writing or public statement relates to such Lender’s obligation to fund a
Loan  hereunder  and  states  that  such  position  is  based  on  such  Lender’s  good  faith  determination  that  a  condition  precedent  to
funding (which condition precedent, together with any applicable Default, shall be specifically identified in such writing or public
statement) cannot be satisfied, (c) failed, within two (2) Business Days after written request by the Administrative Agent or the
Borrower, to confirm that it will comply with the terms of this Agreement relating to its obligations to fund prospective Loans,
unless the subject of a good faith dispute (provided that such Lender shall cease to be a Defaulting Lender pursuant to this clause (c)
upon receipt of such written confirmation by the Administrative Agent or the Borrower), (d) otherwise failed to pay over to the
Administrative Agent or any other Lender any other amount required to be paid by it under this Agreement within two (2) Business
Days of the date when due, unless the subject of a good faith dispute, or (e) has, or has a direct or indirect parent company that has,
(i) become the subject of a proceeding under any Debtor Relief Law, (ii) had a custodian appointed for it, or has consented to,
approved  of  or  acquiesced  in  any  such  proceeding  or  appointment  or  has  a  parent  company  that  has  become  the  subject  of  a
bankruptcy or insolvency proceeding, or has had a receiver, conservator, trustee or custodian appointed for it, or has consented to,
approved of or acquiesced in any such proceeding or appointment, or (iii) become the subject of a Bail-In Action; provided that (x) if
a Lender would be a “Defaulting Lender” solely by reason of events relating to a parent company of such Lender or solely because a
Governmental Authority has been appointed as receiver, conservator, trustee or custodian for such Lender, in each case as described
in clause (e) above, the Administrative Agent may, in its discretion, determine that such Lender is not a “Defaulting Lender” if and
for so long as the Administrative Agent is satisfied that such Lender will continue to perform its funding obligations hereunder and
(y) a Lender shall not be a Defaulting Lender solely by virtue of the ownership or acquisition of voting stock or any other Capital
Stock in such Lender or a parent company thereof by a Governmental Authority or an instrumentality thereof, or the exercise of
control  over  such  Lender  or  parent  company  thereof,  by  a  Governmental  Authority  or  instrumentality  thereof  so  long  as  such
ownership interest does not result in or provide such Lender with immunity from the jurisdiction of courts within the United States
or from the enforcement of judgments or writs of attachment on its assets or permit such Lender (or such Governmental Authority)
to reject, repudiate, disavow or disaffirm

any contracts or agreements made with such Lender. Any determination by the Administrative Agent that a Lender is a Defaulting
Lender under any one or more of clauses (a) through (e) above shall be conclusive and binding absent manifest error, and such
Lender shall be deemed to be a Defaulting Lender (subject to the penultimate paragraph of Section 2.20) upon delivery of written
notice of such determination to the Borrower and each Lender.
“Disposition”:  with  respect  to  any  property,  any  sale,  lease,  sale  and  leaseback,  assignment,  conveyance,  transfer  or  other
disposition thereof. The term “Dispose of” shall have a correlative meaning.
“Documentation Agents”: as defined on the cover hereto.
“Dollars” and “$”: dollars in lawful currency of the United States.
“Early Opt-in Effective Date”: with respect to any Early Opt-in Election, the sixth (6th) Business Day after the date notice of such
Early Opt-in Election is provided to the Lenders, so long as the Administrative Agent has not received, by 5:00 p.m. (New York City
time) on the fifth (5th) Business Day after the date notice of such Early Opt-in Election is provided to the Lenders, written notice of
objection to such Early Opt-in Election from Lenders comprising the Required Lenders.
“Early Opt-in Election”: the occurrence of the following:
(1)    a notification by the Administrative Agent to (or the request by the Borrower to the Administrative Agent to notify) each of the
other parties hereto that at least five currently outstanding U.S. dollar-denominated syndicated credit facilities in the U.S. syndicated
loan market at such time contain (as a result of amendment or as originally executed) a SOFR-based rate (including SOFR, a term
SOFR or any other rate based upon SOFR) as a benchmark rate (and such syndicated credit facilities are identified in such notice and
are publicly available for review); and
(2)    the joint election by the Administrative Agent and the Borrower to trigger a fallback from Eurodollar Base Rate and the
provision by the Administrative Agent of written notice of such election to the Lenders.
“EEA Financial Institution”: (a) any credit institution or investment firm established in any EEA Member Country which is subject
to the supervision of an EEA Resolution Authority, (b) any entity established in an EEA Member Country which is a parent of an
institution described in clause (a) of this definition, or (c) any financial institution established in an EEA Member Country which is a
subsidiary of an institution described in clauses (a) or (b) of this definition and is subject to consolidated supervision with its parent.
“EEA Member Country”: any of the member states of the European Union, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.
“EEA Resolution Authority”: any public administrative authority or any person entrusted with public administrative authority of
any EEA Member Country (including any delegee) having responsibility for the resolution of any EEA Financial Institution.
“Effective Date”: the date on which the conditions precedent set forth in Section 5.1 shall have been satisfied or waived, which date
is July 1, 2020.

“Eligible Assignee”: (a) any commercial bank or other financial institution having a senior unsecured debt rating by Moody’s of A3
or better and by S&P of A- or better, which is domiciled in a country which is a member of the OECD or (b) with respect to any
Person referred to in the preceding clause (a), any other Person that is engaged in making, purchasing, holding or investing in bank
loans and similar extensions of credit in the ordinary course of business all of the Capital Stock of which is owned, directly or
indirectly, by such Person; provided that in the case of clause (b), the Administrative Agent shall have consented to the designation
of such Person as an Eligible Assignee (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed).
“Environmental Laws”: any and all foreign, Federal, state, local or municipal laws, rules, orders, regulations, statutes, ordinances,
codes, decrees, requirements of any Governmental Authority or other Requirements of Law (including common law) regulating,
relating to or imposing liability or standards of conduct concerning protection of human health or the environment, as now or may at
any time hereafter be in effect.
“ERISA”: the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended from time to time.
“ERISA Event”: (a) any Reportable Event; (b) the failure of the Borrower or any Commonly Controlled Entity to timely make a
required contribution with respect to any Plan or any Multiemployer Plan; (c) the imposition of a Lien under Section 430 of the Code
or Section 303 of ERISA with respect to any Single Employer Plan; (d) the failure of the Borrower or any Commonly Controlled
Entity to meet the minimum funding standard under Section 412 or 430 of the Code with respect to any Plan or the filing of an
application for a funding waiver with respect to any Single Employer Plan; (e) the incurrence by the Borrower or any Commonly
Controlled Entity of any liability under Title IV of ERISA, including with respect to the termination of any Plan (other than the
payment  of  PBGC  premiums  in  the  ordinary  course);  (f)  (i)  the  termination  of,  or  the  filing  or  receipt  of  a  notice  of  intent  to
terminate, a Single Employer Plan under Section 4041 of ERISA, or the treatment of a plan amendment as a termination under
Section 4041 of ERISA, or (ii) (A) the appointment of a trustee to administer a Single Employer Plan under Section 4042, or (B) the
institution by the PBGC of proceedings to terminate a Single Employer Plan or to have a trustee appointed to administer a Single
Employer Plan, or receipt by the Borrower of notice from the PBGC thereof, where such proceedings continue unstayed or in effect
for more than 60 days, or such notice is not withdrawn by the PBGC within 60 days following delivery by PBGC; (g) the incurrence
by the Borrower or any Commonly Controlled Entity of any liability with respect to the complete withdrawal or partial withdrawal
under Title IV of ERISA from any Multiemployer Plan; (h) the receipt by the Borrower or any Commonly Controlled Entity of any
notice from a Multiemployer Plan concerning the imposition of Withdrawal Liability; (i) receipt of notification by Borrower or any
Commonly Controlled Entity from a Multiemployer Plan that such Multiemployer Plan is in endangered or critical status (within the
meaning of Section 305 of ERISA) or in Insolvency; (j) the incurrence by the Borrower or any Commonly Controlled Entity of any
liability  pursuant  to  Section  4063  or  4064  of  ERISA  or  a  substantial  cessation  of  operations  with  respect  to  a  Plan  within  the
meaning of Section 4062(e) of ERISA; (k) the posting of a bond or security under Section 436(f) of the Code with respect to any
Plan; or (l) the Borrower incurs material tax liability with respect to any Plan (including Sections 4975, 4980B, 4980D, 4980H and
4980I of the Code, as applicable).
“Erroneous Payment”: as defined in Section 9.13(a).

“EU  Bail-In  Legislation  Schedule”:  the  EU  Bail-In  Legislation  Schedule  published  by  the  Loan  Market  Association  (or  any
successor person), as in effect from time to time.
“Eurocurrency Liabilities”: as defined in Regulation D of the Federal Reserve Board.
“Eurocurrency  Reserve  Requirements”:  of  any  Lender  for  any  Interest  Period  as  applied  to  a  Eurodollar  Loan,  the  reserve
percentage applicable during such Interest Period (or if more than one such percentage shall be so applicable, the daily average of
such percentages for those days in such Interest Period during any such percentage shall be so applicable) under any regulations of
the Federal Reserve Board or other Governmental Authority having jurisdiction with respect to determining the maximum reserve
requirement (including basic, supplemental and emergency reserves) for such Lender with respect to liabilities or assets consisting of
or including Eurocurrency Liabilities having a term equal to such Interest Period.
“Eurodollar  Base  Rate”:  with  respect  to  each  day  during  each  Interest  Period  pertaining  to  a  Eurodollar  Loan,  the  Eurodollar
Screen Rate at approximately 11:00 a.m., London time, two Business Days prior to the commencement of such Interest Period;
provided that if the Eurodollar  Screen Rate shall not be available  at such time for such Interest Period (an “Impacted Interest
Period”) then the Eurodollar Base Rate shall be the Interpolated Rate.
“Eurodollar Loans”: Loans the rate of interest applicable to which is based upon the Eurodollar Rate.
“Eurodollar  Rate”:  with  respect  to  each  day  during  each  Interest  Period  pertaining  to  a  Eurodollar  Loan,  a  rate  per  annum
determined for such day in accordance with the following formula (rounded upwards, if necessary, to the next 1/16 of 1%):
Eurodollar Base Rate
1.00 - Eurocurrency Reserve Requirements
“Eurodollar Screen Rate”: for any day and time, with respect to any Eurodollar Loan for any Interest Period, the London interbank
offered rate as administered by ICE Benchmark Administration (or any other Person that takes over the administration of such rate)
for a period equal in length to such Interest Period as displayed on such day and time on pages LIBOR01 or LIBOR02 of the Reuters
screen that displays such rate (or, in the event such rate does not appear on a Reuters page or screen, on any successor or substitute
page on such screen that displays such rate, or on the appropriate page of such other information service that publishes such rate
from time to time as selected by the Administrative Agent in its reasonable discretion); provided that if the Eurodollar Screen Rate
as so determined would be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to zero for the purposes of this Agreement.
“Eurodollar Tranche”: the collective reference to Eurodollar Loans the then current Interest Periods with respect to all of which
begin on the same date and end on the same later date (whether or not such Loans shall originally have been made on the same day).
“Event of Default”: any of the events specified in Section 8, provided that any requirement for the giving of notice, the lapse of
time, or both, has been satisfied.

“Exchange Act”: Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
“Excluded Taxes”: any of the following Taxes imposed on or with respect to any Recipient or required to be withheld or deducted
from a payment to a Recipient, (a) Taxes imposed on or measured by net income (however denominated), franchise Taxes, and
branch profits Taxes, in each case, (i) imposed as a result of such Recipient being organized under the laws of, or having its principal
office or, in the case of any Lender, its lending office located in, the jurisdiction imposing such Tax (or any political subdivision
thereof) or (ii) that are Other Connection Taxes, (b) in the case of a Lender, U.S. federal withholding Taxes imposed on amounts
payable to or for the account of such Lender with respect to an applicable interest in a Loan pursuant to a law in effect on the date on
which  (i)  such  Lender  acquires  such  interest  in  the  Loan  (other  than  pursuant  to  an  assignment  request  by  the  Borrower  under
Section 2.19) or (ii) such Lender changes its lending office, except in each case to the extent that, pursuant to Section 2.16(a) or (c),
amounts with respect to such Taxes were payable either to such Lender’s assignor immediately before such Lender became a party
hereto  or  to  such  Lender  immediately  before  it  changed  its  lending  office,  (c)  Taxes  attributable  to  such  Recipient’s  failure  to
comply with Section 2.16(e) and (d) any U.S. federal withholding Taxes imposed pursuant to FATCA.
“FATCA”:  Sections  1471  through  1474  of  the  Code,  as  of  the  Effective  Date  (or  any  amended  or  successor  version  that  is
substantively  comparable  and  not  materially  more  onerous  to  comply  with),  any  current  or  future  regulations  or  official
interpretations thereof and any agreements entered into pursuant to Section 1471(b)(1) of the Code.
“FCA”: as defined in Section 2.13(b).
“FCPA”: as defined in Section 4.15.
“Federal Funds Effective Rate”: for any day, the rate calculated by the NYFRB based on such day’s federal funds transactions by
depositary institutions, as determined in such manner as shall be set forth on the NYFRB’s Website from time to time, and published
on the next succeeding Business Day by the NYFRB as the effective federal funds rate; provided that if the Federal Funds Effective
Rate as so determined would be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to be zero for the purposes of this Agreement.
“Federal Reserve Board”: the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System of the United States of America.
“First Mortgage Bonds”: bonds issued by the Borrower pursuant to the FMB Indenture.
“Floor”:  the  benchmark  rate  floor,  if  any,  provided  in  this  Agreement  initially  (as  of  the  execution  of  this  Agreement,  the
modification, amendment or renewal of this Agreement or otherwise) with respect to Eurodollar Base Rate.
“FMB Indenture”: the Indenture of Mortgage (Mortgage), dated as of June 19, 2020, between the Borrower and the Indenture
Trustee (as supplemented by the Supplemental Indenture) and as further supplemented or amended from time to time.
“Foreign Lender”: a Lender that is not a U.S. Person.
“FPA”: the Federal Power Act, as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.

“Funding Office”: the office of the Administrative Agent specified in Section 10.2(a) or such other office as may be specified from
time to time by the Administrative Agent as its funding office by written notice to the Borrower and the Lenders.
“GAAP”: generally accepted accounting principles in the United States as in effect from time to time, except as noted below. In the
event that any “Change in Accounting Principles” (as defined below) shall occur and such change results in a change in the method
of calculation of financial covenants, standards or terms in this Agreement, then, upon the request of the Borrower or the Required
Lenders,  the  Borrower  and  the  Administrative  Agent  agree  to  enter  into  negotiations  in  order  to  amend  such  provisions  of  this
Agreement so as to reflect equitably such Change in Accounting Principles with the desired result that the criteria for evaluating the
Borrower’s  financial  condition  shall  be  the  same  after  such  Change  in  Accounting  Principles  as  if  such  Change  in  Accounting
Principles had not been made. Until such time as such an amendment shall have been executed and delivered by the Borrower, the
Administrative Agent and the Required Lenders, all financial covenants, standards and terms in this Agreement shall continue to be
calculated or construed as if such Change in Accounting Principles had not occurred. “Change in Accounting Principles” refers to
(i) changes in accounting principles required by the promulgation of any rule, regulation, pronouncement or opinion by the Financial
Accounting  Standards  Board  of the American  Institute  of Certified  Public  Accountants  or any successor  thereto,  the SEC or, if
applicable,  the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board and (ii) any change in the application  of GAAP concurred  by the
Borrower’s independent public accountants and disclosed in writing to the Administrative Agent.
“Governmental Authority”:  any  nation  or  government,  any  state  or  other  political  subdivision  thereof,  any  agency,  authority,
instrumentality, regulatory body, court, central bank or other entity exercising executive, legislative, judicial, taxing, regulatory or
administrative functions of or pertaining to government, any securities exchange and any self-regulatory organization (including the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners and supra-national bodies such as the European Union or the European Central
Bank).
“Guarantee  Obligation”:  as  to  any  Person  (the  “guaranteeing  person”),  any  obligation,  including  a  reimbursement,
counterindemnity  or  similar  obligation,  of  the  guaranteeing  person  that  guarantees  any  Indebtedness,  leases,  dividends  or  other
obligations  (the  “primary obligations”)  of  any  other  third  Person  (the  “primary obligor”)  in  any  manner,  whether  directly  or
indirectly,  including  any  obligation  of  the  guaranteeing  person,  whether  or  not  contingent,  (i)  to  purchase  any  such  primary
obligation or any property constituting direct or indirect security therefor, (ii) to advance or supply funds (1) for the purchase or
payment of any such primary obligation or (2) to maintain working capital or equity capital of the primary obligor or otherwise to
maintain the net worth or solvency of the primary obligor, (iii) to purchase property, securities or services primarily for the purpose
of  assuring  the  owner  of  any  such  primary  obligation  of  the  ability  of  the  primary  obligor  to  make  payment  of  such  primary
obligation, (iv) otherwise to assure or hold harmless the owner of any such primary obligation against loss in respect thereof or (v) to
reimburse or indemnify an issuer of a letter of credit, surety bond or guarantee issued by such issuer in respect of primary obligations
of a primary obligor other than the Borrower or any Significant Subsidiary; provided, however, that the term Guarantee Obligation
shall  not  include  endorsements  of  instruments  for  deposit  or  collection  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business.  The  amount  of  any
Guarantee  Obligation  of  any  guaranteeing  person  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  lower  of  (a)  an  amount  equal  to  the  stated  or
determinable amount of the primary obligation in respect of which such Guarantee Obligation is made and (b) the maximum amount
for which such guaranteeing

person may be liable pursuant to the terms of the instrument embodying such Guarantee Obligation, unless such primary obligation
and  the  maximum  amount  for  which  such  guaranteeing  person  may  be  liable  are  not  stated  or  determinable,  in  which  case  the
amount  of  such  Guarantee  Obligation  shall  be  such  guaranteeing  person’s  reasonably  anticipated  liability  in  respect  thereof  as
determined by the Borrower in good faith.
“IBA”: as defined in Section 2.13(b).
“Indebtedness”: of any Person at any date, without duplication, (a) all indebtedness of such Person for borrowed money, (b) all
obligations of such Person for the deferred purchase price of property or services (other than trade payables, including under energy
procurement and transportation contracts, incurred in the ordinary course of such Person’s business), (c) all obligations of such
Person  evidenced  by  notes,  bonds,  debentures  or  other  similar  instruments,  (d)  all  indebtedness  created  or  arising  under  any
conditional sale or other title retention agreement with respect to property acquired by such Person (even though the rights and
remedies of the seller or lender under such agreement in the event of default are limited to repossession or sale of such property), (e)
all Capital Lease Obligations of such Person, (f) all obligations of such Person, contingent or otherwise, as an account party or
applicant  under  or  in  respect  of  acceptances,  letters  of  credit,  surety  bonds  or  similar  arrangements  (other  than  reimbursement
obligations, which are not due and payable on such date, in respect of documentary letters of credit issued to provide for the payment
of goods and services in the ordinary course of business), (g) the liquidation value of all mandatorily redeemable preferred Capital
Stock of such Person, (h) all Guarantee Obligations of such Person in respect of obligations of the kind referred to in clauses (a)
through (g) above, (i) all obligations of the kind referred to in clauses (a) through (h) above secured by (or for which the holder of
such  obligation  has  an  existing  right,  contingent  or  otherwise,  to  be  secured  by)  any  Lien  on  property  (including  accounts  and
contract rights) owned by such Person, whether or not such Person has assumed or become liable for the payment of such obligation
(provided, that if such Person is not liable for such obligation, the amount of such Person’s Indebtedness with respect thereto shall be
deemed to be the lesser of the stated amount of such obligation and the value of the property subject to such Lien), and (j) for the
purposes of Sections 7.1 and 8(e) only, all obligations of such Person in respect of Swap Agreements, provided that Indebtedness as
used in this Agreement shall exclude any Non-Recourse Debt and any obligations under any A/R Securitization Transaction. The
Indebtedness of any Person shall include the Indebtedness of any other entity (including any partnership in which such Person is a
general partner) to the extent such Person is liable therefor as a result of such Person’s ownership interest in or other relationship
with such entity, except to the extent the terms of such Indebtedness expressly provide that such Person is not liable therefor.
“Indebtedness Covenant Release Date”: the date of the expiration of the temporary waiver from its authorized capital structure
granted by the CPUC on May 28, 2020.
“Indemnified Liabilities”: as defined in Section 10.5.
“Indemnified Taxes”: (a) Taxes, other than Excluded Taxes, imposed on or with respect to any payment made by or on account of
any obligation of the Borrower under any Loan Document and (b) to the extent not otherwise described in (a), Other Taxes.
“Indemnitee”: as defined in Section 10.5.
“Indenture Trustee”: The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. and any successor thereto as trustee under the FMB
Indenture.

“Insolvency”: with respect to any Multiemployer Plan, the condition that such plan is insolvent within the meaning of Section 4245
of ERISA.
“Interest Payment Date”: (a) as to any ABR Loan, the last day of each March, June, September and December to occur while such
Loan is outstanding and the final maturity date of such Loan, (b) as to any Eurodollar Loan having an Interest Period of three months
or less, the last day of such Interest Period, (c) as to any Eurodollar Loan having an Interest Period longer than three months, each
day that is three months, or a whole multiple thereof, after the first day of such Interest Period and the last day of such Interest
Period and (d) as to any Loan, the date of any repayment or prepayment made in respect thereof.
“Interest Period”: as to any Eurodollar Loan, (a) initially, the period commencing on the borrowing or conversion date, as the case
may be, with respect to such Eurodollar Loan and ending one week thereafter or one, three or six or (if agreed to by all Lenders)
twelve months thereafter, as selected by the Borrower in its notice of borrowing or notice of conversion, as the case may be, given
with respect thereto; and (b) thereafter, each period commencing on the last day of the next preceding Interest Period applicable to
such Eurodollar  Loan and ending one, three or six or (if agreed to by all Lenders) twelve months thereafter, as selected by the
Borrower by irrevocable notice to the Administrative Agent not later than 12:00 Noon, New York City time, on the date that is three
Business  Days  prior  to  the  last  day  of  the  then  current  Interest  Period  with  respect  thereto; provided that,  all  of  the  foregoing
provisions relating to Interest Periods are subject to the following:
(i)
if any Interest Period would otherwise end on a day that is not a Business Day, such Interest Period shall be extended
to the next succeeding Business Day unless the result of such extension would be to carry such Interest Period into
another calendar month in which event such Interest Period shall end on the immediately preceding Business Day;
Section 8.
the Borrower may not select an Interest Period that would extend beyond the applicable Maturity Date;
Section 9.
any Interest Period that begins on the last Business Day of a calendar month (or on a day for which there is no
numerically corresponding day in the calendar month at the end of such Interest Period) shall end on the last Business Day of a
calendar month;
Section 10.
[reserved];
Section 11.
at the election of the Borrower, the initial Interest Period for any Eurodollar Loans made on the Effective Date, shall
commence on the Effective Date and end on the last day of the calendar month during which the Effective Date occurs; and
Section 12.
the option to elect a one week Interest Period shall only be available during the calendar year ending December 31,
2021 and solely to the extent such Interest Period is available to the Administrative Agent.
“Interpolated Rate”: at any time, for any Interest Period, the rate per annum (rounded to the same number of decimal places as the
Eurodollar  Screen  Rate)  determined  by  the  Administrative  Agent  (which  determination  shall  be  conclusive  and  binding  absent
manifest error) to be equal to the rate that results from interpolating on a linear basis between: (a) the Eurodollar Screen Rate for the
longest period (for which the Eurodollar

Screen Rate is available) that is shorter than the Impacted Interest Period; and (b) the Eurodollar Screen Rate for the shortest period
(for which that Eurodollar Screen Rate is available) that exceeds the Impacted Interest Period, in each case, at such time.
“IRS”: the United States Internal Revenue Service.
“knowledge of the Borrower”: actual knowledge of any Responsible Officer of the Borrower.
“Laws”: collectively, all international, foreign, federal, state and local statutes, treaties, rules, guidelines, regulations, ordinances,
codes  and  administrative  or  judicial  precedents  or  authorities,  including  the  interpretation  or  administration  thereof  by  any
Governmental Authority charged with the enforcement, interpretation or administration thereof, and all applicable administrative
orders, directed duties, requests, licenses, authorizations and permits of, and agreements with, any Governmental Authority, in each
case whether or not having the force of law.
“Lenders”:  as  defined  in  the  preamble  hereto,  including  each  Lender  set  forth  under  the  heading  “Lender”  on  Schedule  I  of
Amendment No. 1 and their respective successors and assigns as permitted hereunder; provided, that unless the context otherwise
requires, each reference herein to the Lenders shall be deemed to include any Conduit Lender.
“LIBOR”: as defined in Section 1.4.
“Lien”: any mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, assignment, deposit arrangement, encumbrance, lien (statutory or other), charge or
other  security  interest  or  any  preference,  priority  or  other  security  agreement  or  preferential  arrangement  of  any  kind  or  nature
whatsoever (including any conditional sale or other title retention agreement and any Capital Lease Obligation having substantially
the same economic effect as any of the foregoing).
“Loans”: the 364-Day Tranche Loans and the 18-Month Tranche Loans.
“Loan Documents”: this Agreement, the Notes, the Supplemental Indenture, the Senior Bonds, the Bond Delivery Agreement, the
FMB Indenture and, in each case, any amendment, waiver, supplement or other modification to any of the foregoing; provided, that
the term “Loan Documents” shall not include the FMB Indenture for any purposes under Section 2.16, Section 8 or Section 10 (other
than for the purposes of Sections 10.1(iv) 10.1(x)).
“Material  Adverse  Effect”:  (a)  a  change  in  the  business,  property,  operations  or  financial  condition  of  the  Borrower  and  its
Subsidiaries taken as a whole that could reasonably be expected to materially and adversely affect the Borrower’s ability to perform
its obligations under the Loan Documents or (b) a material adverse effect on (i) the validity or enforceability of this Agreement or
any of the other Loan Documents or (ii) the rights and remedies of the Administrative Agent and the Lenders, taken as a whole,
under this Agreement or any other Loan Document.
“Materials of Environmental Concern”:  any  gasoline  or  petroleum  (including  crude  oil  or  any  fraction  thereof)  or  petroleum
products or any hazardous or toxic substances, materials or wastes, defined or regulated as such in or under any Environmental Law,
including asbestos, polychlorinated biphenyls and urea-formaldehyde insulation.

“Maturity Date”: (a) with respect to the 364-Day Tranche Loans, the 364-Day Tranche Maturity Date, and (b) with respect to the
18-Month Tranche Loans, the 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date.
“Moody’s”: Moody’s Investors Service, Inc.
“Mortgaged Property”: as defined in the FMB Indenture.
“Multiemployer Plan”: a plan that is a multiemployer plan as defined in Section 4001(a)(3) of ERISA.
“Net Cash Proceeds”: with respect to any Debt Issuance, the excess, if any, of (i) cash actually received by the Borrower or its
Subsidiaries  in  connection  with  such  incurrence,  issuance,  offering  or  placement  over  (ii)  the  underwriting  discounts  and
commissions and other fees and expenses incurred by the Borrower or its Subsidiaries in connection with such incurrence, issuance,
offering or placement.
“Net Tangible Assets”: the total amount of the Borrower’s assets determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP as
of the last day of the most recently ended fiscal quarter for which financial statements have been delivered under Section 6.1, less (a)
the  sum  of  the  Borrower’s  consolidated  current  liabilities  determined  in  accordance  with  GAAP,  and  (b)  the  amount  of  the
Borrower’s consolidated assets classified as intangible assets, determined in accordance with GAAP.
“Non-Recourse Debt”: Indebtedness of the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries that is incurred in connection with the
acquisition, construction, sale, transfer or other Disposition of specific assets, to the extent recourse, whether contractual or as a
matter of law, for non-payment of such Indebtedness is limited (a) to such assets, or (b) if such assets are (or are to be) held by a
Subsidiary formed solely for such purpose, to such Subsidiary or the Capital Stock of such Subsidiary.
“Notes”: as defined in Section 2.14(f).
“NYFRB”: the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
“NYFRB Rate”: for any day, the greater of (a) the Federal Funds Effective Rate in effect on such day and (b) the Overnight Bank
Funding  Rate  in  effect  on  such  day  (or  for  any  day  that  is  not  a  Business  Day,  for  the  immediately  preceding  Business  Day);
provided that if none of such rates are published for any day that is a Business Day, the term “NYFRB Rate” means the rate for a
federal funds transaction quoted at 11:00 a.m. (New York City time) on such day received by the Administrative Agent from a
federal funds broker of recognized standing selected by it; provided, further, that if any of the aforesaid rates as so determined would
be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to be zero for purposes of this Agreement.
“NYFRB’s Website”: the website of the NYFRB at http://www.newyorkfed.org, or any successor source.
“Obligations”: the unpaid principal of and interest on (including, without limitation, interest accruing after the maturity of the Loans
and interest accruing after the filing of any petition in bankruptcy, or the commencement of any insolvency, reorganization or like
proceeding, relating to the Borrower, whether or not a claim for post-filing or post-petition interest is allowed in such proceeding)
the Loans and all other obligations and liabilities of the Borrower to the Administrative Agent or to any Lender, whether direct or

indirect, absolute or contingent, due or to become due, or now existing or hereafter incurred, which may arise under, out of, or in
connection with, this Agreement, any other Loan Document or any other document made, delivered or given in connection herewith
or therewith,  whether  on  account  of principal,  interest,  reimbursement  obligations,  fees,  indemnities,  costs,  expenses  (including,
without limitation, all fees, charges and disbursements of counsel to the Administrative Agent or to any Lender that are required to
be paid by the Borrower pursuant hereto) or otherwise.
“OECD”: the countries constituting the “Contracting Parties” to the Convention on the Organisation For Economic Co-operation
and Development, as such term is defined in Article 4 of such Convention.
“Other Connection Taxes”: with respect to any Recipient, Taxes imposed as a result of a present or former connection between
such  Recipient  and  the  jurisdiction  imposing  such  Tax  (other  than  connections  arising  from  such  Recipient  having  executed,
delivered, become a party to, performed its obligations under, received payments under, received or perfected a security interest
under, engaged in any other transaction pursuant to or enforced any Loan Document, or sold or assigned an interest in any Loan or
Loan Document).
“Other Taxes”: all present or future stamp, court or documentary, intangible, recording, filing or similar Taxes that arise from any
payment made under, from the execution, delivery, performance, enforcement or registration of, from the receipt or perfection of a
security interest under, or otherwise with respect to, any Loan Document, except any such Taxes that are Other Connection Taxes
imposed with respect to an assignment (other than an assignment made pursuant to Section 2.19).
“Overnight  Bank  Funding  Rate”:  for  any  day,  the  rate  comprised  of  both  overnight  federal  funds  and  overnight  Eurodollar
borrowings by U.S.-managed banking offices of depository institutions, as such composite rate shall be determined by the NYFRB
as set forth on the NYFRB’s Website from time to time, and published on the next succeeding Business Day by the NYFRB as an
overnight bank funding rate.
“Participant”: as defined in Section 10.6(c).
“Participant Register”: as defined in Section 10.6(c)(iii).
“Patriot Act”: as defined in Section 10.16.
“Payment Recipient”: as defined in Section 9.13(a).
“PBGC”: the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation established pursuant to Subtitle A of Title IV of ERISA (or any successor).
“PCG”: as defined in the first recital paragraph.
“PCG  Commitment  Letter”:  that  certain  Commitment  Letter  dated  as  of  October  4,  2019  among  PG&E  Corporation,  as  the
borrower, Pacific Gas and Electric Company and the commitment parties from time to time party thereto, as amended, modified or
supplemented from time to time prior to the date hereof.
“PCG Revolving Credit Agreement”: that certain Credit Agreement dated as of the Effective Date, among PCG, the lenders from
time to time party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.

“Percentage”: as to any Lender at any time with respect to a Tranche, the percentage which the aggregate principal amount of such
Lender’s Loans then outstanding constitutes of the aggregate principal amount of the Loans then outstanding with respect to such
Tranche.
“Permitted  Refinancing”:  with  respect  to  any  Indebtedness  (the  “Refinanced  Indebtedness”),  any  extension,  refinancing,
refunding or replacement thereof with Indebtedness provided that (i) the amount of such Indebtedness does not exceed the aggregate
principal amount of the Refinanced Indebtedness, plus any premium, interest, fee or expenses payable in connection therewith, (ii)
the  final  maturity  date  of  such  Indebtedness  is  no  earlier  than  the  maturity  date  of  the  Refinanced  Indebtedness,  and  (iii)  the
weighted average life to maturity of such Indebtedness is not shorter than the weighted average life to maturity of the Refinanced
Indebtedness.
“Person”:  an  individual,  partnership,  corporation,  limited  liability  company,  business  trust,  joint  stock  company,  trust,
unincorporated association, joint venture, Governmental Authority or other entity of whatever nature.
“Plan”:  at  a  particular  time,  any  employee  benefit  plan  that  is  covered  by  ERISA  and  in  respect  of  which  the  Borrower  or  a
Commonly Controlled Entity is (or, if such plan were terminated at such time, would under Section 4069 of ERISA be deemed to
be) an “employer” as defined in Section 3(5) of ERISA.
“Plan of Reorganization”: as defined in the second recital paragraph.
“Platform”: as defined in Section 10.2(d).
“Prime Rate”: the rate of interest last quoted by The Wall Street Journal as the “Prime Rate” in the U.S. or, if The Wall Street
Journal ceases to quote such rate, the highest per annum interest rate published by the Federal Reserve Board in Federal Reserve
Statistical Release H.15 (519) (Selected Interest Rates) as the “bank prime loan” rate or, if such rate is no longer quoted therein, any
similar rate quoted therein (as determined by the Administrative Agent) or in any similar release by the Federal Reserve Board (as
determined by the Administrative Agent). Each change in the Prime Rate shall be effective from and including the date such change
is publicly announced or quoted as being effective.
“PTE”: a prohibited transaction class exemption issued by the U.S. Department of Labor, as any such exemption may be amended
from time to time.
“QFC”: the meaning assigned to the term “qualified financial contract” in, and shall be interpreted in accordance with, 12 U.S.C.
5390(c)(8)(D).
“QFC Credit Support” in Section 10.19.
“Qualified  Securitization  Bond  Issuer”:  a  Subsidiary  of  the  Borrower  formed  and  operating  solely  for  the  purpose  of  (a)
purchasing and owning property created under a “financing order” (as such term is defined in the California Public Utilities Code) or
similar order issued by the CPUC, (b) issuing such securities pursuant to such order, (c) pledging its interests in such property to
secure such securities and (d) engaging in activities ancillary to those described in (a), (b) and (c).
“Rating”: each rating announced by S&P and Moody’s in respect of the Borrower’s senior secured debt.

“Recipient”: the Administrative Agent or any Lender.
“Register”: as defined in Section 10.6(b).
“Regulation U”: Regulation U of the Federal Reserve Board as in effect from time to time.
“Related Parties”:  with  respect  to  any  Person,  such  Person’s  Affiliates  and  the  partners,  directors,  officers,  employees,  agents,
trustees, administrators, managers, advisors and representatives of such Person and of such Person’s Affiliates.
“Relevant Governmental Body”: the Federal Reserve Board or the NYFRB, or a committee officially endorsed or convened by the
Federal Reserve Board or the NYFRB or, in each case, any successor thereto.
“Removal Effective Date”: as defined in Section 9.9(b).
“Reportable Event”: any of the events set forth in Section 4043(c) of ERISA, other than those events as to which the thirty-day
notice period is waived under subsections .27, .28, .29, .30, .31, .32, .34 or .35 of PBGC Reg. § 4043.
“Required Lenders”:  at  any  time,  the  holders  of  more  than  50%  of  the  aggregate  Loans  then  outstanding.  The  Loans  of  any
Defaulting Lender shall be disregarded in determining Required Lenders at any time.
“Requirement  of  Law”:  as  to  any  Person,  the  Articles  of  Incorporation  and  By-Laws  or  other  organizational  or  governing
documents of such Person, and any law, treaty, rule or regulation or determination of an arbitrator or a court or other Governmental
Authority, in each case applicable to or binding upon such Person or any of its property or to which such Person or any of its
property is subject.
“Resignation Effective Date”: as defined in Section 9.9(a).
“Resolution Authority”: with respect to any EEA Financial Institution, an EEA Resolution Authority and, with respect to any UK
Financial Institution, a UK Resolution Authority.
“Responsible Officer”: the chief executive officer, president, chief financial officer, treasurer or assistant treasurer of the Borrower,
but in any event, with respect to financial matters, the chief financial officer, treasurer or assistant treasurer of the Borrower.
“S&P”: Standard & Poor’s Global Ratings, a division of S&P Global Inc., and any successor thereto.
“Sanctions”: as defined in Section 4.15.
“SEC”: the Securities and Exchange Commission, any successor thereto and any analogous Governmental Authority.
“Securitized Bonds”: without duplication, securities, however denominated, that are (i) issued by a Qualified Securitization Bond
Issuer, (ii) secured by or otherwise payable from charges authorized by the financing order referred to in clause (a) of the definition
of “Qualified Securitization Bond Issuer,” and (iii) non-recourse to the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries (other than the issuer of
such securities).

“Senior Bonds”: (i) with respect to the 364-Day Tranche Loans, that certain First Mortgage Bond in the aggregate principal amount
of  $1,500,000,000  and  (ii)  with  respect  to  the  18-Month  Tranche  Loans,  those  certain  First  Mortgage  Bonds  in  the  aggregate
combined  principal  amount  of  $1,500,000,000,  in  each  case,  issued  to  the  Administrative  Agent  pursuant  to  the  Supplemental
Indenture.
“Significant Subsidiary”: as defined in Article 1, Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X of the Exchange Act as of the Effective Date,
provided  that  notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  no  special  purpose  finance  subsidiary,  no  A/R  Securitization  Subsidiary  (or
Subsidiaries of any A/R Securitization Subsidiary) nor any Qualified Securitization Bond Issuer (or Subsidiaries of any Qualified
Securitization  Bond  Issuer)  shall  constitute  a  Significant  Subsidiary.  Unless  otherwise  qualified,  all  references  to  a  “Significant
Subsidiary” or to “Significant Subsidiaries” in this Agreement shall refer to a “Significant Subsidiary” or “Significant Subsidiaries”
of the Borrower.
“Single Employer Plan”: any Plan that is covered by Title IV of ERISA, but that is not a Multiemployer Plan.
“SOFR”: a rate per annum equal to the secured overnight financing rate for such Business Day published by the NYFRB (or a
successor administrator of the secured overnight financing rate) on the NYFRB’s Website (or any successor source for the secured
overnight financing rate identified as such by the administrator of the secured overnight financing rate from time to time).
“Solvent”: with respect to the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis, that as of the date of determination, (i) the fair
value of the assets of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis, at a fair valuation on a going concern basis, exceeds,
on a consolidated basis, their debts and liabilities, subordinated, contingent or otherwise, (ii) the present fair saleable value of the
property of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated and going concern basis, is greater than the amount that will be
required  to  pay  the  probable  liability,  on  a  consolidated  basis,  of  their  debts  and  other  liabilities,  subordinated,  contingent  or
otherwise, as such debts and other liabilities become absolute and matured in the ordinary course of business, (iii) the Borrower and
its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis, are able to pay their debts and liabilities, subordinated, contingent or otherwise, as such
liabilities become absolute and matured in the ordinary course of business, (iv) the Borrower and its Subsidiaries are not engaged in
businesses, and are not about to engage in businesses for which they have unreasonably small capital. For purposes of this definition,
the amount of any contingent liability at any time shall be computed as the amount that, in light of all the facts and circumstances
existing as of the Effective Date, would reasonably be expected to become an actual and matured liability.
“Specified Exchange Act Filings”: the Borrower’s Form 10-K annual report for the year ended December 31, 2020 and each and all
of the Form 10-Qs and Form 8-Ks (and to the extent applicable proxy statements) filed by the Borrower or PCG with the SEC after
December 31, 2020 and prior to the date that is one Business Day before the Amendment No. 1 Effective Date.
“Specified Material Adverse Effect”: any occurrence, fact, change, event, effect, violation, penalty, inaccuracy or circumstance
that, individually or in the aggregate with any such other results, occurrences, facts, changes, events, effects, violations, penalties,
inaccuracies, or circumstances, (i) would have or would reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on the business,
operations, assets, liabilities, capitalization, financial performance, financial condition or results of operations, in each case, of PCG

and the Borrower, taken as a whole, or (ii) would reasonably be expected to prevent or materially delay the ability of the Borrower to
consummate the transactions contemplated by this Agreement or perform its obligations hereunder; provided, however, that none of
the following results, occurrences, facts, changes, events, effects, violations, penalties, inaccuracies or circumstances shall constitute
or be taken into account in determining whether a Specified Material Adverse Effect has occurred, is continuing or would reasonably
be  expected  to  occur:  (A)  [reserved],  (B)  results,  occurrences,  facts,  changes,  events,  violations,  inaccuracies  or  circumstances
affecting  (1) the electric  or gas utility businesses in the United States generally  or (2) the economy, credit,  financial,  capital  or
commodity markets, in the United States or elsewhere in the world, including changes in interest rates, monetary policy or inflation,
(C) changes or prospective changes in law (other than any law or regulation of California or the United States that is applicable to
any  electrical  utility)  or  in  GAAP  or  accounting  standards,  or  any  changes  or  prospective  changes  in  the  interpretation  or
enforcement of any of the foregoing, (D) any decline in the market price, or change in trading volume, of any securities of PCG,
(E)  any  failure  to  meet  any  internal  or  public  projections,  forecasts,  guidance,  estimates,  milestones,  credit  ratings,  budgets  or
internal or published financial or operating predictions of revenue, earnings, cash flow or cash position, (F) [reserved], and (G) one
or more wildfires, occurring on or after January 1, 2020, that destroys or damages fewer than 500 dwellings or commercial structures
in  the  aggregate  (it  being  understood  that  (I)  the  exceptions  in  clauses  (D)  and  (E)  shall  not  prevent  or  otherwise  affect  a
determination that the underlying cause of any such change, decline or failure referred to therein is a Specified Material Adverse
Effect, and (II) a Specified Material Adverse Effect shall include the occurrence of one or more wildfires on or after January 1, 2020
destroying or damaging at least 500 dwellings or commercial structures within PCG’s service area at a time when the portion of
PCG’s system at the location of such wildfire was not successfully de-energized).
“Standard A/R Securitization Obligations”: representations, warranties, covenants, indemnities, repurchase obligations, servicing
obligations,  guarantees,  intercompany  notes  and  obligations  relating  to  contributions  of  A/R  Securitization  Assets  to  an  A/R
Securitization  Subsidiary  and  other  obligations  entered  into  by  the  Borrower  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  which  are  reasonably
customary in A/R Securitization Transactions.
“Subsidiary”: as to any Person, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity of which shares of stock or other
ownership interests having ordinary voting power (other than stock or such other ownership interests having such power only by
reason  of  the  happening  of  a  contingency)  to  elect  a  majority  of  the  board  of  directors  or  other  managers  of  such  corporation,
partnership or other entity are at the time owned, or the management of which is otherwise controlled, directly or indirectly through
one or more intermediaries, or both, by such Person. Unless otherwise qualified, all references to a “Subsidiary” or to “Subsidiaries”
in this Agreement shall refer to a Subsidiary or Subsidiaries of the Borrower.
“Supplemental  Indenture”:  with  respect  to  those  certain  First  Mortgage  Bonds  in  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of
$3,000,000,000 issued to the Administrative Agent, the Supplemental Indenture, dated as of the Effective Date, by and between the
Borrower and the Indenture Trustee.
“Supported QFC”: as defined in Section 10.19.
“Swap  Agreement”:  any  agreement  with  respect  to  any  swap,  forward,  future  or  derivative  transaction  or  option  or  similar
agreement involving, or settled by reference to, one or more rates, currencies, commodities, equity or debt instruments or securities,
or

economic, financial or pricing indices or measures of economic, financial or pricing risk or value or any similar transaction or any
combination  of  these  transactions;  provided  that  no  phantom  stock  or  similar  plan  providing  for  payments  only  on  account  of
services provided by current or former directors, officers, employees or consultants of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries shall
be a “Swap Agreement”.
“Syndication Agents”: as defined on the cover hereto.
“Taxes”: all present or future taxes, levies, imposts, duties, deductions, withholdings (including backup withholding), assessments,
fees  or  other  charges  imposed  by  any  Governmental  Authority,  including  any  interest,  additions  to  tax  or  penalties  applicable
thereto.
“Term SOFR”: for the applicable corresponding tenor, the forward-looking term rate based on SOFR that has been selected or
recommended by the Relevant Governmental Body.
“Tranche”: (i) the 364-Day Tranche Commitments or the 364-Day Tranche Loans or (ii) the 18-Month Tranche Commitments or
the 18-Month Tranche Loans (or, with respect to the 18-Month Tranche Loans, the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A) and the
18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B)).
“Transferee”: any Assignee or Participant.
“Type”: as to any Loan, its nature as an ABR Loan or a Eurodollar Loan.
“UK Financial Institution”: any BRRD Undertaking (as such term is defined under the PRA Rulebook (as amended form time to
time) promulgated by the United Kingdom Prudential Regulation Authority)) or any person falling within IFPRU 11.6 of the FCA
Handbook (as amended from time to time) promulgated by the United Kingdom Financial Conduct Authority, which includes certain
credit institutions and investment firms, and certain affiliates of such credit institutions or investment firms.
“UK  Resolution  Authority”:  the  Bank  of  England  or  any  other  public  administrative  authority  having  responsibility  for  the
resolution of any UK Financial Institution.
“United States” or “U.S.”: the United States of America.
“U.S. Person”: any Person that is a “United States Person” as defined in Section 7701(a)(30) of the Code.
“U.S. Special Resolution Regime”: as defined in Section 10.19.
“U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate”: as defined in Section 2.16(e)(ii)(B)(III).
“Utility  Commitment  Letter”:  that  certain  Commitment  Letter  dated  as  of  October  4,  2019  among  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric
Company, as the borrower, PG&E Corporation and the commitment parties from time to time party thereto, as amended, modified or
supplemented from time to time prior to the date hereof.
“Utility Revolving Credit Agreement”: that certain Credit Agreement dated as of the Effective Date, among the Borrower, the
lenders from time to time party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.

“Withdrawal Liability”: any liability to a Multiemployer Plan as a result of a complete or partial withdrawal by the Borrower or
any Commonly Controlled Entity from such Multiemployer Plan, as such terms are defined in Title IV of ERISA.
“Write-Down and Conversion Powers”: (a) with respect to any EEA Resolution Authority, the write-down and conversion powers
of  such  EEA  Resolution  Authority  from  time  to  time  under  the  applicable  Bail-In  Legislation  for  the  applicable  EEA  Member
Country, which write-down and conversion powers are described in the EU Bail-In Legislation Schedule, and (b) with respect to any
UK Resolution Authority, any powers of such UK Resolution Authority under the applicable Bail-In Legislation to cancel, reduce,
modify or change the form of a liability of any UK Financial Institution or any contract or instrument under which that liability
arises, to convert all or part of that liability into shares, securities or obligations of that person or any other person, to provide that
any such contract or instrument is to have effect as if a right had been exercised under it or to suspend any obligation in respect of
that liability or any of the powers under that Bail-In Legislation that are related to or ancillary to any of those powers.
1.1
Other Definitional Provisions and Interpretative Provisions.
(a) Unless otherwise specified therein, all terms defined in this Agreement shall have the defined meanings when
used in the other Loan Documents or any certificate or other document made or delivered pursuant hereto or thereto.
(b) As used herein and, except as otherwise provided therein, in the other Loan Documents, and any certificate or
other  document  made  or  delivered  pursuant  hereto  or  thereto,  (i)  accounting  terms  relating  to  the  Borrower  and  its
Significant  Subsidiaries  defined  in  Section  1.1  and  accounting  terms  partly  defined  in  Section  1.1,  to  the  extent  not
defined,  shall  have  the  respective  meanings  given  to  them  under  GAAP,  (ii)  the  words  “include”,  “includes”  and
“including” shall be deemed to be followed by the phrase “without limitation”, (iii) the word “incur” shall be construed to
mean incur, create, issue, assume or become liable in respect of (and the words “incurred” and “incurrence” shall have
correlative meanings), (iv) the words “asset” and “property” shall be construed to have the same meaning and effect and to
refer  to  any  and  all  tangible  and  intangible  assets  and  properties,  including  cash,  Capital  Stock,  securities,  revenues,
accounts, leasehold interests and contract rights, and (v) references to agreements or other Contractual Obligations shall,
unless otherwise specified, be deemed to refer to such agreements or Contractual Obligations as amended, supplemented,
restated or otherwise modified from time to time.
(c) The words “hereof”, “herein” and “hereunder” and words of similar import, when used in this Agreement,
shall refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any particular provision of this Agreement, and Section, Schedule and
Exhibit references are to this Agreement unless otherwise specified.
(d) The meanings given to terms defined herein shall be equally applicable to both the singular and plural forms
of such terms.
(e) The Borrower shall not be required to perform, nor shall it be required to guarantee the performance of, any of
the affirmative covenants set

forth in Section 6 that apply to any of its Significant Subsidiaries nor shall any of the Borrower’s Significant Subsidiaries
be required to perform, nor shall any of such Significant Subsidiaries be required to guarantee the performance of, any of
the Borrower’s affirmative covenants set forth in Section 6 or any of the affirmative covenants set forth in Section 6 that
apply to any other Significant Subsidiary; provided, that nothing in this Section 1.2(e) shall prevent the occurrence of a
Default or an Event of Default arising out of the Borrower’s failure to cause any Significant Subsidiary to comply with the
provisions of this Agreement applicable to such Significant Subsidiary.
(f)
Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  contained  herein,  all  terms  of  an  accounting  or  financial  nature  used
herein shall be construed, and all computations of amounts and ratios referred to herein shall be made, without giving
effect  to  any  change  in  accounting  for  leases  pursuant  to  GAAP  resulting  from  the  implementation  of  Financial
Accounting Standards Board ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), to the extent such adoption would require treating
any lease (or similar arrangement conveying the right to use) as a capital lease where such lease (or similar arrangement)
would not have been required to be so treated under GAAP as in effect on December 31, 2015.
1.2
Divisions. For all purposes under the Loan Documents, in connection with any division or plan of division
under Delaware law (or any comparable event under a different jurisdiction’s laws): (a) if any asset, right, obligation or
liability of any Person becomes the asset, right, obligation or liability of a different Person, then it shall be deemed to have
been transferred from the original Person to the subsequent Person, and (b) if any new Person comes into existence, such new
Person shall be deemed to have been organized and acquired on the first date of its existence by the holders of its Capital
Stock at such time.
1.3
Interest Rates; LIBOR Notification. The interest rate on Eurodollar Loans is determined by reference to the
Eurodollar Base Rate, which is derived from the London interbank offered rate (“LIBOR”). LIBOR is intended to represent
the rate at which contributing banks may obtain short-term borrowings from each other in the London interbank market. On
March 5, 2021, the FCA publicly announced that: (a) immediately after December 31, 2021, publication of all seven euro
LIBOR settings, all seven Swiss Franc LIBOR settings, the spot next, 1-week, 2-month and 12-month Japanese Yen LIBOR
settings, the overnight, 1-week, 2-month and 12-month British Pound Sterling LIBOR settings, and the 1-week and 2-month
U.S. Dollar LIBOR settings will permanently cease; immediately after June 30, 2023, publication of the overnight and 12-
month U.S. Dollar LIBOR settings will permanently cease; immediately after December 31, 2021, the 1-month, 3-month and
6-month Japanese Yen LIBOR settings and the 1-month, 3-month and 6-month British Pound Sterling LIBOR settings will
cease to be provided or, subject to consultation by the FCA, be provided on a changed methodology (or “synthetic”) basis
and  no  longer  be  representative  of  the  underlying  market  and  economic  reality  they  are  intended  to  measure  and  that
representativeness will not be restored; and immediately after June 30, 2023, the 1-month, 3- month and 6-month U.S. Dollar
LIBOR settings will cease to be provided or, subject to the FCA’s consideration of the case, be provided on a synthetic basis
and  no  longer  be  representative  of  the  underlying  market  and  economic  reality  they  are  intended  to  measure  and  that
representativeness will not be restored. There is no assurance that dates announced by the FCA will not change or that the
administrator of LIBOR and/or regulators will not take further

action that could impact the availability, composition, or characteristics of LIBOR or the currencies and/or tenors for which
LIBOR  is  published.  Each  party  to  this  agreement  should  consult  its  own  advisors  to  stay  informed  of  any  such
developments. Public and private sector industry initiatives are currently underway to identify new or alternative reference
rates to be used in place of LIBOR. Upon the occurrence of a Benchmark Transition Event or an Early Opt-In Election,
Section 2.13(b) and (c) provide the mechanism for determining an alternative rate of interest. The Administrative Agent will
promptly notify the Borrower, pursuant to Section 2.13(e), of any change to the reference rate upon which the interest rate on
Eurodollar Loans is based. However, the Administrative Agent does not warrant or accept any responsibility for, and shall
not have any liability with respect to, the administration, submission or any other matter related to LIBOR or other rates in
the definition  of “Eurodollar  Base Rate”  or with respect  to any alternative  or successor  rate  thereto,  or replacement  rate
thereof (including, without limitation, (i) any such alternative, successor or replacement rate implemented pursuant to Section
2.13(b) or (c),  whether  upon  the  occurrence  of  a  Benchmark  Transition  Event  or  an  Early  Opt-In  Election,  and  (ii)  the
implementation  of  any  Benchmark  Replacement  Conforming  Changes  pursuant  to Section  2.13(d)),  including  without
limitation, whether the composition or characteristics of any such alternative, successor or replacement reference rate will be
similar to, or produce the same value or economic equivalence of, the Eurodollar Base Rate or have the same volume or
liquidity as did the London interbank offered rate prior to its discontinuance or unavailability.
Section 13.
AMOUNT AND TERMS OF THE TERM LOANS
1.1
Loans.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, each 364-Day Tranche Lender (severally and not jointly)
agrees  to  make  a  term  loan  (the  “364-Day Tranche Loans”)  to  the  Borrower  in  Dollars  on  the  Effective  Date  in  an
amount equal to such 364-Day Tranche Lender’s 364-Day Tranche Commitment. Loans under the 364-Day Tranche may
be ABR Loans or Eurodollar  Loans, as further provided herein. 364-Day Tranche Loans borrowed under this Section
2.1(a) and paid or prepaid may not be reborrowed.
(b) Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, each 18-Month Tranche Lender (severally and not jointly)
agrees  to  make  a  term  loan  (the  “18-Month  Tranche  Loans”)  to  the  Borrower  in  Dollars  on  the  Effective  Date  in  an
aggregate amount equal to the amount of such 18-Month Tranche Lender’s 18-Month Tranche Commitment. Loans under
the 18-Month Tranche may be ABR Loans or Eurodollar Rate Loans, as further provided herein. 18-Month Tranche Loans
borrowed  under  this  Section 2.1(b)2.1(b) and  paid  or  prepaid  may  not  be  reborrowed.  As  of  the  Amendment  No.  1
Effective Date, a portion of the 18-Month Tranche Loans in an aggregate amount of $1,315,735,897.44 (the “18-Month
Tranche Loans (Tranche A)”) shall have an 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date of October 1, 2022 and a portion of the
18-Month Tranche Loans in an aggregate amount of $184,264,102.56 (the “18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B)”)
shall have an 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date of January 1, 2022. As of the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date, the 18-
Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B) shall have an 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date of October 1, 2022.

1.2
Procedures  for  Borrowing.  The  Borrower  may  borrow  the  Loans  on  the  Effective  Date  (so  long  as  the
Effective Date is a Business Day), provided that the Borrower shall give the Administrative Agent irrevocable notice (which
notice must be received by the Administrative Agent (a) prior to 12:00 Noon, New York City time, three Business Days prior
to the Effective Date, in the case of Eurodollar Loans, or (b) prior to 1:00 P.M., New York City time, one Business Day prior
to  the  Effective  Date,  in  the  case  of  ABR  Loans)  specifying  (i)  the  amount  and  Type  of  Loans  to  be  borrowed  on  the
Effective Date and (ii) in the case of Eurodollar Loans, the respective amounts of each such Type of Loan and the respective
lengths of the initial Interest Period therefor. Upon receipt of any such notice from the Borrower, the Administrative Agent
shall  promptly  notify  each  Lender  thereof.  Each  Lender  will  make  the  amount  of  its pro  rata share  of  each  borrowing
available to the Administrative Agent for the account of the Borrower at the Funding Office prior to 10:00 A.M., New York
City time, on the Effective Date requested by the Borrower in funds immediately available to the Administrative Agent. Such
borrowing will then be made available to the Borrower by the Administrative Agent crediting the account of the Borrower on
the books of such office with the aggregate of the amounts made available to the Administrative Agent by the Lenders and in
like funds as received by the Administrative Agent
1.3
[Reserved].
1.4
[Reserved].
1.5
[Reserved].
1.6
Fees, Etc.
(a) The  Borrower  agrees  to  pay  to  the  Administrative  Agent,  for  the  account  of  each  Lender  (other  than  a
Defaulting Lender to the extent provided in Section 2.20), any fees payable in the amounts and at the times separately
agreed upon between the Borrower and the Lenders.
(b) The Borrower agrees to pay to the Administrative Agent the fees in the amounts and on the dates as set forth
in  any  written,  duly  executed  fee  agreements  with  the  Administrative  Agent  and  to  perform  any  other  obligations
contained therein.
(c) On June 1, 2022, the Borrower agrees to pay to the Administrative Agent, for the account of each Lender that
holds any 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A) outstanding on such date, a fee equal to 0.075% of the principal amount
of such Loans.
(a) On January 1, 2022, the Borrower agrees to pay to the Administrative Agent, for the account of each Lender
that holds any 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B) outstanding on such date, a fee equal to 0.075% of the
principal amount of such Loans.
1.7
Termination of Commitments. The Commitments shall automatically terminate in full on the Effective Date
after the proceeds of the Loans have been made available to the Borrower.
1.8
Prepayments.

(a) Optional. The Borrower may at any time and from time to time prepay the Loans, in whole or in part, without
premium or penalty, upon irrevocable notice delivered to the Administrative Agent no later than 12:00 Noon, New York
City time, three Business Days prior thereto, in the case of Eurodollar Loans, and no later than 2:00 p.m., New York City
time,  one  Business  Day  prior  thereto,  in  the  case  of  ABR  Loans,  which  notice  shall  specify  the  date  and  amount  of
prepayment  and  whether  the  prepayment  is  of  Eurodollar  Loans  or  ABR  Loans.  Upon  receipt  of  any  such  notice  the
Administrative Agent shall promptly notify each relevant Lender thereof. If any such notice is given, the amount specified
in such notice shall be due and payable on the date specified therein, together with accrued interest to such date on the
amount prepaid. Partial prepayments of Loans shall be in an aggregate principal amount of $1,000,000 or a whole multiple
of $500,000 in excess thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any notice of prepayment delivered in connection with any
refinancing of all of the Loans with the proceeds of such refinancing or of any other incurrence of Indebtedness or the
occurrence  of  some  other  identifiable  event  or  condition,  may  be,  if  expressly  so  stated  to  be,  contingent  upon  the
consummation of such refinancing or incurrence or occurrence of such other identifiable event or condition and may be
revoked  by the Borrower,  subject  to compliance  with the  obligations  under  Section  2.17  in connection  with  any such
revocation, in the event such contingency is not met. Each prepayment of Loans under this clause (a) shall be applied to
the prepayment in full of the aggregate principal amount and any accrued but unpaid interest with respect to the 364-Day
Tranche Loans before being applied to prepay the aggregate principal amount and any accrued but unpaid interest with
respect to the 18-Month Tranche Loans and shall be accompanied by accrued interest and fees on the amount prepaid to
the date fixed for prepayment, plus, in the case of any Eurodollar Loans that are prepaid on any day other than the last day
of the Interest Period applicable to it, the Borrower shall pay any amounts due to the Lenders as a result thereof pursuant
to Section 2.17.
(b) Mandatory. So long as (i) the commitments in respect of each of the Bridge Facilities have been terminated
without the funding of any loans thereunder or (ii) the loans and any accrued interest, fees and other obligations under the
Bridge Facilities have been paid in full, in the event that the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries receives any Net Cash
Proceeds arising from any Debt Issuance, then the Borrower shall prepay the Loans hereunder in an amount equal to 100%
of such Net Cash Proceeds not later than five (5) Business Days following the receipt by the Borrower or such Subsidiary
of such Net Cash Proceeds. The Borrower shall promptly (and not later than five (5) Business Days following receipt
thereof) notify the Administrative Agent of the receipt by the Borrower or any Subsidiary, as applicable, of such Net Cash
Proceeds  and  such  notice  shall  be  accompanied  by  a  reasonably  detailed  calculation  of  the  Net  Cash  Proceeds.  Each
prepayment of Loans under this clause (b) shall be applied to the prepayment in full of the aggregate principal amount and
any accrued but unpaid interest with respect to the 364-Day Tranche Loans before being applied to prepay the aggregate
principal  amount  and  any  accrued  but  unpaid  interest  with  respect  to  the  18-Month  Tranche  Loans  and  shall  be
accompanied by accrued interest and fees on the amount prepaid to the date fixed for prepayment, plus, in the case of any
Eurodollar Loans that are prepaid on any day other than the last day of the Interest Period applicable to it, the Borrower
shall pay any amounts due to the Lenders as a result thereof pursuant to Section 2.17.

1.9
Conversion and Continuation Options.
(a) The  Borrower  may  elect  from  time  to  time  to  convert  Eurodollar  Loans  to  ABR  Loans  by  giving  the
Administrative Agent prior irrevocable notice of such election no later than 12:00 Noon, New York City time, on the
Business Day preceding the proposed conversion date, provided that any such conversion of Eurodollar Loans may only
be made on the last day of an Interest Period with respect thereto. The Borrower may elect from time to time to convert
ABR Loans to Eurodollar Loans by giving the Administrative Agent prior irrevocable notice of such election no later than
12:00 Noon, New York City time, on the third Business Day preceding the proposed conversion date (which notice shall
specify the length of the initial Interest Period therefor), provided that no ABR Loan may be converted into a Eurodollar
Loan when any Event of Default has occurred and is continuing and the Required Lenders have determined in their sole
discretion not to permit such conversions. Upon receipt of any such notice the Administrative Agent shall promptly notify
each relevant Lender thereof.
(b) Any Eurodollar Loan may be continued as such upon the expiration of the then current Interest Period with
respect thereto by the Borrower giving irrevocable notice to the Administrative Agent, in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the defined term “Interest Period”, of the length of the next Interest Period to be applicable to such Loans,
provided that no Eurodollar Loan may be continued as such when any Event of Default has occurred and is continuing and
the Required Lenders have determined in their sole discretion not to permit such continuations; provided, further, that if
the Borrower shall fail to give any required notice as described above in this paragraph, subject to the preceding proviso,
such Loans shall be automatically continued as Eurodollar Loans with an Interest Period of one month on the last day of
such then expiring Interest Period. Upon receipt of any such notice the Administrative Agent shall promptly notify each
relevant Lender thereof.
1.10
Limitations  on  Eurodollar  Tranches.  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  in  this  Agreement,  all
borrowings, conversions and continuations of Eurodollar Loans and all selections of Interest Periods shall be in such amounts
and  be  made  pursuant  to  such  elections  so  that  (a)  after  giving  effect  thereto,  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  the
Eurodollar  Loans  comprising  each  Eurodollar  Tranche  shall  be  equal  to  $1,000,000  or  a  whole  multiple  of  $500,000  in
excess thereof and (b) no more than 5 Eurodollar Tranches shall be outstanding at any one time.
1.11
Interest Rates and Payment Dates.
(a) Each Eurodollar Loan shall bear interest for each day during each Interest Period with respect thereto at a rate
per annum equal to the Eurodollar Rate determined for such day plus the Applicable Margin.
(b) Each ABR Loan shall bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the ABR plus the Applicable Margin.
(c) (i) If all or a portion of the principal amount of the Loans shall not be paid when due (whether at the stated
maturity, by acceleration or otherwise), such overdue amount shall bear interest at a default rate per annum equal to the
rate that would otherwise be applicable thereto pursuant to the foregoing

provisions of this Section plus 2% and (ii) if all or a portion of any interest payable on the Loans or any other fee payable
in connection herewith (excluding any expenses or other indemnity) shall not be paid when due (whether at the stated
maturity, by acceleration or otherwise), such overdue amount shall bear interest at a default rate per annum equal to the
rate then applicable to ABR Loans plus 2%, in each case, with respect to clauses (i) and (ii) above, from the date of such
non-payment until such amount is paid in full (as well after as before judgment).
(d) Interest shall be payable in arrears on each Interest Payment Date, provided that interest accruing pursuant to
Section 2.11(c) shall be payable from time to time on demand.
(e) The amount of each interest payment received by the Administrative Agent under the applicable Senior Bond
shall be deemed to be a payment of interest payable by the Borrower hereunder and shall reduce, dollar-for-dollar, the
amount of interest then owing by the Borrower hereunder.
1.12
Computation of Interest and Fees.
(a) Interest and fees payable pursuant hereto shall be calculated on the basis of a 360-day year for the actual days
elapsed, except that, with respect to ABR Loans the rate of interest on which is calculated on the basis of ABR, the interest
thereon shall be calculated on the basis of a 365- (or 366-, as the case may be) day year for the actual days elapsed. The
Administrative Agent shall as soon as practicable notify the Borrower and the relevant Lenders of each determination of a
Eurodollar  Rate.  Any  change  in  the  interest  rate  on  a  Loan  resulting  from  a  change  in  the  ABR  or  the  Eurocurrency
Reserve Requirements shall become effective as of the opening of business on the day on which such change becomes
effective.  The  Administrative  Agent  shall  as  soon  as  practicable  notify  the  Borrower  and  the  relevant  Lenders  of  the
effective date and the amount of each such change in interest rate.
(b) Each  determination  of  an  interest  rate  by  the  Administrative  Agent  pursuant  to  any  provision  of  this
Agreement shall constitute prima facie evidence of such amounts. The Administrative Agent shall, at the request of the
Borrower  or  any  Lender,  deliver  to  the  Borrower  or  such  Lender  a  statement  showing  the  quotations  used  by  the
Administrative Agent in determining any interest rate pursuant to Section 2.11(a).
1.13
Inability to Determine Interest Rate.
(a) Subject  to  clauses  (b),  (c),  (d),  (e),  (f)  and  (g)  of  this Section 2.13,  if prior  to  the  commencement of  any
Interest Period for a Eurodollar Loan:
Section 14.
the  Administrative  Agent  determines  (which  determination  shall  be  conclusive  absent  manifest  error)  that
adequate  and  reasonable  means  do  not  exist  for  ascertaining  the  Eurodollar  Rate  or  the  Eurodollar  Base  Rate,  as  applicable
(including because the Eurodollar Screen Rate is not available or published on a current basis) for such Interest Period, provided that
no Benchmark Transition Event shall have occurred at such time; or
Section 15.
the Administrative Agent is advised by the Required Lenders that the Eurodollar Rate or the Eurodollar Base
Rate, as applicable, for such Interest Period

will  not  adequately  and  fairly  reflect  the  cost  to  such  Lenders  (or  Lender)  of  making  or  maintaining  their  Loans  (or  its  Loan)
included in the applicable borrowing for such Interest Period;
then the Administrative Agent shall give notice thereof to the Borrower and the Lenders by telephone, telecopy or electronic mail as
promptly as practicable thereafter and, until the Administrative Agent notifies the Borrower and the Lenders that the circumstances
giving rise to such notice no longer exist, (A) any notice from the Borrower to the Administrative Agent that requests the conversion
of  any  Loans  to,  or  continuation  of  any  Loans  as,  a  Eurodollar  borrowing  shall  be  ineffective  and  (B)  if  any  borrowing  notice
delivered  pursuant  to Section 2.2 requests  a  borrowing  of  Eurodollar  Loans,  such  borrowing  shall  be  made  as  an  ABR  Loan;
provided that if the circumstances giving rise to such notice affect only one Type of borrowings, then the other Type of borrowings
shall be permitted.
(a) Replacing USD LIBOR. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in any other Loan Document, on
March  5,  2021  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority  (“FCA”),  the  regulatory  supervisor  of  the  Eurodollar  Base  Rate’s
administrator (“IBA”), announced in a public statement the future cessation or loss of representativeness of overnight/Spot
Next, 1-week, 1-month, 3-month, 6-month and 12-month Eurodollar Base Rate tenor settings. On the earlier of (i) the date
that all Available Tenors of the Eurodollar Base Rate have either permanently or indefinitely ceased to be provided by
IBA  or  have  been  announced  by  the  FCA  pursuant  to  public  statement  or  publication  of  information  to  be  no  longer
representative and (ii) the Early Opt-in Effective Date, if the then-current Benchmark is the Eurodollar Base Rate, the
Benchmark  Replacement  will  replace  such  Benchmark  for  all  purposes  hereunder  and  under  any  Loan  Document  in
respect of any setting of such Benchmark on such day and all subsequent settings without any amendment to, or further
action or consent of any other party to this Agreement or any other Loan Document. If the Benchmark Replacement is
Daily Simple SOFR, all interest payments will be payable on a monthly basis.
(b) Replacing  Future  Benchmarks.  Upon  the  occurrence  of  a  Benchmark  Transition  Event,  the  Benchmark
Replacement will replace the then-current Benchmark for all purposes hereunder and under any Loan Document in respect
of any Benchmark setting at or after 5:00 p.m. on the fifth (5th) Business Day after the date notice of such Benchmark
Replacement is provided to the Lenders without any amendment to, or further action or consent of any other party to, this
Agreement or any other Loan Document so long as the Administrative Agent has not received, by such time, written
notice of objection to such Benchmark Replacement from Lenders comprising the Required Lenders. Upon the occurrence
of a Benchmark Transition Event, the Borrower may revoke any request for a borrowing of, conversion to or continuation
of Loans to be made, converted or continued that would bear interest by reference to such Benchmark until the Borrower’s
receipt of notice from the Administrative Agent that a Benchmark Replacement has replaced such Benchmark, and, failing
that, the Borrower will be deemed to have converted any such request into a request for a borrowing of or conversion to
ABR Loans. During the period referenced in the foregoing sentence, the component of ABR based upon the Benchmark
will not be used in any determination of ABR.

(c) Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes. In connection with the implementation and administration of a
Benchmark Replacement,  the Administrative Agent will have the right to make Benchmark  Replacement Conforming
Changes from time to time and, notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in any other Loan Document, any
amendments implementing such Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes will become effective without any further
action or consent of any other party to this Agreement.
(d) Notices;  Standards  for  Decisions  and  Determinations.  The  Administrative  Agent  will  promptly  notify  the
Borrower and the Lenders of (i) the implementation of any Benchmark Replacement and (ii) the effectiveness of any
Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes. For the avoidance of doubt, any notice required to be delivered by the
Administrative Agent as set forth in this Section 2.13 may be provided, at the option of the Administrative Agent (in its
sole  discretion),  in  one  or  more  notices  and  may  be  delivered  together  with,  or  as  part  of  any  amendment  which
implements any Benchmark Replacement or Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes. Any determination, decision
or election that may be made by the Administrative Agent or, if applicable, any Lender (or group of Lenders) pursuant to
this Section, including any determination with respect to a tenor, rate or adjustment or of the occurrence or non-occurrence
of  an  event,  circumstance  or  date  and  any  decision  to  take  or  refrain  from  taking  any  action,  will  be  conclusive  and
binding absent manifest error and may be made in its or their sole discretion and without consent from any other party
hereto, except, in each case, as expressly required pursuant to this Section 2.13.
(e) Unavailability of Tenor of Benchmark. At any time (including in connection with the implementation of a
Benchmark Replacement), (i) if the then-current Benchmark is a term rate (including Term SOFR or Eurodollar Base
Rate), then the Administrative Agent may remove any tenor of such Benchmark that is unavailable or non-representative
for Benchmark (including Benchmark Replacement) settings and (ii) the Administrative Agent may reinstate any such
previously removed tenor for Benchmark (including Benchmark Replacement) settings.
(f)
Disclaimer. The Administrative Agent does not warrant or accept any responsibility for, and shall not have
any liability with respect to (i) the administration, submission or any other matter related to the London interbank offered
rate or other rates in the definition of “Eurodollar Rate” or “Eurodollar Base Rate” or with respect to any alternative or
successor  rate  thereto,  or  replacement  rate  thereof  (including,  without  limitation  any  Benchmark  Replacement
implemented hereunder), (ii) the composition or characteristics of any Benchmark Replacement, including whether it is
similar to, or produces the same value or economic equivalence to the Eurodollar Base Rate (or any other Benchmark) or
have the same volume or liquidity as did the Eurodollar Base Rate (or any other Benchmark), (iii) any actions or use of its
discretion or other decisions or determinations made with respect to any matters covered by this Section 2.13 including,
without limitation, whether or not a Benchmark Transition Event has occurred, the removal or lack thereof of unavailable
or non-representative tenors, the implementation or lack thereof of any Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes,
the delivery or non-delivery of any notices required by clause (e) above or otherwise in accordance herewith, and (iv) the
effect of any of the foregoing provisions of this Section 2.13.

1.2
Pro Rata Treatment and Payments; Notes.
(a) [Reserved].
(b) Each payment (including each prepayment) by the Borrower on account of principal of and interest on the
Loans (other than, for the avoidance of doubt, payment in full of all principal and interest due with respect to the 18-
Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B) on or prior to the 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date for such Loans) shall be made pro
rata (i) in the case of the 364-Day Tranche Loans, according to the respective outstanding principal amounts of the 364-
Day  Tranche  Loans  then  held  by  the  364-Day  Tranche  Lenders  and  (ii)  in  the  case  of  the  18-Month  Tranche  Loans,
according to the respective outstanding principal amounts of the 18-Month Tranche Loans then held by the 18-Month
Tranche Lenders.
(c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, all payments (including prepayments) to be made by the
Borrower  hereunder,  whether  on  account  of  principal,  interest,  fees  or  otherwise,  shall  be  made  without  setoff  or
counterclaim and shall be made prior to 4:00 P.M., New York City time, on the due date thereof to the Administrative
Agent, for the account of the Lenders, as applicable, at the Funding Office, in Dollars and in immediately available funds.
The Administrative Agent shall distribute such payments to the Lenders promptly upon receipt in like funds as received. If
any payment hereunder (other than payments on the Eurodollar Loans) becomes due and payable on a day other than a
Business Day, such payment shall be extended to the next succeeding Business Day. If any payment on a Eurodollar Loan
becomes  due  and  payable  on  a  day  other  than  a  Business  Day,  the  maturity  thereof  shall  be  extended  to  the  next
succeeding  Business  Day  unless  the  result  of  such  extension  would  be  to  extend  such  payment  into  another  calendar
month,  in  which  event  such  payment  shall  be  made  on  the  immediately  preceding  Business  Day.  In  the  case  of  any
extension of any payment of principal pursuant to the preceding two sentences, interest thereon shall be payable at the then
applicable rate during such extension.
(d) Unless the Administrative Agent shall have been notified in writing by any Lender prior to a borrowing that
such Lender will not make the amount that would constitute its share of such borrowing available to the Administrative
Agent, the Administrative Agent may assume that such Lender is making such amount available to the Administrative
Agent,  and  the  Administrative  Agent  may,  in  reliance  upon  such  assumption,  make  available  to  the  Borrower  a
corresponding amount. If such amount is not made available to the Administrative Agent by the required time on the
Effective Date, such Lender shall pay to the Administrative Agent, on demand, such amount with interest thereon, at a rate
equal to the greater of (i) the Federal Funds Effective Rate and (ii) a rate determined by the Administrative Agent in
accordance with banking industry rules on interbank compensation, for the period until such Lender makes such amount
immediately available to the Administrative Agent. A certificate of the Administrative Agent submitted to any Lender
with respect to any amounts  owing under this paragraph  shall be conclusive  in the absence  of manifest  error. If such
Lender’s share of such borrowing is not made available to the Administrative Agent by such Lender within three Business
Days after the Effective Date, the Administrative Agent shall also be entitled to recover such amount with interest thereon
at the rate per annum applicable to ABR Loans from the Borrower within 30 days after written demand therefor.

(e) Unless the Administrative Agent shall have been notified in writing by the Borrower prior to the date of any
payment due to be made by the Borrower hereunder that the Borrower will not make such payment to the Administrative
Agent, the Administrative Agent may assume that the Borrower is making such payment, and the Administrative Agent
may, but shall not be required to, in reliance upon such assumption, make available to the Lenders their respective pro
rata shares of a corresponding amount. If such payment is not made to the Administrative Agent by the Borrower within
three Business Days after such due date, the Administrative Agent shall be entitled to recover, on demand, from each
Lender to which any amount which was made available pursuant to the preceding sentence, such amount with interest
thereon at the rate per annum equal to the daily average Federal Funds Effective Rate. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
limit the rights of the Administrative Agent or any Lender against the Borrower.
(f)
The Borrower agrees that, upon the request to the Administrative Agent by any Lender, the Borrower will
promptly execute and deliver to such Lender a promissory note (a “Note”) of the Borrower evidencing any Loans (or any
portion thereof) of such Lender, substantially in the form of Exhibit H, with appropriate insertions as to date and principal
amount; provided, that delivery of Notes shall not be a condition precedent to the occurrence of the Effective Date or the
making of the Loans on the Effective Date.
(g) If any Lender shall fail to make any payment required to be made by it pursuant to Section 2.14(d), then the
Administrative Agent may, in its discretion and notwithstanding any contrary provision hereof, (i) apply any amounts
thereafter  received  by  the  Administrative  Agent  hereunder  for  the  account  of  such  Lender  for  the  benefit  of  the
Administrative Agent to satisfy such Lender’s obligations to the Administrative Agent, as the case may be, under such
Section until all such unsatisfied obligations are fully paid, and/or (ii) so long as such Lender is a Defaulting Lender, hold
any such amounts in a segregated account as cash collateral for, and application to, any future funding obligations of such
Lender  under  any  such  Section,  in  the  case  of  each  of  clauses  (i)  and  (ii)  above,  in  any  order  as  determined  by  the
Administrative Agent in its discretion.
1.3
Change of Law.
(a) If a Change of Law shall:
Section 16.
subject any Recipient to any Taxes (other than (A) Indemnified Taxes, (B) Taxes described in clauses (b) through (d)
of the definition of Excluded Taxes and (C) Connection Income Taxes) on its Loans, or other obligations, or its deposits, reserves,
other liabilities or capital attributable thereto;
Section  17.
impose,  modify  or  hold  applicable  any  reserve,  special  deposit,  compulsory  loan,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance
Corporation  insurance  charge  or  other  similar  insurance  charge  or  similar  requirement  against  assets  held  by,  deposits  or  other
liabilities in or for the account of, advances, loans or other extensions of credit by, or any other acquisition of funds by, any Lender
that is not otherwise included in the determination of the Eurodollar Rate, which requirements are generally applicable to advances,
loans and other extensions of credit made by such Lender; or

Section 18.
impose on any Lender any other condition that is generally applicable to loans made by such Lender or participations
therein;
and the result of any of the foregoing is to increase the cost to such Lender or such other Recipient, by an amount that such Lender
or such other Recipient deems to be material, of making, converting into, continuing or maintaining the Loans, or to reduce any
amount receivable hereunder in respect thereof, then, in any such case, the Borrower shall promptly pay such Lender or such other
Recipient, within ten Business Days after its demand, any additional amounts necessary to compensate such Lender or such other
Recipient for such increased cost or reduced amount receivable. If any Lender or other Recipient becomes entitled to claim any
additional amounts pursuant to this paragraph, it shall promptly notify the Borrower (with a copy to the Administrative Agent) of the
event by reason of which it has become so entitled; provided, however, that no Lender or other Recipient shall be entitled to demand
such compensation more than 90 days following (x) the last day of the Interest Period in respect of which such demand is made or
(y) the repayment of the Loan in respect of which such demand is made. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, no Lender
shall demand compensation pursuant to this Section 2.15 if it shall not at the time be the general policy or practice of such Lender to
demand such compensation from similarly situated borrowers (to the extent that such Lender has the right to do so under its credit
facilities with similarly situated borrowers).
(a) If any Lender shall have determined that a Change of Law regarding capital or liquidity requirements shall
have the effect of reducing the rate of return on such Lender’s capital or the capital of any corporation controlling such
Lender as a consequence of its obligations hereunder to a level below that which such Lender or such corporation could
have achieved but for such Change of Law (taking into consideration such Lender’s or such corporation’s policies with
respect to capital adequacy or liquidity) by an amount deemed by such Lender to be material, then from time to time, after
submission by such Lender to the Borrower (with a copy to the Administrative Agent) of a written request therefor, the
Borrower  shall  pay  to  such  Lender  such  additional  amount  or  amounts  as  will  compensate  such  Lender  or  such
corporation for such reduction.
(b) A certificate as to any additional amounts payable pursuant to this Section 2.15 submitted by any Lender or
any other Recipient to the Borrower (with a copy to the Administrative Agent) shall constitute prima facie evidence of
such costs or amounts. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 2.15, the Borrower shall not be required to
compensate a Lender or any other Recipient pursuant to this Section 2.15 for any amounts incurred more than six months
prior to the date that such Lender or such other Recipient notifies the Borrower of such Lender’s or such other Recipient’s
intention to claim compensation therefor; provided that, if the circumstances giving rise to such claim have a retroactive
effect, then such six-month period shall be extended to include the period of such retroactive effect not to exceed twelve
months. The obligations of the Borrower pursuant to this Section 2.15 shall survive for 90 days after the termination of
this Agreement and the payment of the Loans and all other amounts then due and payable hereunder.
1.2
Taxes.
(a) Any and all payments by or on account of any obligation of the Borrower under any Loan Document shall be
made without deduction or withholding for any Taxes, except as required by applicable laws. If any

applicable laws (as determined in the good faith discretion of the Borrower or Administrative Agent making the payment)
require the deduction or withholding of any Tax from any such payment, then (A) the Borrower or Administrative Agent,
as applicable shall withhold or make such deductions as are determined by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent to be
required, (B) the Borrower or Administrative Agent, as applicable shall timely pay the full amount withheld or deducted to
the relevant Governmental Authority in accordance with such laws, and (C) to the extent that the withholding or deduction
is made on account of Indemnified Taxes, the sum payable by the Borrower shall be increased as necessary so that after
any required withholding or the making of all required deductions (including deductions applicable to additional sums
payable under this Section 2.16) the applicable Recipient receives an amount equal to the sum it would have received had
no such withholding or deduction been made.
(b) Without  limiting  the  provisions  of  subsection  (a)  above,  the  Borrower  shall  timely  pay  to  the  relevant
Governmental Authority in accordance with applicable law, or at the option of the Administrative Agent timely reimburse
it for the payment of, any Other Taxes.
(c) (i) The Borrower shall, and does hereby, indemnify each Recipient, and shall make payment in respect thereof
within 10 days after demand therefor, for the full amount of any Indemnified Taxes (including Indemnified Taxes imposed
or asserted on or attributable to amounts payable under this Section 2.16) payable or paid by such Recipient or required to
be withheld or deducted from a payment to such Recipient, and any reasonable expenses arising therefrom or with respect
thereto,  whether  or  not  such  Indemnified  Taxes  were  correctly  or  legally  imposed  or  asserted  by  the  relevant
Governmental Authority. A certificate as to the amount of such payment or liability delivered to the Borrower by a Lender
or another Recipient (with a copy to the Administrative Agent), or by the Administrative Agent on its own behalf or on
behalf of a Lender or another Recipient, shall be conclusive absent manifest error.
Section 19.
Each Lender shall, and does hereby, severally indemnify, and shall make payment in respect thereof within 10 days
after demand therefor, (x) the Administrative Agent against any Indemnified Taxes attributable to such Lender (but only to the extent
that  the  Borrower  has  not  already  indemnified  the  Administrative  Agent  for  such  Indemnified  Taxes  and  without  limiting  the
obligation of the Borrower to do so), (y) the Administrative Agent against any Taxes attributable to such Lender’s failure to comply
with the provisions of Section 10.6(c)(iii) relating to the maintenance of a Participant Register and (z) the Administrative Agent
against  any  Excluded  Taxes  attributable  to  such  Lender,  in  each  case,  that  are  payable  or  paid  by  the  Administrative  Agent  in
connection with any Loan Document, and any reasonable expenses arising therefrom or with respect thereto, whether or not such
Taxes were correctly or legally imposed or asserted by the relevant Governmental Authority. A certificate as to the amount of such
payment or liability delivered to any Lender by the Administrative Agent shall be conclusive absent manifest error. Each Lender
hereby authorizes the Administrative Agent to set off and apply any and all amounts at any time owing to such Lender, as the case
may be, under this Agreement or any other Loan Document against any amount due to the Administrative Agent under this clause
(ii).
(a) Upon request by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, as the case may be, after any payment of Taxes by
the Borrower or by the

Administrative Agent to a Governmental Authority as provided in this Section 2.16, the Borrower shall deliver to the
Administrative Agent or the Administrative Agent shall deliver to the Borrower, as the case may be, the original or a
certified copy of a receipt issued by such Governmental Authority evidencing such payment, a copy of any return required
by  laws  to  report  such  payment  or  other  evidence  of  such  payment  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Borrower  or  the
Administrative Agent, as the case may be.
(b) (i) Any Lender that is entitled to an exemption from or reduction of withholding Tax with respect to payments
made  under  any  Loan  Document  shall  deliver  to  the  Borrower  and  the  Administrative  Agent,  at  the  time  or  times
reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, such properly completed and executed documentation
reasonably  requested  by  the  Borrower  or  the  Administrative  Agent  as  will  permit  such  payments  to  be  made  without
withholding or at a reduced rate of withholding. In addition, any Lender, if reasonably requested by the Borrower or the
Administrative Agent, shall deliver such other documentation prescribed by applicable law or reasonably requested by the
Borrower or the Administrative Agent as will enable the Borrower or the Administrative Agent to determine whether or
not such Lender is subject to backup withholding or information reporting requirements. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in the preceding two sentences, the completion, execution and submission of such documentation (other than
such documentation set forth in Sections 2.16(e)(ii)(A), (ii)(B) and (ii)(D) below) shall not be required if in the Lender’s
reasonable judgment such completion, execution or submission would subject such Lender to any material unreimbursed
cost or expense or would materially prejudice the legal or commercial position of such Lender.
Section 20.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
(A)
any Lender that is a U.S. Person shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative
Agent on or prior to the date on which such Lender becomes a Lender under this Agreement (and from
time  to  time  thereafter  upon  the  reasonable  request  of  the  Borrower  or  the  Administrative  Agent),
executed copies of IRS Form W-9 certifying that such Lender is exempt from U.S. federal backup
withholding tax;
(B)
any  Foreign  Lender  shall,  to  the  extent  it  is  legally  entitled  to  do  so,  deliver  to  the
Borrower  and  the  Administrative  Agent  (in  such  number  of  copies  as  shall  be  requested  by  the
recipient)  on  or  prior  to  the  date  on  which  such  Foreign  Lender  becomes  a  Lender  under  this
Agreement  (and  from  time  to  time  thereafter  upon  the  reasonable  request  of  the  Borrower  or  the
Administrative Agent), whichever of the following is applicable:
(I)
in the case of a Foreign Lender claiming the benefits of an income tax treaty to
which  the  United  States  is  a  party  (x)  with  respect  to  payments  of  interest  under  any  Loan
Document, executed copies of IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable, establishing
an

exemption from, or reduction of, U.S. federal withholding Tax pursuant to the “interest” article
of  such  tax  treaty  and  (y)  with  respect  to  any  other  applicable  payments  under  any  Loan
Document, IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable, establishing an exemption from,
or  reduction  of,  U.S.  federal  withholding  Tax  pursuant  to  the  “business  profits”  or  “other
income” article of such tax treaty;
(II)
executed copies of IRS Form W-8ECI;
(III)
in  the  case  of  a  Foreign  Lender  claiming  the  benefits  of  the  exemption  for
portfolio interest under Section 881(c) of the Code, (x) a certificate substantially in the form of
Exhibit  G-1  to  the  effect  that  such  Foreign  Lender  is  not  a  “bank”  within  the  meaning  of
Section  881(c)(3)(A)  of  the  Code,  a  “10  percent  shareholder”  of  the  Borrower  within  the
meaning of Section 881(c)(3)(B) of the Code, or a “controlled foreign corporation” described
in Section 881(c)(3)(C) of the Code (a “U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate”) and (y) executed
copies of IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable; or
(IV)
to the extent a Foreign Lender is not the beneficial owner, executed copies of
IRS Form W-8IMY, accompanied by IRS Form W-8ECI, IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E,
as applicable, a U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate substantially in the form of Exhibit G-2 or
Exhibit G-3, IRS Form W-9, and/or other certification documents from each beneficial owner,
as applicable; provided that if the Foreign Lender is a partnership and one or more direct or
indirect  partners  of such Foreign  Lender  are claiming  the portfolio  interest  exemption,  such
Foreign Lender may provide a U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate substantially in the form of
Exhibit G-4 on behalf of each such direct and indirect partner.
(C)
any  Foreign  Lender  shall,  to  the  extent  it  is  legally  entitled  to  do  so,  deliver  to  the
Borrower  and  the  Administrative  Agent  (in  such  number  of  copies  as  shall  be  requested  by  the
recipient)  on  or  prior  to  the  date  on  which  such  Foreign  Lender  becomes  a  Lender  under  this
Agreement  (and  from  time  to  time  thereafter  upon  the  reasonable  request  of  the  Borrower  or  the
Administrative Agent), executed copies of any other form prescribed by applicable law as a basis for
claiming exemption from or a reduction in U.S. federal withholding Tax, duly completed, together
with such supplementary documentation as may be

prescribed  by  applicable  law  to  permit the  Borrower  or the  Administrative  Agent  to determine  the
withholding or deduction required to be made; and
(D)
if a payment made to a Lender under any Loan Document would be subject to U.S.
federal withholding Tax imposed by FATCA if such Lender were to fail to comply with the applicable
reporting  requirements  of FATCA  (including  those  contained  in  Section  1471(b)  or  1472(b)  of  the
Code, as applicable), such Lender shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent at the
time or times prescribed by law and at such time or times reasonably requested by the Borrower or the
Administrative Agent such documentation prescribed by applicable law (including as prescribed by
Section 1471(b)(3) (C)(i) of the Code) and such additional documentation reasonably requested by the
Borrower or the Administrative Agent as may be necessary for the Borrower and the Administrative
Agent to comply with their obligations under FATCA and to determine that such Lender has complied
with such Lender’s obligations under FATCA or to determine the amount to deduct and withhold from
such payment. Solely for purposes of this clause (D), “FATCA” shall include any amendments made
to FATCA after the Effective Date.
Section 21.
Each Lender agrees that if any form or certification it previously delivered pursuant to this Section 2.16 expires or
becomes obsolete or inaccurate in any respect, it shall update such form or certification or promptly notify the Borrower and the
Administrative Agent in writing of its legal inability to do so.
(a) At no time shall the Administrative Agent have any obligation to file for or otherwise pursue on behalf of a
Lender, any refund of Taxes withheld or deducted from funds paid for the account of such Lender, as the case may be. If
any Recipient determines, in its sole discretion exercised in good faith, that it has received a refund of, or credit with
respect to, any Taxes as to which it has been indemnified  pursuant to this Section 2.16 (including by the payment of
additional amounts pursuant to this Section 2.16), it shall pay to the Borrower an amount equal to such refund or credit
(but only to the extent of indemnity payments made under this Section 2.16 with respect to the Taxes giving rise to such
refund or credit), net of all out-of-pocket expenses (including Taxes) of such indemnified party and without interest (other
than any interest paid by the relevant Governmental Authority with respect to such refund or credit). The Borrower, upon
the  request  of  such  indemnified  party,  shall  repay  to  such  indemnified  party  the  amount  paid  over  pursuant  to  this
paragraph (f) (plus any penalties, interest or other charges imposed by the relevant Governmental Authority) in the event
such  indemnified  party  is  required  to  repay  such  refund  or  credit  to  such  Governmental  Authority.  Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this paragraph (f), in no event will the indemnified party be required to pay any amount to the
Borrower pursuant to this paragraph (f) the payment of which would place the indemnified party in a less favorable net
after-Tax position than the indemnified party would have been in if the Tax subject to indemnification and giving rise to
such refund or credit had not been deducted, withheld or otherwise imposed and the

indemnification payments or additional amounts with respect to such Tax had never been paid. This paragraph (f) shall not
be construed to require any Recipient to make available its tax returns (or any other information relating to its Taxes that it
deems confidential) to the Borrower or any other Person.
(b) Each  party’s  obligations  under  this  Section  2.16  shall  survive  for  one  year  after  the  termination  of  this
Agreement and the payment of the Loans and all other amounts payable hereunder.
1.2
Indemnity. The Borrower agrees to indemnify each Lender for, and to hold each Lender harmless from, any
loss (other than the loss of Applicable Margin) or expense that such Lender may sustain or incur as a consequence of (a)
default by the Borrower in making a borrowing of, conversion into or continuation of Eurodollar Loans after the Borrower
has given a notice requesting the same in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, (b) default by the Borrower in
making any prepayment of or conversion from Eurodollar Loans after the Borrower has given a notice thereof in accordance
with the provisions of this Agreement or (c) the making of a prepayment of Eurodollar Loans on a day that is not the last day
of an Interest Period with respect thereto. A certificate as to any amounts payable pursuant to this Section submitted to the
Borrower by any Lender shall be conclusive in the absence of manifest error. This covenant shall survive for 90 days after
the termination of this Agreement and the payment of the Loans and all other amounts payable hereunder.
1.3
Change  of  Lending  Office.  Each  Lender  agrees  that,  upon  the  occurrence  of  any  event  giving  rise  to  the
operation of Section 2.15 or 2.16 with respect to such Lender, it will, if requested by the Borrower, use reasonable efforts
(subject to overall policy considerations of such Lender) to designate another lending office for any Loans affected by such
event with the object of avoiding the consequences of such event; provided, that such designation is made on terms that, in
the sole but reasonable  judgment  of such Lender,  cause  such Lender  and its lending  office(s)  to suffer no unreimbursed
economic disadvantage or any legal or regulatory disadvantage, and provided, further, that nothing in this Section shall affect
or postpone any of the obligations of the Borrower or the rights of any Lender pursuant to Section 2.15 or 2.16.
1.4
Replacement of Lenders. The Borrower shall be permitted to replace any Lender that (a) requests (on its behalf
or any of its Participants)  reimbursement  for amounts owing pursuant to Section 2.15 or 2.16, (b) provides notice under
Section 2.21 or (c) becomes a Defaulting Lender, with a replacement financial institution; provided that (i) such replacement
does not conflict with any Requirement of Law, (ii) no Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time of
such  replacement,  (iii)  prior  to any  such  replacement,  such  Lender  shall  have  taken  no  action  under  Section  2.18  which
eliminates the continued need for payment of amounts owing pursuant to Section 2.15 or 2.16, (iv) the replacement financial
institution  shall  purchase,  at  par,  all  Loans  and  other  amounts  owing  to such  replaced  Lender  on  or prior  to  the  date  of
replacement, (v) the Borrower shall be liable to such replaced Lender under Section 2.17 if any Eurodollar Loan owing to
such replaced Lender shall be purchased other than on the last day of the Interest Period relating thereto, (vi) the replacement
financial institution, if not already a Lender, shall be reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent, (vii) the replaced
Lender shall be obligated to make such replacement in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.6 (provided that the
Borrower shall be obligated to pay the registration and processing fee referred to

therein), (viii) until such time as such replacement shall be consummated, the Borrower shall pay all additional amounts (if
any) required pursuant to Section 2.15 or 2.16, as the case may be, and (ix) any such replacement shall not be deemed to be a
waiver of any rights that the Borrower, the Administrative Agent or any other Lender shall have against the replaced Lender.
1.5
Defaulting Lenders.  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  in  this  Agreement,  if  any  Lender
becomes a Defaulting Lender, then, until such time as that Lender is no longer a Defaulting Lender, to the extent permitted
by applicable law:
(a) any payment of principal, interest, fees or other amounts received by the Administrative Agent for the account
of that Defaulting Lender (whether voluntary or mandatory, at maturity, pursuant to Section 7 or otherwise, and including
any amounts made available to the Administrative Agent by that Defaulting Lender pursuant to Section 9.7), shall be
applied at such time or times as may be determined by the Administrative Agent as follows: first, to the payment of any
amounts owing by that Defaulting Lender to the Administrative Agent hereunder; second, as the Borrower may request
(so long as no Default or Event of Default exists), to the funding of any Loan in respect of which that Defaulting Lender
has failed to fund its portion thereof as required by this Agreement, as determined by the Administrative Agent; third, if so
determined by the Borrower with the consent of the Administrative Agent, not to be unreasonably withheld, to be held in a
non-interest bearing deposit account and released in order to satisfy obligations of that Defaulting Lender to fund Loans
under this Agreement; fourth, to the payment of any amounts owing to the Lenders as a result of any judgment of a court
of competent jurisdiction obtained by any Lender against that Defaulting Lender as a result of that Defaulting Lender’s
breach of its obligations under this Agreement; fifth, so long as no Default or Event of Default exists, to the payment of
any amounts owing to the Borrower  as a result of any judgment of a court of competent  jurisdiction  obtained by the
Borrower  against  that  Defaulting  Lender  as  a  result  of  that  Defaulting  Lender’s  breach  of  its  obligations  under  this
Agreement; and sixth, to that Defaulting Lender or as otherwise directed by a court of competent jurisdiction; provided
that if such payment is a payment of the principal amount of the Loans in respect of which that Defaulting Lender has not
fully funded its appropriate share such payment shall be applied solely to pay the Loans of all non-Defaulting Lenders on
a pro rata basis prior to being applied to the payment of any Loans of that Defaulting Lender. Any payments, prepayments
or other amounts paid or payable to a Defaulting Lender that are applied (or held) to pay amounts owed by a Defaulting
Lender pursuant to this Section 2.20(a) shall be deemed paid to and redirected by that Defaulting Lender, and each Lender
irrevocably consents hereto;
(b) [Reserved];
(c) [Reserved];
(d) [Reserved]; and
(e) that Defaulting Lender’s right to approve or disapprove any amendment, supplement, modification, waiver or
consent with respect to this

Agreement shall be restricted as set forth in the definition of “Required Lenders” and Section 10.1.
If the Borrower and the Administrative Agent reasonably determine in writing that a Defaulting Lender should no longer be deemed
to be a Defaulting Lender, the Administrative Agent will so notify the parties hereto, whereupon as of the effective date specified in
such notice and subject to any conditions set forth therein (which may include arrangements with respect to any cash collateral), that
Lender will, to the extent applicable, purchase that portion of outstanding Loans of the other Lenders or take such other actions as
the  Administrative  Agent  may  determine  to  be  necessary  to  cause  the  Loans  to  be  held  on  a  pro  rata  basis  by  the  Lenders  in
accordance with their Percentages, whereupon that Lender will cease to be a Defaulting Lender; provided that no adjustments will be
made  retroactively  with  respect  to  fees  accrued  or  payments  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Borrower  while  that  Lender  was  a
Defaulting Lender; and provided, further, that except to the extent otherwise expressly agreed by the affected parties, no change
hereunder from Defaulting Lender to Lender will constitute a waiver or release of any claim of any party hereunder arising from that
Lender’s having been a Defaulting Lender.
1.6
Illegality. If any Lender determines that any Law has made it unlawful, or that any Governmental Authority
has asserted  that  it is unlawful,  for any  Lender  or its applicable  lending  office  to make,  maintain,  or  fund Loans  whose
interest is determined by reference to the Eurodollar Rate, or to determine or charge interest rates based upon the Eurodollar
Rate, or any Governmental Authority has imposed material restrictions on the authority of such Lender to purchase or sell, or
to  take  deposits  of,  Dollars  in  the  London  interbank  market,  then,  upon  notice  thereof  by  such  Lender  to  the  Borrower
(through the Administrative Agent), (a) any obligation of such Lender to make or continue Eurodollar Loans or to convert
ABR Loans to Eurodollar Loans shall be suspended, and (b) if such notice asserts the illegality of such Lender making or
maintaining ABR Loans the interest rate on which is determined by reference to the Eurodollar Rate component of the ABR,
the  interest  rate  on  which  ABR  Loans  of  such  Lender  shall,  if  necessary  to  avoid  such  illegality,  be  determined  by  the
Administrative  Agent  without  reference  to  the  Eurodollar  Rate  component  of  the  ABR,  in  each  case  until  such  Lender
notifies the Administrative Agent and the Borrower that the circumstances giving rise to such determination no longer exist.
Upon  receipt  of such  notice,  (i)  the  Borrower  shall,  upon  demand  from such  Lender  (with  a copy  to  the  Administrative
Agent), prepay or, if applicable, convert all Eurodollar Loans of such Lender to ABR Loans (the interest rate on which ABR
Loans  of  such  Lender  shall,  if  necessary  to  avoid  such  illegality,  be  determined  by  the  Administrative  Agent  without
reference to the Eurodollar Rate component of the ABR), either on the last day of the Interest Period therefor, if such Lender
may lawfully continue to maintain such Eurodollar Loans to such day, or immediately, if such Lender may not lawfully
continue  to  maintain  such  Eurodollar  Loans  and  (ii)  if  such  notice  asserts  the  illegality  of  such  Lender  determining  or
charging interest rates based upon the Eurodollar Rate, the Administrative Agent shall during the period of such suspension
compute  the  ABR  applicable  to  such  Lender  without  reference  to  the  Eurodollar  Rate  component  thereof  until  the
Administrative Agent is advised in writing by such Lender that it is no longer illegal for such Lender to determine or charge
interest rates based upon the Eurodollar Rate. Upon any such prepayment or conversion, the Borrower shall also pay accrued
interest on the amount so prepaid or converted, together with any additional amounts required pursuant to Section 2.17.

Section 22.
[RESERVED].
Section 23.
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
To induce the Administrative Agent and the Lenders to enter into this Agreement and to make the Loans, the Borrower hereby
represents and warrants to the Administrative Agent and each Lender, on the Effective Date, that:
1.1
Financial  Condition.  (a)  The  audited  consolidated  balance  sheet  of  the  Borrower  and  its  consolidated
Subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020, and the related consolidated statements of income and cash flows for the fiscal year
ended on such date, reported on by Deloitte & Touche LLP, and (b) the unaudited consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower
and its consolidated Subsidiaries as of March 31, 2021, and the related consolidated statements of income and cash flows for
the portion of the fiscal year ended on such date, each delivered to the Administrative Agent prior to the Amendment No. 1
Effective Date, in each case, (i) were prepared in accordance with GAAP consistently applied throughout the periods covered
thereby, except as otherwise expressly noted therein, and (ii) present fairly in all material respects the consolidated financial
condition of the Borrower and its consolidated Subsidiaries as of such date, and its consolidated income and its consolidated
cash  flows  for  the  respective  fiscal  year  or  portion  of  the  fiscal  year  then  ended,  subject,  in  the  case  of  the  financial
statements referred to in clause (b), to the absence of footnotes and to normal year-end audit adjustments.
1.2
No Change. Since December 31, 2020, no Specified Material Adverse Effect has occurred.
1.3
Existence; Compliance with Law. Each of the Borrower and its Significant Subsidiaries (a) is duly organized,
validly existing and in good standing under the laws of its jurisdiction of organization, (b) has the organizational power and
organizational authority to own and operate its property, to lease the property it operates as lessee and to conduct the business
in which it is currently engaged, (c) is duly qualified as a foreign corporation or other organization and in good standing
under the laws of each jurisdiction where its ownership, lease or operation of property or the conduct of its business requires
such qualification except to the extent that the failure to so qualify could not reasonably be expected to have a Material
Adverse Effect and (d) is in compliance with all Requirements of Law except for any Requirements of Law being contested
in  good  faith  by  appropriate  proceedings  and  except  to  the  extent  that  the  failure  to  comply  therewith  could  not,  in  the
aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect.
1.4
Power;  Authorization;  Enforceable  Obligations.  The  Borrower  has  the  corporate  power  and  corporate
authority to execute and deliver and to perform its obligations under the Loan Documents and to obtain extensions of credit
hereunder.  The  Borrower  has  taken  all  necessary  corporate  action  to  authorize  the  execution  and  delivery  of,  and
performance of its obligations under, the Loan Documents to which it is a party and to authorize the extensions of credit on
the terms and conditions of this Agreement. No consent or authorization of, filing with, notice to or other act by or in respect
of, any Governmental Authority or any other Person is required in connection with the extensions of credit hereunder or with
the execution, delivery, performance, validity or enforceability of this Agreement or any of the Loan Documents, except (i)
consents,

authorizations,  filings  and  notices  which  have  been  obtained  or  made  and  are  in  full  force  and  effect,  (ii)  any  consent,
authorization or filing that may be required in the future the failure of which to make or obtain could not reasonably be
expected to have a Material Adverse Effect and (iii) applicable Requirements of Law (including the approval of the CPUC)
prior to foreclosure or other exercise of remedies under the Loan Documents. This Agreement has been, and each other Loan
Document upon execution and delivery will be, duly executed and delivered. This Agreement constitutes, and each other
Loan Document upon execution will constitute, a legal, valid and binding obligation of the Borrower, enforceable against the
Borrower in accordance with its terms, except as enforceability may be limited by (x) applicable bankruptcy, insolvency,
reorganization,  moratorium  or  similar  laws  affecting  the  enforcement  of  creditors’  rights  generally,  laws  of  general
application  related  to  the  enforceability  of  securities  secured  by  real  estate  and  by  general  equitable  principles  (whether
enforcement is sought by proceedings in equity or at law) and (y) applicable Requirements of Law (including the approval of
the CPUC) prior to foreclosure or other exercise of remedies hereunder or under the Loan Documents.
1.5
No Legal Bar. The execution and delivery of, and the performance of the obligations under, this Agreement
and the other Loan Documents, the borrowing of the Loans hereunder and the use of the proceeds thereof will not violate in
any  material  respect  any  Requirement  of  Law  or  any  Contractual  Obligation  of  the  Borrower  or  any  of  its  Significant
Subsidiaries and will not result in, or require, the creation or imposition of any Lien on any of their respective properties or
revenues pursuant to any Requirement of Law or any such Contractual Obligation (other than the Liens created by the Loan
Documents and the FMB Indenture).
1.6
Litigation. (a) No litigation, investigation or proceeding of or before any arbitrator or Governmental Authority
is pending or, to the knowledge of the Borrower, threatened in writing by or against the Borrower or any of its Significant
Subsidiaries or against any of their respective material properties or revenues with respect to any of the Loan Documents.
(b) No litigation, investigation or proceeding of or before any arbitrator or Governmental Authority is pending or,
to the knowledge of the Borrower, threatened in writing by or against the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries
or  against  any  of  their  respective  material  properties  or  revenues,  except  as  disclosed  in  the  Specified  Exchange  Act
Filings, that could reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect.
1.7
No Default. No Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing.
1.8
Taxes. The Borrower and each of its Significant Subsidiaries has filed or caused to be filed all Federal and
state returns of income and franchise taxes imposed in lieu of net income taxes and all other material tax returns that are
required to be filed and has paid all taxes shown to be due and payable on said returns or with respect to any claims or
assessments for taxes made against it or any of its property by any Governmental Authority (other than (i) any amounts the
validity of which are currently being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and with respect to which reserves in
conformity with GAAP have been provided on the books of the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries, as applicable,
and (ii) claims which could not reasonably be expected to have a

Material Adverse Effect). No material tax Liens have been filed against the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries
other than (A) Liens for taxes which are not delinquent or (B) Liens for taxes which are being contested in good faith by
appropriate proceedings and with respect to which reserves in conformity with GAAP have been provided on the books of
the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries, as applicable.
1.9
Federal Regulations. No part of the proceeds of any Loans hereunder, will be used for “buying” or “carrying”
any “margin stock” within the respective meanings of each of the quoted terms under Regulation U as now and from time to
time hereafter in effect or for any purpose that violates the provisions of the Regulations of the Federal Reserve Board.
1.10
ERISA.  No  Reportable  Event  has  occurred  during  the  five  year  period  prior  to  the  date  on  which  this
representation is made or deemed made with respect to any Plan, and each Plan has complied with the applicable provisions
of ERISA and the Code, except, in each case, to the extent that any such Reportable Event or failure to comply with the
applicable provisions of ERISA or the Code could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect. During
the five year period prior to the date on which this representation is made or deemed made, there has been no (i) failure to
make a required contribution to any Plan that would result in the imposition of a Lien or other encumbrance or the provision
of security under Section 430 of the Code or Section 303 or 4068 of ERISA, or the arising of such a Lien or encumbrance; or
(ii)  “unpaid  minimum  required  contribution”  or  “accumulated  funding  deficiency”  (as  defined  or  otherwise  set  forth  in
Section 4971 of the Code or Part 3 of Subtitle B of Title I of ERISA), whether or not waived, except, in each case, to the
extent that such event could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect. No termination of a Single
Employer Plan has occurred, and no Lien in favor of the PBGC or a Plan has arisen, during such five-year period. The
present value of all accrued benefits under each Single Employer Plan (based on those assumptions used to fund such Plan)
did not, as of the last annual valuation date for which a certified actuarial valuation report is available prior to the date on
which this representation is made or deemed made, exceed the value of the assets of such Plan allocable to such accrued
benefits, except as could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect. Neither the Borrower nor any
Commonly Controlled Entity has had a complete or partial withdrawal from any Multiemployer Plan during the five year
period  prior  to  the  date  on  which  this  representation  is  made  or  deemed  made  that  has  resulted  or  could  reasonably  be
expected to result in a material liability under ERISA, and neither the Borrower nor any Commonly Controlled Entity would
become subject to any liability under ERISA if the Borrower or any such Commonly Controlled Entity were to withdraw
completely  from  all  Multiemployer  Plans  as  of  the  valuation  date  most  closely  preceding  the  date  on  which  this
representation is made or deemed made, except as could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect.
No  such  Multiemployer  Plan  is  in  endangered  or  critical  status  (within  the  meaning  of  Section  305  of  ERISA)  or  in
Insolvency.
1.11
Investment Company Act; Other Regulations. The Borrower is not an “investment company”, or a company
“controlled” by an “investment company”, within the meaning of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended. On the
Effective Date, the Borrower is not subject to regulation under any Requirement of Law (other than (a) Regulation X of the
Federal Reserve Board and (b) Sections 817-830, and Sections 701 and 851 of the California

Public Utilities Code) that limits its ability to incur Indebtedness under this Agreement.
1.12
Use of Proceeds. The proceeds of the Loans shall be used to fund the transactions contemplated under the
Plan of Reorganization.
1.13
Environmental Matters.  Except  as  disclosed  in  the  Specified  Exchange  Act  Filings,  the  Borrower  and  its
Significant Subsidiaries are not subject to any pending violations or liabilities under Environmental Laws or relating to the
disposal, spill or other release of Materials of Environmental Concern that would reasonably be expected to have a Material
Adverse Effect, and, to the knowledge of the Borrower, there are no facts, circumstances or conditions that could reasonably
be expected to give rise to such violations or liabilities.
1.14
Regulatory Matters. Solely by virtue of the execution, delivery and performance of, or the consummation of
the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, no Lender shall be or become subject to regulation (a) under the FPA or (b)
as a “public utility” or “public service corporation” or the equivalent under any Requirement of Law.
1.15
Sanctions;  Anti-Corruption.  None  of  the  Borrower,  any  of  its  Subsidiaries,  nor,  to  the  knowledge  of  the
Borrower, any director, officer, agent, Affiliate or employee of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries is currently (i) the
subject of any U.S. sanctions administered by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Treasury Department or the
U.S.  State  Department  (“Sanctions”)  or  (ii)  located,  organized  or  resident  in  a  country  or  territory  that  is,  or  whose
government is, the subject of any Sanctions. None of the Borrower, any of its Subsidiaries nor, to the knowledge of the
Borrower, any director, officer, agent, Affiliate or employee of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries, has taken any action,
directly or indirectly, that would result in a violation in any material respect by any such Person of the United States Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, as amended (“FCPA”) or of any other anti-bribery or anti-corruption laws, rules, regulations
legally applicable to such Persons (collectively, “Anti-Corruption Laws”). The Borrower will not use the proceeds of the
Loans, or lend, contribute or otherwise make available such proceeds (a) to any Subsidiary, Affiliate, joint venture partner or
other Person or entity, to fund the activities of any Person, or in any country or territory, that, at the time of such funding, is,
or whose government is, the subject of any Sanctions, or (a) directly, or, to the knowledge of the Borrower, indirectly, for
any payments to any governmental official or employee, political party, official of a political party, candidate for political
office,  or  anyone  else  acting  in  an  official  capacity,  in  order  to  obtain,  retain  or  direct  business  or  obtain  any  improper
advantage, in violation of the FCPA or of any Anti-Corruption Laws.
1.16
Affected Financial Institutions. The Borrower is not an Affected Financial Institution.
1.17
Solvency. The Borrower and its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis, are Solvent as of the Amendment No. 1
Effective Date.
1.18
Disclosure.

(a) All written information relating to the Borrower, its Subsidiaries and their respective businesses, other than
any projections, estimates and other forward-looking materials and information of a general economic or industry specific
nature, that has been provided by or on behalf of the Borrower to the Administrative Agent or the Lenders in connection
with the transactions contemplated hereby does not, when taken as a whole, contain any untrue statement of a material fact
or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the statements contained therein not materially misleading in
light of the circumstances under which such statements were made (giving effect to all supplements and updates thereto).
Any projected information, estimates, other forward-looking materials and pro forma financial information that have been
made available to any Lenders or the Administrative Agent prior to the Effective Date in connection with the transactions
contemplated hereby have been prepared in good faith based upon assumptions believed by the Borrower to be reasonable
as of the date such information was furnished to the Lenders and as of the Effective Date (it being understood that actual
results  may  vary  materially  from  such  projections  and  pro  forma  information  and  such  projections  and  pro  forma
information are not a guarantee of performance).
(b) As  of  the  Effective  Date,  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Borrower,  the  information  included  in  any  Beneficial
Ownership Certification provided on or prior to the Effective Date to any Lender in connection with this Agreement is true
and correct in all respects.
1.19
Status of Obligations. The issuance to the Administrative Agent of the Senior Bonds provides the Lenders, as
beneficial  holders  of  the  Senior  Bonds  through  the  Administrative  Agent,  the  benefit  of  the  Lien  of  the  FMB  Indenture
equally and ratably with the holders of other First Mortgage Bonds.
1.20
Ownership of Property. As of the Effective Date, each of the Borrower and its Significant Subsidiaries has
good title to, or valid leasehold interests in, all its real and personal property material to its business, subject to no Liens other
than Liens permitted under Section 7.3, except for where the failure would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably
be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect.
1.21
Covered Entity. The Borrower is not a Covered Entity.
Section 24.
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
1.1
Conditions to the Effective Date. The occurrence of the Effective Date and the obligation of each Lender to
make its Loans hereunder on the Effective Date is subject to the satisfaction of the following conditions precedent:
(a) Credit Agreement.  The  Administrative  Agent  shall  have  received  this  Agreement  (including  copies  of  all
schedules attached hereto in a form reasonably satisfactory to the Lenders), executed and delivered by the Administrative
Agent, the Borrower and each Person listed on Schedule 1.1.
(b) Consents and Approvals. All governmental and third party consents and approvals necessary in connection
with  the  execution  and  delivery  of  this  Agreement  and  the  other  Loan  Documents  and  the  consummation  of  the
transactions contemplated hereby shall have been

obtained and be in full force and effect; and the Administrative Agent shall have received a certificate of a Responsible
Officer to the foregoing effect.
(c) KYC Information. At least three (3) Business Days prior to the Effective Date, the Administrative Agent and
each Lender shall have received all documentation and information relating to the Borrower as is reasonably requested in
writing by the Administrative Agent and/or any such Lender at least ten (10) Business Days prior to the Effective Date
that is required by Governmental Authorities under applicable “know your customer” and anti-money laundering rules and
regulations, including the Patriot Act and the Beneficial Ownership Regulation. If the Borrower qualifies as a “legal entity
customer” under the Beneficial Ownership Regulation and the Administrative Agent or any Lender so request at least five
(5)  Business  Days  prior  to  the  Effective  Date,  then  at  least  three  (3)  Business  Days  prior  to  the  Effective  Date,  the
Borrower shall have delivered to the Administrative Agent and/or any such Lender a Beneficial Ownership Certification
in relation to the Borrower.
(d) Bond Documents. The Administrative Agent shall have received:
Section 25.
the Bond Delivery Agreement, duly executed and delivered by the Borrower and Administrative Agent;
Section 26.
the Senior Bonds in a face amount equal to the Loans as of the Effective Date, duly issued and authenticated under
the FMB Indenture and in a form reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent;
Section 27.
the Supplemental Indenture, duly executed and delivered by the Borrower and the Indenture Trustee and in a form
reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent;
Section  28.
a  certificate  of  a  duly  authorized  officer  of  the  Indenture  Trustee  certifying  that  each  Senior  Bond  has  been
authenticated and is outstanding under the FMB Indenture;
Section 29.
copies of all legal opinions and other documents delivered to the Indenture Trustee by or on behalf of the Borrower
on or prior to the Effective Date in connection with the issuance of each Senior Bond; and
Section 30.
copies of all title reports and commitments as of the Effective Date with respect to the Mortgaged Property consisting
of real property as to which Liens in favor of the Indenture Trustee, for the benefit of the holders of the First Mortgage Bond, has
been granted.
(a) Fees. The Lenders, the Arrangers and the Administrative Agent shall have received all fees required to be
paid,  and  all  expenses  for  which  invoices  have  been  presented  (including  the  reasonable  fees  and  expenses  of  legal
counsel) on or before the date that is two (2) Business Days prior to the Effective Date.
(b) Closing  Certificate;  Certified  Articles  of  Incorporation;  Good  Standing  Certificates.  The  Administrative
Agent shall have received (i) a certificate of the Borrower, dated the Effective Date, substantially in the form of Exhibit D,
with appropriate insertions and attachments, including the articles of incorporation of the Borrower certified as of a recent
date by the Secretary

of State of the State of California, (ii) a good standing certificate for the Borrower dated as of a recent date from the
Secretary  of State of the State of California,  and (iii) a certificate  of a Responsible  Officer,  dated the Effective  Date,
confirming the satisfaction of the conditions precedent set forth in Sections 5.1(h) and (i).
(c) Legal Opinion. The Administrative Agent shall have received the legal opinion of (i) Hunton Andrews Kurth
LLP,  counsel  to  the  Borrower,  and  (ii)  Munger,  Tolles  &  Olson  LLP,  special  California  regulatory  counsel  to  the
Borrower, each in a form reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent.
(d) Representations and Warranties. Each of the representations and warranties made by the Borrower in this
Agreement that does not contain a materiality qualification shall be true and correct in all material respects on and as of
the Effective Date, and each of the representations and warranties made by the Borrower in this Agreement that contains a
materiality qualification shall be true and correct on and as of the Effective Date (or, in each case, to the extent such
representations and warranties specifically relate to an earlier date, that such representations and warranties were true and
correct in all material respects, or true and correct, as the case may be, as of such earlier date).
(e) No Default. No Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing on the Effective Date or
would result from the funding of the Loans on the Effective Date.
(f)
Notice of Borrowing. The Administrative Agent shall have received a notice of borrowing in accordance with
the requirements of Section 2.2.
(g) Solvency. The Administrative Agent shall have received a solvency certificate from the chief financial officer
of the Borrower in substantially the form of Exhibit I hereto.
Section 31.
AFFIRMATIVE COVENANTS
The  Borrower  hereby  agrees  that,  so  long  as  any  Loan,  any  interest  on  any  Loan  or  any  fee  payable  to  any  Lender  or  the
Administrative Agent hereunder remains outstanding, or any other amount then due and payable is owing to any Lender or the
Administrative  Agent  hereunder,  the  Borrower  shall  and,  with  respect  to  Sections  6.3  and  6.6(b),  shall  cause  its  Significant
Subsidiaries to:
1.1
Financial  Statements.  Furnish  to  the  Administrative  Agent  with  a  copy  for  each  Lender,  and  the
Administrative Agent shall deliver to each Lender:
(a) as soon as available, but in any event within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of the Borrower, a copy
of the audited consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower and its consolidated Subsidiaries as at the end of such year and
the  related  audited  consolidated  statements  of  income  and  cash  flows  for  such  year,  setting  forth  in  each  case  in
comparative  form  the  figures  for  the  previous  year,  reported  on  without  a  “going  concern”  or  like  qualification  or
exception, or qualification arising out of the scope of the audit, by Deloitte & Touche LLP or other independent certified
public accountants of nationally recognized standing; and

(b) as soon as available, but in any event not later than 60 days after the end of each of the first three quarterly
periods of each fiscal year of the Borrower, the unaudited consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower and its consolidated
Subsidiaries as at the end of such quarter and the related unaudited consolidated statements of income and cash flows for
such quarter and the portion of the fiscal year through the end of such quarter, setting forth in each case in comparative
form the figures for the previous year, certified by a Responsible Officer as being fairly stated in all material respects
(subject to the absence of footnotes and normal year-end audit adjustments).
All such financial statements shall (x) be complete and correct in all material respects and (y) shall be prepared in reasonable detail
and in accordance with GAAP applied (except as approved by such accountants or officer, as the case may be, and disclosed in
reasonable detail therein) consistently throughout the periods reflected therein and with prior periods, subject, in each case to the
absence  of  footnotes  and  to  normal  year-end  audit  adjustments.  The  Borrower  shall  be  deemed  to  have  delivered  the  financial
statements required to be delivered pursuant to this Section 6.1 upon the filing of such financial statements by the Borrower through
the SEC’s EDGAR system (or any successor electronic gathering system that is publicly available free of charge) or the publication
by the Borrower of such financial statements on its website.
1.2
Certificates; Other Information. Furnish to the Administrative Agent, for delivery to the Lenders:
(a) within  two  Business  Days  after  the  delivery  of  any  financial  statements  pursuant  to  Section  6.1,  (i)  a
certificate of a Responsible Officer stating that such Responsible Officer has obtained no actual knowledge of any Default
or Event of Default except as specified in such certificate and (ii) a Compliance Certificate, substantially in the form of
Exhibit C, containing all information and calculations reasonably necessary for determining compliance by the Borrower
with  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  referred  to  therein  as  of  the  last  day  of  the  fiscal  quarter  or  fiscal  year  of  the
Borrower, as the case may be;
(b) within five days after the same are sent, copies of all financial statements and reports that the Borrower sends
to the holders of any class of its debt securities or public equity securities, provided that, such financial statements and
reports shall be deemed to have been delivered upon the filing of such financial statements and reports by the Borrower
through the SEC’s EDGAR system (or any successor electronic gathering system that is publicly available free of charge)
or publication by the Borrower of such financial statements and reports on its website;
(c) promptly, such additional financial and other information (other than any such information the disclosure of
which is prohibited by applicable law or binding agreement or subject to attorney-client privilege or constitutes attorney-
work  product  or  constitutes  non-financial  trade  secrets  or  non-financial  proprietary  information  so  long  as  (x)  such
confidentiality obligation was not entered into in contemplation hereof and (y) the Borrower provides such Lender with
notice that information is being withheld due to the existence of such confidentiality obligation) as any Lender, through
the Administrative Agent, may from time to time reasonably request; and

(d) promptly, such documentation and other information that the Administrative Agent or such Lender reasonably
requests  in  order  to  comply  with  its  ongoing  obligations  under  applicable  “know  your  customer”  and  anti-money
laundering rules and regulations, including the Patriot Act and the Beneficial Ownership Regulation.
1.3
Payment of Taxes. Pay all taxes due and payable or any other tax assessments made against the Borrower or
any of its Significant Subsidiaries or any of their respective property by any Governmental Authority (other than (i) any
amounts the validity of which are currently being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and with respect to
which  reserves  in  conformity  with  GAAP  have  been  provided  on  the  books  of  the  Borrower  or  any  of  its  Significant
Subsidiaries,  as  applicable  or  (ii)  where  the  failure  to  effect  such  payment  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to  have  a
Material Adverse Effect).
1.4
Maintenance  of  Existence;  Compliance.  (a)(i)  Preserve,  renew  and  keep  in  full  force  and  effect  its
organizational  existence  and  (ii)  take  all  reasonable  action  to  maintain  all  rights,  privileges  and  franchises  necessary  or
desirable in the normal conduct of its business, except, in each case, as otherwise permitted by Section 7.4 and except, in the
case of clause (ii) above, to the extent that failure to do so could not reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse
Effect; (b) comply with all Contractual Obligations except to the extent that failure to comply therewith could not, in the
aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect and (c) comply with all Requirements of Law except for
any Requirements of Law being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings or except to the extent that failure to
comply therewith could not, in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect.
1.5
Maintenance  of  Property;  Insurance.  (a)  Keep  all  property  useful  and  necessary  in  its  business  in  good
working order and condition, ordinary wear and tear and casualty excepted, except to the extent that failure to do so could
not, in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect, and (b) maintain with financially sound and
reputable insurance companies insurance on all its material property in at least such amounts and against at least such risks as
are usually insured against in the same general area by companies engaged in the same or a similar business of comparable
size and financial strength and owning similar properties in the same general areas in which the Borrower operates, which
may include self-insurance, if determined by the Borrower to be reasonably prudent.
1.6
Inspection of Property; Books and Records; Discussions. (a) Keep proper books of records and account in
which full, true and correct entries in conformity with GAAP and all Requirements of Law shall be made of all dealings and
transactions  in  relation  to  its  business  and  activities  and  (b)  unless  a  Default  or  Event  of  Default  has  occurred  and  is
continuing, not more than once a year and after at least five Business Days’ notice, (i) permit representatives of any Lender
to visit and inspect any of its properties and examine and make abstracts from any of its books and records at any reasonable
time to discuss the business, operations,  properties  and financial  and other condition  of the Borrower  and its Significant
Subsidiaries  with  officers  and  employees  of  the  Borrower  and  its  Significant  Subsidiaries  and  (ii)  use  commercially
reasonable  efforts  to  provide  for  the  Lenders  (in  the  presence  of  representatives  of  the  Borrower)  to  meet  with  the
independent certified public accountants of the Borrower and its Significant Subsidiaries; provided, that any such visits or
inspections shall be subject to such

conditions as the Borrower and each of its Significant Subsidiaries shall deem necessary based on reasonable considerations
of safety, security and confidentiality; and provided, further, that neither the Borrower nor any Significant Subsidiary shall be
required  to  disclose  to  any  Person  any  information  the  disclosure  of  which  is  prohibited  by  applicable  law  or  binding
agreement  or  subject  to  attorney-client  privilege  or  constitutes  attorney-work  product  or  constitutes  non-financial  trade
secrets  or  non-financial  proprietary  information  so  long  as  (x)  such  confidentiality  obligation  was  not  entered  into  in
contemplation hereof and (y) the Borrower provides such Lender with notice that information is being withheld due to the
existence of such confidentiality obligation.
1.7
Notices. Give notice to the Administrative Agent, and the Administrative Agent shall deliver such notice to
each Lender, promptly upon any Responsible Officer obtaining knowledge of:
(a) the occurrence of any Default or Event of Default;
(b) any change in the Rating issued by either S&P or Moody’s; and
(c) the occurrence of an ERISA Event which, individually or in the aggregate, could reasonably be expected to
result in a Material Adverse Effect (provided, that, any judicial proceeding instituted by PBGC that, within 60 days after
the  institution  of such  proceeding,  has  been  withdrawn  or stayed  by  PBGC  or  otherwise,  shall  be  disregarded  for  the
purpose of this Section 6.7(c)).
1.8
Maintenance of Licenses, etc. Maintain in full force and effect any authorization, consent, license or approval
of any Governmental Authority necessary for the conduct of the Borrower’s business as now conducted by it or necessary in
connection with this Agreement, except to the extent the failure to do so could not reasonably be expected to have a Material
Adverse Effect.
1.9
Further Assurances.
(a) (i) Comply with Section 7.08(a) of the FMB Indenture, (ii) deliver to the Administrative Agent within 120
days  after  the  Effective  Date,  a  copy  of  the  Opinion  of  Counsel  (as  defined  in  the  FMB  Indenture)  delivered  to  the
Indenture Trustee under Section 7.08(a)(i) of the FMB Indenture relating the Supplemental Indenture and (iii) deliver to
the Administrative Agent a copy of each Opinion of Counsel delivered to the Indenture Trustee under Section 7.08(a)(ii)
of the FMB Indenture relating to the Supplemental Indenture.
(b) Promptly upon the reasonable request by the Administrative Agent, or by the Required Lenders through the
Administrative  Agent,  (i)  correct  any  material  defect  or  error  that  may  be  discovered  in  any  Loan  Document  or  the
execution, acknowledgment, filing or recordation thereof and (ii) do, execute, acknowledge and deliver any and all such
further certificates, documents, agreements and other instruments as reasonably required from time to time to carry out
more effectively the purposes of the Loan Documents.
1.10
Use of Proceeds. The Borrower shall use the proceeds of the Loans in accordance with Section 4.12.

Section 32.
NEGATIVE COVENANTS
The  Borrower  hereby  agrees  that,  so  long  as  any  Loan,  or  any  interest  on  any  Loan  or  any  fee  payable  to  any  Lender  or  the
Administrative Agent hereunder remains outstanding, or any other amount then due and payable is owing to any Lender or the
Administrative Agent hereunder, the Borrower shall not and shall not permit its Significant Subsidiaries to:
1.1
Indebtedness. At all times prior to the Indebtedness Covenant Release Date, create, incur, assume or permit to
exist any Indebtedness, except for:
(a) Indebtedness and other Obligations created hereunder;
(b) Indebtedness  of  the  Borrower  under  the  Utility  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  in  an  aggregate  outstanding
principal amount not to exceed $3,500,000,000 plus any additional amounts permitted to be incurred thereunder pursuant
to Section 2.3 of the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the date hereof and any Permitted Refinancing
thereof;
(c) Indebtedness of the Borrower outstanding on the Effective Date in an aggregate outstanding principal amount
not to exceed, together with any Loans outstanding hereunder on the Effective Date, $33,350,000,000 and any Permitted
Refinancing thereof;
(d) Indebtedness  (i)  pursuant  to  tenders,  statutory  obligations,  bids,  leases,  governmental  contracts,  trade
contracts, surety, stay, customs, appeal, performance and/or return of money bonds or other similar obligations incurred in
the ordinary course of business and (ii) in respect of letters of credit, bank guaranties, surety bonds, performance bonds or
similar instruments and reimbursement obligations to support any of the foregoing items;
(e) (i) Guarantee Obligations with respect to the obligations of suppliers, customers and licensees and other third
parties in the ordinary course of business, (ii) Indebtedness incurred in the ordinary course of business to pay the deferred
purchase  price  of  goods  or  services  or  progress  payments  in  connection  with  such  goods  and  services  and  (iii)
Indebtedness in respect of letters of credit, bankers’ acceptances, bank guaranties or similar instruments supporting trade
payables, warehouse receipts or similar facilities entered into in the ordinary course of business, workers compensation
claims or other employee benefits;
(f)
Guarantee Obligations with respect to Indebtedness otherwise permitted to be incurred pursuant to this Section
7.1 and Guarantee Obligations with respect to the obligations of Subsidiaries and joint ventures of the Borrower; provided
that no such Guarantee Obligations with respect to Indebtedness of the Borrower constituting debt for borrowed money or
evidenced  by  notes,  bonds,  debentures  or  other  similar  instruments  (including,  for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the  First
Mortgage Bonds) shall be permitted except to the extent provided by a Person that is, or concurrently with providing such
Guarantee  Obligations  becomes,  a  guarantor  of  the  Obligations  hereunder  on  terms  and  pursuant  to  documentation
reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent;

(g) Indebtedness  consisting  of  (i)  the  financing  of  insurance  premiums  and/or  (ii)  take-or-pay  obligations
contained in supply arrangements;
(h) Indebtedness with respect to Capital Lease Obligations and purchase money Indebtedness; provided, that the
aggregate  outstanding  principal  amount  of  Indebtedness  with  respect  to  Capital  Lease  Obligations  shall  not  exceed
$500,000,000 at any one time;
(i)
(i)  obligations  under  any  Cash  Management  Agreement  and  (ii)  Indebtedness  under  any  Swap  Agreement
permitted under Section 7.6;
(j)
Indebtedness  arising  from  any  agreement  providing  for  indemnification,  adjustment  or  purchase  price  or
similar  obligations  (including  contingent  earn-out  obligations)  incurred  in  connection  with  any  Disposition  or  any
purchase of assets or Capital Stock, and Indebtedness arising from guaranties, letters of credit, bank guaranties, surety
bonds, performance bonds or similar instruments securing the performance of the Borrower or its Subsidiaries pursuant to
any such agreement;
(k) Indebtedness in respect of banking services and incentive, supplier finance or similar programs incurred in the
ordinary course of business;
(l)
customer  deposits  and  advance  payments  received  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  from  customers  for
goods and services purchased in the ordinary course of business;
(m) Indebtedness  representing  deferred  compensation  to  employees,  consultants  or  independent  contractors
incurred in the ordinary course of business;
(n) Indebtedness  arising  from  the  honoring  by  a  bank  or  other  financial  institution  of  a  check,  draft  or  other
similar instrument drawn against insufficient funds in the ordinary course of business;
(o) endorsements for collection or deposit in the ordinary course of business;
(p) Indebtedness issued or incurred to fund rate base growth in an aggregate outstanding principal amount not to
exceed $9,000,000,000 at any time and any Permitted Refinancing thereof; and
(q) other Indebtedness of the Borrower in an aggregate outstanding principal amount not to exceed the excess, if
any, of 10% of Net Tangible Assets of the Borrower over the amount of Indebtedness incurred pursuant to clause (p)
above.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no Guarantee Obligations from any Significant Subsidiary of the Borrower
with respect to Indebtedness of the Borrower constituting debt for borrowed money or evidenced by notes, bonds, debentures
or other similar instruments (including, for the avoidance of doubt, the First Mortgage Bonds) shall be permitted hereunder
except to the extent provided by a Person that is, or concurrently with providing such Guarantee Obligations becomes, a
guarantor of the Obligations hereunder on terms and pursuant to documentation reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative
Agent.

1.2
Consolidated Capitalization Ratio. Permit the Consolidated Capitalization Ratio on the last day of any fiscal
quarter, from and after the last day of the first fiscal quarter ending after the Effective Date, to exceed 0.65 to 1.00.
1.3
Liens. Create, incur, assume or suffer to exist any Lien upon any assets of the Borrower or any Significant
Subsidiary, whether now owned or hereafter acquired, except for (a) Liens securing the Obligations under this Agreement
and the other Loan Documents and (b) Liens permitted under Section 7.06(b) of the FMB Indenture.
1.4
Fundamental  Changes.  Enter  into  any  merger,  consolidation  or  amalgamation,  or  liquidate,  wind  up  or
dissolve  itself  (or  suffer  any  liquidation  or  dissolution),  or  Dispose  of  all  or  substantially  all  of  its  property  or  business
(including,  without  limitation,  rental  equipment  or  leasehold  interests  and  excluding  the  sale  or  transfer  of  any  accounts
receivable or of any amounts that are accrued and recorded in a regulatory account for collections by the Borrower, in each
case,  in  connection  with  a  securitization  transaction  including,  without  limitation,  any  A/R  Securitization  Transaction),
except that the Borrower may be merged, consolidated or amalgamated with another Person or Dispose of all or substantially
all of its property or business so long as, after giving effect to such transaction, (a) no Default or Event of Default shall have
occurred  and  be  continuing,  (b)  either  (i)  the  Borrower  is  the  continuing  or  surviving  corporation  of  such  merger,
consolidation or amalgamation or (ii) the continuing or surviving corporation of such merger, consolidation or amalgamation,
if not the Borrower or the purchaser, (x) shall be an entity organized or existing under the laws of the United States, any state
thereof  or  the  District  of  Columbia,  (y)  shall  have  assumed  all  obligations  of  the  Borrower  under  the  Loan  Documents
pursuant  to  arrangements  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Administrative  Agent  and  (z)  to  the  extent  requested  by  the
Administrative  Agent  or  any  Lender,  shall  have  promptly  provided  to  the  Administrative  Agent  or  such  Lender  all
documentation and other information that may be required by the Administrative Agent or such Lender in order to enable
compliance with applicable “know-your-customer” and anti-money laundering rules and regulations, including information
required  by  the  Patriot  Act  and  the  Beneficial  Ownership  Regulation  and  (c)  the  ratings  by  Moody’s  and  S&P  of  the
continuing  or  surviving  corporation’s  or  purchaser’s  senior,  secured  debt  shall  be  at  least  the  higher  of  (1)  Baa3  from
Moody’s and BBB- from S&P and (2) the ratings by such rating agencies of the Borrower’s senior, secured debt in effect
before the earlier of the occurrence or the public announcement of such event.
1.5
Sale  and  Lease  Back  Transactions.  Enter  into  any  arrangement,  directly  or  indirectly,  with  any  Person
whereby it shall sell or transfer any property having fair market value in excess of $10,000,000, real or personal, used or
useful in its business, whether now owned or hereafter acquired, and thereafter rent or lease such property or other property
that it intends to use for substantially the same purpose or purposes as the property being sold or transferred, except for (a)
those  transactions  described  on  Schedule  7.5  and  (b)  any  other  sale  of  any  fixed  or  capital  assets  that  is  made  for  cash
consideration; provided that, in each case, if such sale and leaseback results in a Capital Lease Obligation, such Capital Lease
Obligation  is  permitted  by  Section  7.1  and  any  Lien  made  the  subject  of  such  Capital  Lease  Obligation  is  permitted  by
Section 7.3.

1.6
Swap  Agreements.  Enter  into  any  Swap  Agreement,  other  than  Swap  Agreements  entered  into  not  for
speculative purposes (a) to hedge or mitigate risks to which the Borrower and its Subsidiaries are exposed in the conduct of
its business or the management of its liabilities (including, without limitation, raw material, commodities, fuel, electricity or
other supply costs and currency risks), (b) to effectively cap, collar or exchange interest rates (from fixed to floating rates,
from one floating rate to another floating rate or fixed rate or otherwise) with respect to any interest bearing Indebtedness of
the Borrower and its Subsidiaries permitted by this Agreement, (c) to swap currency in connection with funding the business
of  the  Borrower  and  its  Subsidiaries  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  or  (d)  entered  into  in  connection  with  any  A/R
Securitization Transaction.
1.7
Amendments to FMB Indenture. Amend, supplement, modify or waive the FMB Indenture in any manner that
is  materially  adverse  to  the  Lenders  hereunder;  provided  that  the  foregoing  shall  not  prohibit  the  Borrower  from
supplementing the FMB Indenture in order to provide for the issuance of additional First Mortgage Bonds in accordance with
the FMB Indenture or to add property to the Lien of the FMB Indenture.
Section 33.
EVENTS OF DEFAULT
If any of the following events shall occur and be continuing on or after the Effective Date:
(a) the Borrower shall fail to pay any principal of the Loans when due in accordance with the terms hereof; or the
Borrower shall fail to pay any interest on the Loans, or any other amount payable hereunder or under any other Loan
Document, within five Business Days after any such interest or other amount becomes due in accordance with the terms
hereof; or
(b) any representation or warranty made or deemed made by the Borrower herein or in any other Loan Document
or that is contained in any certificate, document or financial or other statement furnished by it at any time under or in
connection with this Agreement or any such other Loan Document shall prove to have been inaccurate in any material
respect on or as of the date made or deemed made, unless, as of any date of determination, the facts or circumstances to
which such representation or warranty relates have changed with the result that such representation or warranty is true and
correct in all material respects on such date; or
(c) the Borrower shall default in the observance or performance of any agreement contained in Section 6.4(a)(i),
Section 6.7(a), Section 6.10, Section 7.1, Section 7.2, Section 7.3 or Section 7.4 of this Agreement; or
(d) the  Borrower  shall  default  in  the  observance  or  performance  of  any  other  agreement  contained  in  this
Agreement or any other Loan Document (other than as provided in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this Section), and such
default shall continue unremedied for a period of 30 days after notice to the Borrower from the Administrative Agent at
the request of the Required Lenders; or
(e) the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries shall (i) default in making any payment of any principal of
any Indebtedness (including any

Guarantee Obligation, but excluding the Loans) on the due date with respect thereto (after giving effect to any period of
grace,  if  any,  provided  in  the  instrument  or  agreement  under  which  such  Indebtedness  was  created);  or (ii)  default  in
making  any  payment  of  any  interest  on  any  such  Indebtedness  beyond  the  period  of  grace,  if  any,  provided  in  the
instrument or agreement under which such Indebtedness was created; or (iii) default in the observance or performance of
any  other  agreement  or  condition  relating  to  any  such  Indebtedness  or  contained  in  any  instrument  or  agreement
evidencing, securing or relating thereto, or any other event shall occur or condition exist, the effect of which default or
other  event  or  condition  is  to  cause,  or  (in  the  case  of  all  Indebtedness  other  than  Indebtedness  under  any  Swap
Agreement) to permit the holder or beneficiary of such Indebtedness (or a trustee or agent on behalf of such holder or
beneficiary) to cause, with the giving of notice if required, such Indebtedness to become due prior to its stated maturity or
(in the case of any such Indebtedness constituting a Guarantee Obligation) to become payable; provided, that a default,
event or condition described in clause (i), (ii) or (iii) of this paragraph (e) shall not at any time constitute an Event of
Default unless, at such time, one or more defaults, events or conditions of the type described in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of
this paragraph (e) shall have occurred and be continuing with respect to Indebtedness the outstanding principal amount of
which exceeds in the aggregate $200,000,000; provided, further, that unless payment of the Loans hereunder has already
been accelerated, if such default shall be cured by the Borrower or such Significant Subsidiary or waived by the holders of
such Indebtedness and any acceleration of maturity having resulted from such default shall be rescinded or annulled, in
each case, in accordance with the terms of such agreement or instrument, without any modification of the terms of such
Indebtedness  requiring  the  Borrower  or  such  Significant  Subsidiary  to  furnish  security  or  additional  security  therefor,
reducing the average life to maturity thereof or increasing the principal amount thereof, or any agreement by the Borrower
or such Significant Subsidiary to furnish security or additional security therefor or to issue in lieu thereof Indebtedness
secured by additional or other collateral or with a shorter average life to maturity or in a greater principal amount, then any
Default hereunder by reason thereof shall be deemed likewise to have been thereupon cured or waived; or
(f)
(i) the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries shall commence any case, proceeding or other action
(A)  under  any  existing  or  future  law  of  any  jurisdiction,  domestic  or  foreign,  relating  to  bankruptcy,  insolvency,
reorganization or relief of debtors, seeking to have an order for relief entered with respect to it, or seeking to adjudicate it
as  bankrupt  or  insolvent,  or  seeking  reorganization,  arrangement,  adjustment,  winding  up,  liquidation,  dissolution,
composition or other relief with respect to it or its debts, or (B) seeking appointment of a receiver, trustee, custodian,
conservator or other similar official for it or for all or any substantial part of its assets, or the Borrower or any of its
Significant Subsidiaries shall make a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors; or (ii) there shall be commenced
against the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries any case, proceeding or other action of a nature referred to in
clause (i) above that (A) results in the entry of an order for relief or any such adjudication or appointment or (B) remains
undismissed, undischarged or unbonded for a period of 60 days; or (iii) there shall be commenced against the Borrower or
any  of  its  Significant  Subsidiaries  any  case,  proceeding  or  other  action  seeking  issuance  of  a  warrant  of  attachment,
execution, distraint or similar process against all or any

substantial  part  of  its  assets  that  results  in  the  entry  of  an  order  for  any  such  relief  that  shall  not  have  been  vacated,
discharged, or stayed or bonded pending appeal within 60 days from the entry thereof; or (iv) the Borrower or any of its
Significant Subsidiaries shall generally not, or shall be unable to, or shall admit in writing its inability to, pay its debts as
they become due; or
(g) there occurs any ERISA Event that, individually or in the aggregate, would reasonably be expected to result in
a Material Adverse Effect; or
(h) one or more judgments or decrees shall be entered against the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries
by a court of competent jurisdiction involving in the aggregate a liability (not paid or, subject to customary deductibles,
fully covered by insurance as to which the relevant insurance company has not denied coverage) of $200,000,000 or more,
and all such judgments or decrees shall not have been vacated, discharged, stayed or bonded pending appeal within 45
days from the entry thereof unless, in the case of a discharge, such judgment or decree is due at a later date in one or more
payments and the Borrower or such Significant Subsidiary satisfies the obligation to make such payment or payments on
or prior to the date such payment or payments become due in accordance with such judgment or decree; or
(i)
there shall have occurred a Change of Control; or
(j)
any Loan Document, at any time after its execution and delivery and for any reason other than as expressly
permitted hereunder or thereunder or satisfaction in full of all the Obligations, ceases to be in full force and effect; or the
Borrower contests in any manner in writing the validity or enforceability of any Loan Document; or the Borrower denies
in writing that it has any or further liability or obligation under any Loan Document, or purports in writing to revoke,
terminate or rescind any Loan Document; or
(k) at any time (i) any Senior Bond shall cease to be outstanding for any reason other than (A) the payment in full
of  the  applicable  Tranche  relating  to  such  Senior  Bond  and  other  obligations  then  due  and  owing  under  the  Loan
Documents with respect thereto or (B) the payment in full of such Senior Bond, (ii) the Administrative Agent, on behalf of
the Lenders, shall cease at any time to be the holder of any Senior Bond for all purposes of the FMB Indenture (unless
such Senior Bond is transferred by the Administrative Agent other than in connection with the payment in full of the
obligations with respect to such Senior Bond) or (iii) the Lien of the FMB Indenture shall cease to constitute a valid and
enforceable Lien on the Mortgaged Property;
then, and in any such event, (A) if such event is an Event of Default specified in clause (i) or (ii) of paragraph (f) above with respect
to the Borrower, the Loans (with accrued interest thereon) and all other amounts owing under this Agreement and the other Loan
Documents shall immediately become due and payable, and (B) if such event is any other Event of Default, either or both of the
following actions may be taken: with the consent of the Required Lenders, the Administrative Agent may, or upon the request of the
Required Lenders, the Administrative Agent shall, by notice to the Borrower, declare the Loans (with accrued interest thereon) and
all other amounts owing under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents to be due and payable forthwith, whereupon the same
shall immediately become due and payable. Except as expressly provided above in this

Section, presentment, demand, protest and all other notices of any kind are hereby expressly waived by the Borrower.
Section 34.
THE AGENTS
1.1
Appointment and Authority. Each of the Lenders hereby irrevocably appoints JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. to
act  on  its  behalf  as  the  Administrative  Agent  hereunder  and  under  the  other  Loan  Documents  and  authorizes  the
Administrative Agent to take such actions on its behalf and to exercise such powers as are delegated to the Administrative
Agent  by  the  terms  hereof  or  thereof,  together  with  such  actions  and  powers  as  are  reasonably  incidental  thereto.  The
provisions of this Section 9 are solely for the benefit of the Agents, the Lenders and the Borrower shall not have rights as a
third-party beneficiary of any of such provisions (other than with respect to the Borrower’s rights under Sections 9.9(a) and
(b)). It is understood and agreed that the use of the term “agent” herein or in any other Loan Documents (or any other similar
term) with reference to any Agent is not intended to connote any fiduciary or other implied (or express) obligations arising
under agency doctrine of any applicable law. Instead such term is used as a matter of market custom, and is intended to create
or reflect only an administrative relationship between contracting parties.
1.2
Delegation of Duties. The Administrative Agent may perform any and all of its duties and exercise its rights
and powers hereunder or under any other Loan Document by or through any one or more sub-agents appointed by it. The
Administrative Agent, and any such sub-agent may each perform any and all of its duties and exercise its rights and powers
by or through their respective Related Parties. The exculpatory provisions of this Section shall apply to any such sub-agent
and to the Related Parties of the Administrative Agent, and any such sub-agent, and shall apply to their respective activities
in connection with the syndication of the credit facilities provided for herein as well as activities as Administrative Agent.
The Administrative Agent shall not be responsible for the negligence or misconduct of any sub-agents except to the extent
that a court of competent jurisdiction determines in a final and nonappealable judgment that the Administrative Agent acted
with gross negligence or willful misconduct in the selection of such sub-agents.
1.3
Exculpatory Provisions.
(a) No Agent shall have any duties or obligations except those expressly set forth herein and in the other Loan
Documents, and its duties hereunder shall be administrative in nature. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, no
Agent:
Section  35.
shall  be  subject  to  any  fiduciary  or  other  implied  duties,  regardless  of  whether  a  Default  has  occurred  and  is
continuing;
Section 36.
shall have any duty to take any discretionary action or exercise any discretionary powers, except discretionary rights
and powers expressly contemplated hereby or by the other Loan Documents that an Agent is required to exercise as directed in
writing by the Required Lenders (or such other number or percentage of the Lenders as shall be expressly provided for herein or in
the other Loan Documents); provided that no Agent shall be required to take any action that, in its opinion or the opinion of its
counsel, may expose such Agent to liability or that is contrary to any Loan Document or

applicable law, including for the avoidance of doubt any action that may be in violation of the automatic stay under any Debtor
Relief Law or that may effect a forfeiture, modification or termination of property of a Defaulting Lender in violation of any Debtor
Relief Law; and
Section 37.
shall, except as expressly set forth herein and in the other Loan Documents, have any duty to disclose, and shall not
be liable for the failure to disclose, any information relating to the Borrower or any of its Affiliates that is communicated to or
obtained by the Person serving as an Agent or any of its Affiliates in any capacity.
(a) No Agent shall be liable for any action taken or not taken by it (i) with the consent or at the request of the
Required Lenders (or such other number or percentage of the Lenders as shall be necessary, or as such Agent shall believe
in good faith shall be necessary, under the circumstances as provided in Sections 10.1 and 8), or (ii) in the absence of its
own gross negligence or willful misconduct as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction by final and nonappealable
judgment.
(b) No Agent shall be responsible for or have any duty to ascertain or inquire into (i) any statement, warranty or
representation  made  in  or  in  connection  with  this  Agreement  or  any  other  Loan  Document,  (ii)  the  contents  of  any
certificate, report or other document delivered hereunder or thereunder or in connection herewith or therewith, (iii) the
performance or observance of any of the covenants, agreements or other terms or conditions set forth herein or therein or
the occurrence of any Default or Event of Default, (iv) the validity, enforceability, effectiveness or genuineness of this
Agreement,  any other Loan Document or any other agreement, instrument or document, or (v) the satisfaction of any
condition  set  forth  in  Section  5  or  elsewhere  herein,  other  than  to  confirm  receipt  of  items  expressly  required  to  be
delivered to such Agent.
1.2
Reliance by Administrative Agent. The Administrative Agent shall be entitled to rely upon, and shall not incur
any  liability  for  relying  upon,  any  notice,  request,  certificate,  consent,  statement,  instrument,  document  or  other  writing
(including any electronic message, Internet or intranet website posting or other distribution) believed by it to be genuine and
to have been signed, sent or otherwise authenticated by the proper Person. The Administrative Agent also may rely upon any
statement made to it orally or by telephone and believed by it to have been made by the proper Person, and shall not incur
any liability for relying thereon. In determining compliance with any condition hereunder to the making of a Loan, that by its
terms  must  be  fulfilled  to  the  satisfaction  of  a  Lender,  the  Administrative  Agent  may  presume  that  such  condition  is
satisfactory to such Lender unless the Administrative Agent shall have received notice to the contrary from such Lender prior
to  the  making  of  such  Loan.  The  Administrative  Agent  may  consult  with  legal  counsel  (who  may  be  counsel  for  the
Borrower), independent accountants and other experts selected by it, and shall not be liable for any action taken or not taken
by it in accordance with the advice of any such counsel, accountants or experts.
1.3
Notice  of  Default.  The  Administrative  Agent  shall  not  be  deemed  to  have  knowledge  or  notice  of  the
occurrence of any Default or Event of Default unless the Administrative Agent has received notice from a Lender or the
Borrower referring to this Agreement, describing such Default or Event of Default and stating that such notice is a “notice of
default”. In the event that the

Administrative  Agent  receives  such  a  notice,  the  Administrative  Agent  shall  give  notice  thereof  to  the  Lenders.  The
Administrative Agent shall take such action with respect to such Default or Event of Default as shall be reasonably directed
by the Required Lenders (or, if so specified by this Agreement, all Lenders); provided that unless and until such Agent shall
have received such directions, such Agent may (but shall not be obligated to) take such action, or refrain from taking such
action, with respect to such Default or Event of Default as it shall deem advisable in the best interests of the Lenders.
1.4
Non-Reliance on Agents and Other Lenders. Each Lender acknowledges that it has, independently and without
reliance upon the Administrative Agent, or any other Lender or any of their Related Parties and based on such documents and
information  as  it  has  deemed  appropriate,  made  its  own  credit  analysis  and  decision  to  enter  into  this  Agreement.  Each
Lender  also  acknowledges  that  it  will,  independently  and  without  reliance  upon  the  Administrative  Agent,  or  any  other
Lender or any of their Related Parties and based on such documents and information as it shall from time to time deem
appropriate, continue to make its own decisions in taking or not taking action under or based upon this Agreement, any other
Loan Document or any related agreement or any document furnished hereunder or thereunder. Except for notices, reports and
other  documents  expressly  required  to  be  furnished  to  the  Lenders  by  the  Administrative  Agent  hereunder,  the
Administrative Agent shall not have any duty or responsibility to provide any Lender with any credit or other information
concerning  the  business,  operations,  property,  condition  (financial  or  otherwise),  prospects  or  creditworthiness  of  the
Borrower or any of its Affiliates that may come into the possession of such Agent or any of its officers, directors, employees,
agents, attorneys in fact or Affiliates.
1.5
Indemnification.  The  Lenders  agree  to  indemnify  each  Agent  in  its  capacity  as  such  (to  the  extent  not
reimbursed  by  the  Borrower  and  without  limiting  the  obligation  of  the  Borrower  to  do  so),  ratably  according  to  their
respective Percentages in effect on the date on which indemnification is sought under this Section (or, if indemnification is
sought after the date upon which the Commitments shall have terminated and the Loans shall have been paid in full, ratably
in accordance with such Percentages immediately prior to such date), from and against any and all liabilities, obligations,
losses, damages, penalties, actions, judgments, suits, costs, expenses or disbursements of any kind whatsoever that may at
any time (whether before or after the payment of the Loans) be imposed on, incurred by or asserted against such Agent in any
way relating to or arising out of, the Commitments, this Agreement, any of the other Loan Documents or any documents
contemplated by or referred to herein or therein or the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby or any action taken or
omitted by such Agent under or in connection with any of the foregoing; provided that no Lender shall be liable for the
payment of any portion of such liabilities, obligations, losses, damages, penalties, actions, judgments, suits, costs, expenses
or disbursements that are found by a final and nonappealable decision of a court of competent jurisdiction to have resulted
from such Agent’s gross negligence or willful misconduct.
1.6
Agent in Its Individual Capacity. Each Person serving as an Agent hereunder shall have the same rights and
powers in its capacity as a Lender as any other Lender and may exercise the same as though it were not an Agent, and the
terms “Lender” or “Lenders” shall, unless otherwise expressly indicated or unless the context otherwise requires, include
such Person serving as an Agent hereunder

in its individual capacity. Such Person and its Affiliates may accept deposits from, lend money to, own securities of, act as
the financial advisor or in any other advisory capacity for, and generally engage in any kind of business with, the Borrower
or any Subsidiary or other Affiliate thereof as if such Person were not an Agent hereunder and without any duty to account
therefor to the Lenders.
1.7
Successor Agents.
(a) The  Administrative  Agent  may  resign  upon  10  days’  notice  to  the  Lenders  and  the  Borrower.  If  the
Administrative Agent shall so resign under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents, then the Required Lenders
shall appoint from among the Lenders a successor agent for the Lenders, which successor agent shall (unless an Event of
Default under Section 8(f) with respect to the Borrower shall have occurred and be continuing) be subject to approval by
the Borrower (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed), whereupon such successor
agent shall succeed to the rights, powers and duties of the Administrative Agent and the term “Administrative Agent”
shall mean such successor agent effective upon such appointment and approval, and the former Agent’s rights, powers and
duties as Administrative Agent shall be terminated, without any other or further act or deed on the part of such former
Agent or any of the parties to this Agreement or any holders of the Loans. If no successor agent has accepted appointment
as Administrative Agent by the date that is 10 days following a retiring Agent’s notice of resignation (the “Resignation
Effective Date”), the retiring Agent’s resignation shall nevertheless thereupon become effective, and the Lenders shall
assume  and  perform  all  of  the  duties  of  the  Administrative  Agent  hereunder  until  such  time,  if  any,  as  the  Required
Lenders appoint a successor agent as provided for above. After any retiring Agent’s resignation as Administrative Agent
the provisions of Section 9.7 shall inure to its benefit as to any actions taken or omitted to be taken by it while it was an
Agent under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents.
(b) If the Person serving as Administrative Agent is a Defaulting Lender pursuant to clause (e) of the definition
thereof, the Required Lenders may, to the extent permitted by applicable law, by notice in writing to the Borrower and
such Person remove such Person as Administrative Agent and, shall appoint a successor, subject to the approval of the
Borrower  (unless  an  Event  of  Default  under  Section  8(f)  with  respect  to  the  Borrower  shall  have  occurred  and  be
continuing), which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. If no such successor shall have
been so appointed by the Required Lenders and shall have accepted such appointment within 30 days (or such earlier day
as shall be agreed by the Required Lenders) (the “Removal Effective Date”), then such removal shall nonetheless become
effective in accordance with such notice on the Removal Effective Date.
(c) With effect from the Resignation Effective Date or the Removal Effective Date (as applicable) (i) the retiring
or removed Agent shall be discharged from its duties and obligations hereunder and under the other Loan Documents
(except that in the case of any Senior Bond held by the Administrative Agent on behalf of the Lenders, the retiring or
removed  Administrative  Agent  shall  continue  to  hold  such  Senior  Bond  in  its  name  until  such  time  as  a  successor
Administrative Agent is appointed) and (ii) except for any indemnity payments or other amounts then owed to the retiring
or removed Administrative Agent, all payments, communications and determinations

provided to be made by, to or through the Administrative Agent shall instead be made by or to each Lender directly, until
such time, if any, as the Required Lenders appoint a successor Administrative Agent as provided for above. Upon the
acceptance of a successor’s appointment as Administrative Agent hereunder, such successor shall succeed to and become
vested  with all  of the rights,  powers,  privileges  and duties  of the retiring  or removed  Agent  (other  than  any rights  to
indemnity payments or other amounts owed to the retiring or removed Agent as of the Resignation Effective Date or the
Removal Effective Date (as applicable)), and the retiring or removed Agent shall be discharged from all of its duties and
obligations hereunder or under the other Loan Documents. The fees payable by the Borrower to a successor Agent shall be
the same as those payable to its predecessor unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and such successor. After the
retiring or removed Agent’s resignation or removal hereunder and under the other Loan Documents, the provisions of this
Section and Sections 2.17 and 10.5 shall continue in effect for the benefit of such retiring or removed Agent, its sub-agents
and their respective Related Parties in respect of any actions taken or omitted to be taken by any of them while the retiring
or removed Agent was acting as Agent.
1.8
Documentation Agents and Syndication Agents. None of the Documentation Agents or the Syndication Agents
shall have any duties or responsibilities hereunder in its capacity as such.
1.9
Administrative Agent May File Proofs of Claim. In case of the pendency of any proceeding under any Debtor
Relief Law, the Administrative Agent (irrespective of whether the principal of any Loan shall then be due and payable as
herein expressed or by declaration or otherwise and irrespective of whether the Administrative Agent shall have made any
demand  on  the  Borrower)  shall  be  entitled  and  empowered  (but  not  obligated)  by  intervention  in  such  proceeding  or
otherwise:
(a) to file and prove a claim for the whole amount of the principal and interest owing and unpaid in respect of the
Loans  and  all  other  Obligations  that  are  owing  and  unpaid  and  to  file  such  other  documents  as  may  be  necessary  or
advisable in order to have the claims of the Lenders and the Administrative Agent (including any claim for the reasonable
compensation, expenses, disbursements and advances of the Lenders and the Administrative Agent and their respective
agents and counsel and all other amounts due the Lenders and the Administrative Agent under Sections 2.6, 2.17 and 10.5)
allowed in such judicial proceeding; and
(b) to collect and receive any monies or other property payable or deliverable on any such claims and to distribute
the same;
and any custodian, receiver, assignee, trustee, liquidator,  sequestrator or other similar official in any such judicial proceeding is
hereby authorized by each Lender to make such payments to the Administrative Agent and, in the event that the Administrative
Agent shall consent to the making of such payments directly to the Lenders, to pay to the Administrative Agent any amount due for
the reasonable compensation, expenses, disbursements and advances of the Administrative Agent and its agents and counsel, and any
other amounts due the Administrative Agent under Sections 2.6, 2.17 and 10.5.

1.10
Certain ERISA Matters.
(a) Each Lender (x) represents and warrants, as of the date such Person became a Lender party hereto, to, and (y)
covenants, from the date such Person became a Lender party hereto to the date such Person ceases being a Lender party
hereto,  for  the  benefit  of,  the  Administrative  Agent,  and  not,  for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  to  or  for  the  benefit  of  the
Borrower, that at least one of the following is and will be true:
Section 38.
such Lender is not using “plan assets” (within the meaning of Section 3(42) of ERISA or otherwise) of one or more
Benefit Plans with respect to such Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance of the Loans, the
Commitments or this Agreement,
Section  39.
the  transaction  exemption  set  forth  in  one  or  more  PTEs,  such  as  PTE  84-14  (a  class  exemption  for  certain
transactions  determined  by  independent  qualified  professional  asset  managers),  PTE  95-60  (a  class  exemption  for  certain
transactions  involving  insurance  company  general  accounts),  PTE  90-1  (a  class  exemption  for  certain  transactions  involving
insurance  company  pooled  separate  accounts),  PTE  91-38  (a  class  exemption  for  certain  transactions  involving  bank  collective
investment funds) or PTE 96-23 (a class exemption for certain transactions determined by in-house asset managers), is applicable
with respect to such Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance of the Loans, the Commitments and
this Agreement,
Section 40.
(A) such Lender is an investment fund managed by a “Qualified Professional Asset Manager” (within the meaning of
Part VI of PTE 84-14), (B) such Qualified Professional Asset Manager made the investment decision on behalf of such Lender to
enter  into,  participate  in,  administer  and  perform  the  Loans,  the  Commitments  and  this  Agreement,  (C)  the  entrance  into,
participation in, administration of and performance of the Loans, the Commitments and this Agreement satisfies the requirements of
sub-sections (b) through (g) of Part I of PTE 84-14 and (D) to the best knowledge of such Lender, the requirements of subsection (a)
of Part I of PTE 84-14 are satisfied with respect to such Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance
of the Loans, the Commitments and this Agreement, or
Section 41.
such other representation, warranty and covenant as may be agreed in writing between the Administrative Agent, in
its sole discretion, and such Lender.
(a) In addition, unless either (1) sub-clause (i) in the immediately preceding clause (a) is true with respect to a
Lender or (2) a Lender has provided another representation, warranty and covenant in accordance with sub-clause (iv) in
the immediately preceding clause (a), such Lender further (x) represents and warrants, as of the date such Person became a
Lender  party hereto,  to, and (y) covenants,  from the date such Person became  a Lender  party hereto to the date such
Person ceases being a Lender party hereto, for the benefit of, the Administrative Agent, and not, for the avoidance of
doubt, to or for the benefit of the Borrower, that the Administrative Agent is not a fiduciary with respect to the assets of
such Lender involved in such Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance of the Loans, the
Commitments  and  this  Agreement  (including  in  connection  with  the  reservation  or  exercise  of  any  rights  by  the
Administrative Agent under this Agreement, any Loan Document or any documents related hereto or thereto).
1.2
Erroneous Payment.

(a) If the Administrative Agent notifies a Lender or any Person who has received funds on behalf of a Lender, such
Lender  (any  such  Lender  or  other  recipient,  a  “Payment  Recipient”)  that  the  Administrative  Agent  has
determined in its sole discretion (whether or not after receipt of any notice under immediately succeeding clause
(b)) that any funds received by such Payment Recipient from the Administrative Agent or any of its Affiliates
were erroneously  transmitted  to, or otherwise  erroneously  or mistakenly  received  by, such Payment  Recipient
(whether  or  not  known  to  such  Lender  or  other  Payment  Recipient  on  its  behalf)  (any  such  funds,  whether
received as a payment, prepayment or repayment of principal, interest, fees, distribution or otherwise, individually
and collectively, an “Erroneous Payment”) and demands the return of such Erroneous Payment (or a portion
thereof), such Erroneous Payment shall at all times remain the property of the Administrative Agent and shall be
segregated  by  the  Payment  Recipient  and  held  in  trust  for  the  benefit  of  the  Administrative  Agent,  and  such
Lender shall (or, with respect to any Payment Recipient who received such funds on its behalf, shall cause such
Payment  Recipient  to)  promptly,  but  in  no  event  later  than  one  Business  Day  thereafter,  return  to  the
Administrative Agent the amount of any such Erroneous Payment (or portion thereof) as to which such a demand
was made, in same day funds (in the currency so received), together with interest thereon in respect of each day
from and including the date such Erroneous Payment (or portion thereof) was received by such Payment Recipient
to the date such amount is repaid to the Administrative Agent in same day funds at the greater of the Federal
Funds Effective Rate and a rate determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with banking industry
rules on interbank compensation from time to time in effect. A notice of the Administrative Agent to any Payment
Recipient under this clause (a) shall be conclusive, absent manifest error.
(b) Without limiting immediately preceding clause (a), each Lender, or any Person who has received funds on behalf
of a Lender, such Lender, hereby further agrees that if it receives a payment, prepayment or repayment (whether
received as a payment, prepayment or repayment of principal, interest, fees, distribution or otherwise) from the
Administrative Agent (or any of its Affiliates) (x) that is in a different amount than, or on a different date from,
that specified in a notice of payment, prepayment or repayment sent by the Administrative Agent (or any of its
Affiliates) with respect to such payment, prepayment or repayment, (y) that was not preceded or accompanied by
a notice of payment, prepayment or repayment sent by the Administrative Agent (or any of its Affiliates), or (z)
that such Lender, or other such recipient, otherwise becomes aware was transmitted, or received, in error or by
mistake (in whole or in part) in each case:
(i) (A) in the case of immediately preceding clauses (x) or (y), an error shall be presumed to have been made (absent
written confirmation from the Administrative Agent to the contrary) or (B) an error has been made (in the case of
immediately preceding clause (z)), in each case, with respect to such payment, prepayment or repayment; and

(ii) such Lender shall (and shall cause any other recipient that receives funds on its respective behalf to) promptly
(and, in all events, within one Business Day of its knowledge of such error) notify the Administrative Agent of its
receipt  of  such  payment,  prepayment  or  repayment,  the  details  thereof  (in  reasonable  detail)  and  that  it  is  so
notifying the Administrative Agent pursuant to this Section 9.13(b), and upon demand from the Administrative
Agent,  it  shall  promptly,  but  in  no  event  later  than  one  Business  Day  thereafter,  return  to  the  Administrative
Agent the amount of any such payment, prepayment or repayment as to which such a demand was made in same
day  funds,  together  with  interest  thereon  in  respect  of  each  day  from  and  including  the  date  such  payment,
prepayment or repayment was received by such Lender to the date such amount is repaid to the Administrative
Agent at the greater of the NYFRB Rate and a rate determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with
banking industry rules on interbank compensation from time to time in effect.
(c) Each Lender hereby authorizes the Administrative Agent to set off, net and apply any and all amounts at any time
owing to such Lender under any Loan Document, or otherwise payable or distributable by the Administrative
Agent to such Lender from any source, against any amount due to the Administrative Agent under immediately
preceding clause (a) or under the indemnification provisions of this Agreement.
(d)
The Borrower hereby agrees that in the event an Erroneous Payment (or portion thereof) are not recovered from any
Lender that has received such Erroneous Payment (or portion thereof) for any reason, the Administrative Agent shall be subrogated
to all the rights of such Lender with respect to such amount.
(e) The parties hereto agree that an Erroneous Payment shall not pay, prepay, repay, discharge or otherwise satisfy
any Obligations owed by the Borrower, except, in each case, to the extent such Erroneous Payment is, and solely
with respect to the amount of such Erroneous Payment that is, comprised of funds received by the Administrative
Agent from the Borrower for the purpose of making such Erroneous Payment.
(f) To the extent permitted by applicable law, no Payment Recipient shall assert any right or claim to an Erroneous
Payment, and hereby waives, and is deemed to waive, any claim, counterclaim, defense or right of set-off or
recoupment with respect to any demand, claim or counterclaim by the Administrative Agent for the return of any
Erroneous Payment received, including without limitation waiver of any defense based on “discharge for value”
or any similar doctrine.
(g) Each  party’s  obligations,  agreements  and  waivers  under  this Section  9.13 shall  survive  the  resignation  or
replacement of the Administrative Agent, any transfer of rights or obligations by, or the replacement of a Lender,
the termination of the Commitments and/or the repayment, satisfaction or discharge of all Obligations (or any
portion thereof) under any Loan Document.

Section 42.
MISCELLANEOUS
1.1
Amendments  and  Waivers.  Subject  to  Section  2.13(b)  and  (c),  neither  this  Agreement,  any  other  Loan
Document,  nor  any  terms  hereof  or  thereof  may  be  amended,  supplemented  or  modified  except  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of this Section 10.1. The Required Lenders and the Borrower may, or, with the written consent of the Required
Lenders, the Administrative Agent and the Borrower may, from time to time, (a) enter into written amendments, supplements
or modifications hereto and to the other Loan Documents for the purpose of adding any provisions to this Agreement or the
other Loan Documents or changing in any manner the rights of the Lenders or of the Borrower hereunder or thereunder or (b)
waive, on such terms and conditions as the Required Lenders or the Administrative Agent, as the case may be, may specify in
such instrument, any of the requirements of this Agreement or the other Loan Documents or any Default or Event of Default
and its consequences; provided, however, that no such waiver and no such amendment, supplement or modification shall:
Section 43.
forgive the principal amount or extend the final scheduled date of maturity of any Loan, reduce the stated rate of any
interest or fee payable hereunder (except in connection with the waiver of applicability of any post-default increase in interest rates
(which waiver shall be effective with the consent of the Required Lenders)) or extend the scheduled date of any payment thereof, in
each case without the written consent of each Lender directly affected thereby;
Section 44.
eliminate or reduce the voting rights of any Lender under this Section 10.1 or Section 10.6(a)(i) without the written
consent of such Lender;
Section 45.
reduce any percentage specified in the definition of Required Lenders without the written consent of all Lenders;
Section 46.
amend, modify or waive any provision of Section 2.14, Section 10.07 (Application of Money Collected) of the FMB
Indenture or any similar provision in the Loan Documents related to pro rata treatment without the consent of each Lender directly
affected thereby;
Section 47.
amend, modify or waive any provision of Section 9 without the written consent of the Administrative Agent;
Section 48.
[reserved];
Section 49.
amend, modify or waive any provision of Section 5.1 without the written consent of all the Lenders;
Section 50.
amend, modify or waive any provision of Section 2.8(b) without the written consent of each Lender affected thereby;
Section 51.
amend or modify any provision in any Loan Document in a manner that by its terms affects the rights or duties under
this Agreement of the Lenders of one Tranche (but not the other Tranche), without the prior written consent of the requisite number
or percentage in interest of each affected Tranche of Lenders that would be required to consent thereto under this Section if such
Tranche of Lenders were the only Tranche of Lenders hereunder at the time; or

Section 52.
instruct the Administrative Agent to vote the Senior Bonds in favor of the release of all or substantially all of the
Mortgaged Property without the written consent of all the Lenders.
Any such waiver and any such amendment, supplement or modification shall apply equally to each of the Lenders and shall be
binding upon the Borrower, the Lenders, the Administrative Agent and all future holders of the Loans. In the case of any waiver, the
Borrower, the Lenders and the Administrative Agent shall be restored to their former position and rights hereunder and under the
other Loan Documents, and any Default or Event of Default waived shall be deemed to be cured and not continuing; but no such
waiver shall extend to any subsequent or other Default or Event of Default, or impair any right consequent thereon.
Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  in  this  Section  10.1,  if  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  Borrower  acting
together identify any ambiguity, omission, mistake, typographical error or other defect in any provision of this Agreement or any
other Loan Document, then the Administrative Agent and the Borrower shall be permitted to amend, modify or supplement such
provision to cure such ambiguity, omission, mistake, typographical error or other defect, and any such amendment, modification or
supplement shall become effective without any further action or consent of any other party to this Agreement.
If the Required Lenders shall have approved any amendment which requires the consent of all of the Lenders, the Borrower shall be
permitted  to  replace  any  non-consenting  Lender  with  another  financial  institution, provided that,  (i)  the  replacement  financial
institution shall purchase at par, all Loans and other amounts owing to such replaced Lender on or prior to the date of replacement,
(ii) the Borrower shall be liable to such replaced Lender under Section 2.17 if any Eurodollar Loan owing to such replaced Lender
shall be purchased other than on the last day of the Interest Period relating thereto (as if such purchase constituted a prepayment of
such  Loans),  (iii)  such  replacement  financial  institution,  if  not  already  a  Lender,  shall  be  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the
Administrative Agent, (iv) the replaced Lender shall be obligated to make such replacement in accordance with the provisions of
Section 10.6 (provided that the Borrower shall be obligated to pay the registration and processing fee referred to therein) (for the
avoidance of doubt, such replacement shall be effective subject to the conditions in the other clauses set forth in this proviso,
regardless of whether such replaced Lender enters into an Assignment and Assumption) and (v) any such replacement shall not
be deemed to be a waiver of any rights the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, or any other Lender shall have against the replaced
Lender.
Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  herein,  no  Defaulting  Lender  shall  have  any  right  to  approve  or  disapprove  any
amendment,  supplement,  modification,  waiver  or  consent  hereunder  (and  any  amendment,  supplement,  modification,  waiver  or
consent which by its terms requires the consent of all Lenders or each affected Lender may be effected with the consent of the
applicable Lenders other than Defaulting Lenders), except that (i) any reduction of the amount of principal or interest owed to such
Defaulting Lender shall, in each case, require the consent of such Defaulting Lender, and (ii) a Defaulting Lender’s Percentage shall
be taken into consideration along with the Percentage of non-Defaulting Lenders when voting to approve or disapprove any waiver,
amendment or modification that by its terms affects any Defaulting Lender more adversely than other affected Lenders.
1.1
Notices.

(a) All notices, requests and demands to or upon the respective parties hereto to be effective shall be in writing
(including  by telecopy), and, unless otherwise expressly provided herein, shall be deemed to have been duly given or
made when delivered during the recipient’s normal business hours, or three Business Days after being deposited in the
mail,  postage  prepaid,  or,  in  the  case  of  telecopy  notice,  when  received  during  the  recipient’s  normal  business  hours,
addressed as  follows in  the  case  of the  Borrower  and  the Administrative  Agent, and  as set  forth  in  an administrative
questionnaire  delivered  to  the  Administrative  Agent  in  the  case  of  the  Lenders,  or  to  such  other  address  as  may  be
hereafter notified by the respective parties hereto:
Borrower:    Pacific Gas and Electric Company 
c/o PG&E Corporation 
P.O. Box 770000 
San Francisco, California 94177 
Attention: Treasurer 
Telecopy: (415) 973-8968 
Telephone: (415) 973-8956
with a copy to:    Pacific Gas and Electric Company 
c/o PG&E Corporation 
P.O. Box 770000 
San Francisco, California 94177 
Attention: General Counsel 
Telecopy: (415) 973-5520
Administrative Agent:    JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. 
500 Stanton Christiana Road 
NCC 5, 1st Floor 
Newark, DE 19713-2107 
Attention: Mary Crews 
Telecopy: (302) 634-5758 
Telephone: (302) 634-1417 
Email: mary.crews@jpmorgan.com
provided that any notice, request or demand to or upon the Administrative Agent or any Lender shall not be effective until received.
(b) Notices and other communications to the Administrative Agent or the Lenders hereunder may be delivered or
furnished by electronic communications pursuant to procedures approved by the Administrative Agent; provided that the
foregoing shall not apply to notices pursuant to Section 2 unless otherwise agreed by the Administrative Agent and each
Lender.  The  Administrative  Agent  or  the  Borrower  may,  in  its  discretion,  agree  to  accept  notices  and  other
communications  to  it  hereunder  by  electronic  communications  pursuant  to  procedures  approved  by  it; provided that
approval of such procedures may be limited to particular notices or communications.
(c) Unless the Administrative Agent otherwise prescribes, (i) notices and other communications sent to an e-mail
address shall be deemed received upon the sender’s receipt of an acknowledgement from the intended recipient (such as
by the “return receipt requested” function, as available, return e-mail or other written acknowledgement), and (ii) notices
or communications posted to an Internet or intranet website shall be deemed received upon the deemed

receipt by the intended recipient, at its e-mail address as described in the foregoing clause (i), of notification that such
notice or communication is available and identifying the website address therefor; provided that, for both clauses (i) and
(ii) above, if such notice, email or other communication is not sent during the normal business hours of the recipient, such
notice or communication shall be deemed to have been sent at the opening of business on the next Business Day for the
recipient.
(d) (i)  The  Borrower  agrees  that  the  Administrative  Agent  may,  but  shall  not  be  obligated  to,  make  the
Communications (as defined below) available to the Lenders by posting the Communications on Debt Domain, Intralinks,
Syndtrak or a substantially similar electronic transmission system (the “Platform”).
Section  53.
The  Platform  is  provided  “as  is”  and  “as  available.”  The  Agent  Parties  (as  defined  below)  do  not  warrant  the
adequacy of the Platform and expressly disclaim liability for errors or omissions in the Communications. No warranty of any kind,
express, implied or statutory, including, without limitation, any warranty of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non-
infringement of third-party rights or freedom from viruses or other code defects, is made by any Agent Party in connection with the
Communications or the Platform. In no event shall the Administrative Agent or any of its Related Parties (collectively, the “Agent
Parties”) have any liability to the Borrower, any Lender or any other Person or entity for damages of any kind, including, without
limitation, direct or indirect, special, incidental or consequential damages, losses or expenses (whether in tort, contract or otherwise)
arising out of the Borrower’s or the Administrative Agent’s transmission of Communications through the Platform, except to the
extent such liability resulted from the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the Administrative Agent or any of its Related
Parties  as  determined  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  in  a  final  non-appealable  judgment.  “Communications”  means,
collectively, any notice, demand, communication, information, document or other material provided by or on behalf of the Borrower
pursuant to any Loan Document or the transactions contemplated therein which is distributed to the Administrative Agent or any
Lender by means of electronic communications pursuant to this Section, including through the Platform.
1.1
No  Waiver;  Cumulative  Remedies.  No  failure  to  exercise  and  no  delay  in  exercising,  on  the  part  of  the
Administrative Agent or any Lender, any right, remedy, power or privilege hereunder or under the other Loan Documents
shall operate as a waiver thereof; nor shall any single or partial exercise of any right, remedy, power or privilege hereunder
preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right, remedy, power or privilege.  The rights,
remedies,  powers  and  privileges  herein  provided  are  cumulative  and  not  exclusive  of  any  rights,  remedies,  powers  and
privileges provided by law.
1.2
Survival of Representations and Warranties. All representations and warranties made hereunder, in the other
Loan Documents and in any document, certificate or statement delivered pursuant hereto or in connection herewith shall
survive the execution and delivery of this Agreement and the making of the Loans hereunder.
1.3
Payment of Expenses and Taxes. The Borrower agrees (a) to pay or reimburse the Administrative Agent and
the Lenders for all their respective reasonable out of pocket costs and expenses incurred in connection with the development,
preparation and execution of, and any amendment, supplement or

modification to, this Agreement and the other Loan Documents and any other documents prepared in connection herewith or
therewith, and the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby and thereby, including the reasonable fees and
disbursements of only one joint counsel and one joint special California counsel and, if necessary, one joint local counsel in
each  other  relevant  jurisdiction  to  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  Lenders  (and  in  the  case  of  an  actual  or  perceived
conflict  of  interest,  one  additional  counsel  for  each  applicable  jurisdiction  to  each  group  of  similarly  situated  affected
persons) and filing and recording fees and expenses, with statements with respect to the foregoing to be submitted to the
Borrower  prior  to  the  Effective  Date  (in  the  case  of  amounts  to  be  paid  on  the  Effective  Date)  and  from  time  to  time
thereafter on a quarterly basis or such other periodic basis as the Administrative Agent shall deem appropriate, (b) to pay or
reimburse  each  Lender  and  the  Administrative  Agent  for  all  its  costs  and  expenses  incurred  in  connection  with  the
enforcement or preservation of its rights under this Agreement, the other Loan Documents and any such other documents,
including  the  reasonable  fees  and  disbursements  of  only  one  joint  counsel,  one  joint  special  California  counsel  and,  if
necessary, one local counsel in each other relevant jurisdiction to the Administrative Agent and the Lenders (and in the case
of an actual or perceived conflict of interest, one additional counsel for each applicable jurisdiction to each group of similarly
situated affected persons), and (c) to pay, indemnify, and hold each Lender, the Administrative Agent and their respective
Affiliates and their respective officers, directors, employees and agents (each, an “Indemnitee”) harmless from and against
any  and  all  other  liabilities,  obligations,  losses,  damages,  penalties,  actions,  judgments,  suits,  costs,  expenses  or
disbursements of any kind or nature whatsoever whether brought by the Borrower or any other Person, with respect to the
execution, delivery, enforcement and performance of, or arising out of or in connection with, this Agreement, the other Loan
Documents and any such other documents, including any of the foregoing relating to the use of proceeds of the Loans or the
violation of, noncompliance with or liability under, any Environmental Law directly or indirectly relating to the Borrower, its
Significant Subsidiaries or any of the facilities and properties owned, leased or operated by the Borrower or its Significant
Subsidiaries  and  the  reasonable,  documented  and  invoiced  fees  and  expenses  of  one  joint  counsel  and  one  joint  special
California counsel and, if necessary, one joint local counsel in each other relevant jurisdiction to the applicable Indemnitee
(and in the case of an actual or perceived conflict of interest, one additional counsel for each applicable jurisdiction to each
group of similarly situated affected persons), in connection with claims, actions or proceedings by any Indemnitee against the
Borrower  under  any  Loan  Document  (all  the  foregoing  in  this  clause  (c),  collectively,  the  “Indemnified  Liabilities”),
provided, that the Borrower shall have no obligation hereunder to any Indemnitee with respect to Indemnified Liabilities to
the  extent  such  Indemnified  Liabilities  resulted  from,  as  determined  in  a  final  non-appealable  judgment  by  a  court  of
competent jurisdiction, (x) the gross negligence, bad faith or willful misconduct of such Indemnitee or its Affiliates, (y) the
material breach of such Indemnitee’s funding obligations hereunder or (z) a dispute amongst one or more Lenders not arising
from the Borrower’s breach of its obligations under the Loan Documents (other than a dispute involving a claim against an
Indemnitee for its acts or omissions in its capacity as an arranger, bookrunner, agent or similar role in respect of the Loan
Agreement, except, to the extent such acts or omissions are determined by a court of competent jurisdiction by a final and
non-appealable judgment to have constituted the gross negligence, bad faith or willful misconduct of such Indemnitee in such
capacity). Without limiting the foregoing, and to the extent permitted by applicable law, the Borrower agrees not to assert
and to cause

its Significant Subsidiaries not to assert, and hereby waives and agrees to cause its Significant Subsidiaries to waive, all
rights  for  contribution  or  any  other  rights  of  recovery  with  respect  to  all  claims,  demands,  penalties,  fines,  liabilities,
settlements, damages, costs and expenses of whatever kind or nature, under or related to Environmental Laws, that any of
them might have by statute or otherwise against any Indemnitee. All amounts due under this Section 10.5 shall be payable
not  later  than  30  days  after  written  demand  therefor,  subject  to  the  Borrower’s  receipt  of  reasonably  detailed  invoices.
Statements payable by the Borrower pursuant to this Section 10.5 shall be submitted to Treasurer (Telephone No. (415) 817-
8199/(415) 267-7000) (Telecopy No. (415) 267-7265/7268), at the address of the Borrower set forth in Section 10.2(a) with a
copy to Chief Counsel, Corporate (Telephone No. (415) 817-8200) (Telecopy No. (415) 817-8225), at the address of the
Borrower set forth in Section 10.2(a), or to such other Person or address as may be hereafter designated by the Borrower in a
written notice to the Administrative Agent. The agreements in this Section 10.5 shall survive for two years after repayment of
the Loans and all other amounts payable hereunder. This Section 10.5 shall not apply with respect to Taxes, other than Taxes
that represent claims, damages, losses, liabilities, costs or expenses arising from non-Tax claims.
1.4
Successors and Assigns; Participations and Assignments.
(a) The provisions of this Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their
respective successors and assigns permitted hereby, except that (i) the Borrower may not assign or otherwise transfer any
of its rights or obligations hereunder without the prior written consent of each Lender (and any attempted assignment or
transfer by the Borrower without such consent shall be null and void) and (ii) no Lender may assign or otherwise transfer
its rights or obligations hereunder except in accordance with this Section 10.6.
(b) (i)  Subject  to  the  conditions  set  forth  in  paragraph  (b)(ii)  below,  any  Lender  may  assign  to  one  or  more
assignees (each, an “Assignee”) other than a Defaulting Lender, any Subsidiary of a Defaulting Lender, any natural person
(or holding company, investment vehicle or trust for, or owned or operated by or for the primary benefit of, one or more
natural  persons),  the  Borrower  or  any  of  the  Borrower’s  Affiliates  or  Subsidiaries,  all  or  a  portion  of  its  rights  and
obligations under this Agreement (including all or a portion of the Loans at the time owing to it) with the prior written
consent (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed) of:
(A)
the  Borrower, provided that  no  consent  of  the  Borrower  shall  be  required  for  an
assignment to a Lender (or an Affiliate of any Lender) or an Approved Fund or, if an Event of Default
under Section 8(a), (e) or (f) has occurred and is continuing, any other Person, and provided further,
that the Borrower shall be deemed to have consented to any such assignment unless it shall object
thereto  by  written  notice  to  the  Administrative  Agent  within  ten  (10)  Business  Days  after  having
received notice thereof from the assigning Lender (with a copy to the Administrative Agent); and

(B)
the Administrative Agent, provided that no consent of the Administrative Agent shall be
required for an assignment of any Loans to an Assignee that is a Lender (or an Affiliate of a Lender)
immediately prior to giving effect to such assignment.
Section 54.
Assignments shall be subject to the following additional conditions:
(A)
except in the case of an assignment to a Lender, an Eligible Assignee that is an Affiliate
of any Lender or an assignment of the entire remaining amount of the assigning Lender’s Loans, the
amount of the Loans of the assigning Lender subject to each such assignment (determined as of the
date  the  Assignment  and  Assumption  with  respect  to  such  assignment  is  delivered  to  the
Administrative Agent) shall not be less than $10,000,000 (or, if such Assignee is an Eligible Assignee
that is an Affiliate of a Lender, $5,000,000) unless each of the Borrower and the Administrative Agent
otherwise consent, provided that (1) no such consent of the Borrower shall be required if an Event of
Default has occurred and is continuing and (2) with respect to any Lender party to this Agreement on
the Effective Date, such amounts shall be aggregated in respect of such Lender and any Affiliate of
such Lender that is an Eligible Assignee;
(B)
the parties to each assignment shall execute and deliver to the Administrative Agent an
Assignment and Assumption, together with a processing and recordation fee of $3,500; and
(C)
the Assignee, if it shall not be a Lender, shall deliver to the Administrative Agent an
administrative questionnaire.
In  connection  with  any  assignment  of  rights  and  obligations  of  any  Defaulting  Lender  hereunder,  no  such  assignment  shall  be
effective unless and until, in addition to the other conditions thereto set forth herein, the parties to the assignment shall make such
additional payments to the Administrative Agent in an aggregate amount sufficient, upon distribution thereof as appropriate (which
may be outright payment, purchases by the Assignee of participations or subparticipations, or other compensating actions, including
funding, with the consent of the Borrower and the Administrative Agent, the applicable pro rata share of Loans previously requested
but not funded by the Defaulting Lender, to each of which the applicable Assignee and assignor hereby irrevocably consent), to (x)
pay  and  satisfy  in  full  all  payment  liabilities  then  owed  by  such  Defaulting  Lender  to  the  Administrative  Agent  or  any  Lender
hereunder (and interest accrued thereon) and (y) acquire (and fund as appropriate) its full pro rata share of all Loans in accordance
with its Percentage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that any assignment of rights and obligations of any Defaulting
Lender hereunder shall become effective under applicable law without compliance with the provisions of this paragraph, then the
Assignee of such interest shall be deemed to be a Defaulting Lender for all purposes of this Agreement until such compliance occurs.

Section 55.
Subject to acceptance and recording thereof pursuant to paragraph (b)(iv) below, from and after the effective date
specified  in each Assignment  and Assumption  the Assignee thereunder  shall be a party hereto and, to the extent of the interest
assigned by such Assignment and Assumption, shall have the rights and obligations of a Lender under this Agreement, and the
assigning Lender thereunder shall, to the extent of the interest assigned by such Assignment and Assumption, be released from its
obligations under this Agreement (and, in the case of an Assignment and Assumption covering all of the assigning Lender’s rights
and obligations under this Agreement, such Lender shall cease to be a party hereto but shall continue to be entitled to the benefits of
Sections  2.15,  2.16,  2.17  and  10.5  but  shall  be  subject  to  the  limitations  set  forth  therein); provided,  that  except  to  the  extent
otherwise expressly agreed by the affected parties, no assignment by a Defaulting Lender will constitute a waiver or release of any
claim of any party hereunder arising from the Lender’s having been a Defaulting Lender. Any assignment or transfer by a Lender of
rights  or  obligations  under  this  Agreement  that  does  not  comply  with  this  Section  10.6  shall  be  treated  for  purposes  of  this
Agreement as a sale by such Lender of a participation in such rights and obligations in accordance with paragraph (c) of this Section.
Section 56.
The Administrative Agent, acting for this purpose as a non-fiduciary agent of the Borrower (and such agency being
solely  to  establish  that  the  relevant  obligation  is  in  registered  form  under  Section  5f.103-1(c)  of  the  United  States  Treasury
Regulations), shall maintain at one of its offices a copy of each Assignment and Assumption delivered to it and a register for the
recordation of the names and addresses of the Lenders, and the principal amount of the Loans owing to, each Lender pursuant to the
terms hereof from time to time (the “Register”). The entries in the Register shall be conclusive, in the absence of manifest error, and
the Borrower, the Administrative Agent and the Lenders shall treat each Person whose name is recorded in the Register pursuant to
the terms hereof as a Lender hereunder for all purposes of this Agreement, notwithstanding notice to the contrary. The Register shall
be available for inspection by the Borrower and any Lender, at any reasonable time and from time to time upon reasonable prior
notice.
Section 57.
Upon its receipt of a duly completed Assignment and Assumption executed by an assigning Lender and an Assignee,
the Assignee’s completed administrative questionnaire (unless the Assignee shall already be a Lender hereunder), the processing and
recordation fee referred to in paragraph (b) of this Section and any written consent to such assignment required by paragraph (b) of
this Section, the Administrative Agent shall accept such Assignment and Assumption and record the information contained therein in
the Register. No assignment shall be effective for purposes of this Agreement unless it has been recorded in the Register as provided
in this paragraph.
(a) (i) Any Lender may, without the consent of the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, sell participations to
one or more banks or other entities (other than a Defaulting Lender or the Borrower or any of the Borrower’s Affiliates or
Subsidiaries) (a “Participant”) in all or a portion of such Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement (including
all or a portion of the Loans owing to it); provided that (A) such Lender’s obligations under this Agreement shall remain
unchanged,  (B)  such  Lender  shall  remain  solely  responsible  to  the  other  parties  hereto  for  the  performance  of  such
obligations  and  (C)  the  Borrower,  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  other  Lenders  shall  continue  to  deal  solely  and
directly with such Lender in connection with such Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement. Any agreement
pursuant to which a Lender sells such a participation shall provide that such Lender shall retain the sole right to enforce
this Agreement and to approve any

amendment, modification or waiver of any provision of this Agreement; provided that such agreement may provide that
such Lender will not, without the consent of the Participant, agree to any amendment, modification or waiver that (1)
requires the consent of each Lender directly affected thereby pursuant to the proviso to the second sentence of Section
10.1 and (2) directly affects such Participant. Subject to paragraph (c)(ii) of this Section, the Borrower agrees that each
Participant shall be entitled to the benefits of Sections 2.15, 2.16 and 2.17 to the same extent as if it were a Lender and had
acquired its interest by assignment pursuant to paragraph (b) of this Section.
Section 58.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, a Participant shall not be entitled to receive any greater payment
under Section 2.15 or 2.16 than the applicable Lender would have been entitled to receive with respect to the participation sold to
such Participant, unless the sale of the participation to such Participant is made with the Borrower’s prior written consent to such
greater payments. Any Participant that is a Foreign Lender shall not be entitled to the benefits of Section 2.16 unless such Participant
complies with Section 2.16(e).
Section 59.
Each Lender that sells a participation shall, acting solely for this purpose as a non-fiduciary agent of the Borrower,
maintain a register on which it enters the name and address of each Participant and the principal amounts (and stated interest) of each
Participant’s interest in the Loans or other obligations under the Loan Documents (the “Participant Register”); provided that no
Lender shall have any obligation to disclose all or any portion of the Participant Register (including the identity of any Participant or
any information relating to a Participant’s interest in any loans or its other obligations under any Loan Document) to any Person
except  to  the  extent  that  such  disclosure  is  necessary  to  establish  that  such  loan  or  other  obligation  is  in  registered  form  under
Section 5f.103-1(c) of the United States Treasury Regulations. The entries in the Participant Register shall be conclusive absent
manifest error, and such Lender shall treat each Person whose name is recorded in the Participant Register as the owner of such
participation  for  all  purposes  of  this  Agreement  notwithstanding  any  notice  to  the  contrary.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the
Administrative Agent (in its capacity as Administrative Agent) shall have no responsibility for maintaining a Participant Register.
(a) Any Lender may at any time pledge or assign a security interest in all or any portion of its rights under this
Agreement to secure obligations of such Lender, including any pledge or assignment to secure obligations to a Federal
Reserve Bank or other central bank having jurisdiction over such Lender, and this Section shall not apply to any such
pledge or assignment of a security interest; provided that no such pledge or assignment of a security interest shall release a
Lender from any of its obligations hereunder or substitute any such pledgee or Assignee for such Lender as a party hereto.
(b) The Borrower, upon receipt of written notice from the relevant Lender, agrees to issue Notes to any Lender
requiring Notes to facilitate transactions of the type described in paragraph (d) above.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, any Conduit Lender may assign any or all of the Loans it may have funded
hereunder to its designating Lender without the consent of the Borrower or the Administrative Agent and without regard
to the limitations set forth in Section 10.6(b). Each of the Borrower, each Lender and the Administrative Agent hereby
confirms that it will not institute against a Conduit Lender or join any other Person in instituting against a Conduit Lender
any bankruptcy, reorganization, arrangement, insolvency or

liquidation proceeding under any state bankruptcy or similar law, for one year and one day after the payment in full of the
latest maturing commercial paper note issued by such Conduit Lender; provided, however, that each Lender designating
any  Conduit  Lender  hereby  agrees  to  indemnify,  save  and  hold  harmless  each  other  party  hereto  for  any  loss,  cost,
damage, expense, obligations, penalties, actions, judgments, suits or any kind whatsoever arising out of its inability to
institute such a proceeding against such Conduit Lender during such period of forbearance.
(d) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section, none of the Agents, in their capacity as Lenders, will
assign without the consent of the Borrower, prior to the Effective Date, any of the Commitments held by them on the
Effective Date.
(e) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 10.6, for the avoidance of doubt, Goldman Sachs
Bank  USA  may  assign  any  amount  of  its  Loans  hereunder  to  Goldman  Sachs  Lending  Partners  LLC  (or  vice  versa)
without the prior written consent of any other Person.
1.2
Adjustments; Set off.
(a) Except  to  the  extent  that  this  Agreement  expressly  provides  for  payments  to  be  allocated  to  a  particular
Lender, if any Lender (a “Benefitted Lender”) shall receive any payment of all or part of the Obligations owing to it
hereunder, or receive any collateral in respect thereof (whether voluntarily or involuntarily, by set off, pursuant to events
or proceedings of the nature referred to in Section 8(f), or otherwise), in a greater proportion than any such payment to or
collateral received by any other Lender, if any, in respect of the Obligations owing to such other Lender hereunder, such
Benefitted Lender shall purchase for cash from the other Lenders a participating interest in such portion of the Obligations
owing to each such other Lender hereunder, or shall provide such other Lenders with the benefits of any such collateral, as
shall be necessary to cause such Benefitted Lender to share the excess payment or benefits of such collateral ratably with
each  of  the  Lenders; provided, however,  that  if  all  or  any  portion  of  such  excess  payment  or  benefits  is  thereafter
recovered from such Benefitted Lender, such purchase shall be rescinded, and the purchase price and benefits returned, to
the extent of such recovery, but without interest.
(b) In addition to any rights and remedies of the Lenders provided by law, including other rights of set-off, each
Lender shall have the right, without prior notice to the Borrower, any such notice being expressly waived by the Borrower
to  the  extent  permitted  by  applicable  law,  upon  any  amount  becoming  due  and  payable  by  the  Borrower  hereunder
(whether at the stated maturity, by acceleration or otherwise), after any applicable grace period, to set off and appropriate
and  apply  against  such  amount  any  and  all deposits  (general  or special,  time  or demand,  provisional  or final),  in any
currency, and any other credits, indebtedness or claims, in any currency, in each case whether direct or indirect, absolute
or contingent, matured or unmatured, at any time held or owing by such Lender or any branch, Affiliate or agency thereof
to or for the credit or the account of the Borrower; provided, that in the event that any Defaulting Lender shall exercise
any such right of setoff, (x) all amounts so set off shall be paid over immediately to the Administrative Agent for further
application in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.20 and,

pending such payment, shall be segregated by such Defaulting Lender from its other funds and deemed held in trust for the
benefit  of  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  Lenders,  and  (y)  the  Defaulting  Lender  shall  provide  promptly  to  the
Administrative Agent a statement describing in reasonable detail the Obligations owing to such Defaulting Lender as to
which it exercised such right of setoff. Each Lender agrees promptly to notify the Borrower and the Administrative Agent
after any such setoff and application made by such Lender, provided that the failure to give such notice shall not affect the
validity of such setoff and application.
1.3
Counterparts; Electronic Execution; Binding Effect. This Agreement may be executed by one or more of the
parties to this Agreement on any number of separate counterparts, and all of said counterparts taken together shall be deemed
to  constitute  one  and  the  same  instrument.  Delivery  of  an  executed  signature  page  of  this  Agreement  by  facsimile
transmission, emailed pdf. or any other electronic means that reproduces an image of the actual executed signature page shall
be effective as delivery of an original executed counterpart hereof. The words “execution,” “signed,” “signature,” “delivery,”
and words of like import in or relating to any document to be signed in connection with this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby shall be deemed to include an electronic sound, symbol, or process attached to, or associated with, a
contract  or  other  record  and  adopted  by  a Person  with  the  intent  to sign,  authenticate  or  accept  such  contract  or  record,
deliveries  or  the  keeping  of  records  in  electronic  form,  each  of  which  shall  be  of  the  same  legal  effect,  validity  or
enforceability as a manually executed signature, physical delivery thereof or the use of a paper-based recordkeeping system,
as the case may be, to the extent and as provided for in any applicable law, including the Federal Electronic Signatures in
Global and National Commerce Act, the New York State Electronic Signatures and Records Act, or any other similar state
laws based on the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act; provided that nothing herein shall require the Administrative Agent
to accept electronic signatures in any form or format without its prior written consent. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing,  the  Borrower  hereby  (i)  agrees  that,  for  all  purposes,  including  without  limitation,  in  connection  with  any
workout, restructuring, enforcement of remedies, bankruptcy proceedings or litigation among the Administrative Agent and
the Lenders, electronic images of this Agreement or any other Loan Documents (in each case, including with respect to any
signature pages thereto) shall have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability as any paper original, and (ii) waives any
argument, defense or right to contest the validity or enforceability of the Loan Documents based solely on the lack of paper
original copies of any Loan Documents, including with respect to any signature pages thereto. This Agreement shall become
binding on the parties hereto when it shall have been executed by the Administrative Agent and the Administrative Agent
shall have received counterparts hereof which, when taken together, bear the signatures of each of the other parties hereto,
and thereafter shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their respective successors and assigns.
1.4
Severability. Any provision of this Agreement that is prohibited or unenforceable in any jurisdiction shall, as
to such jurisdiction, be ineffective to the extent of such prohibition or unenforceability without invalidating the remaining
provisions  hereof,  and  any  such  prohibition  or  unenforceability  in  any  jurisdiction  shall  not  invalidate  or  render
unenforceable such provision in any other jurisdiction. Without limiting the foregoing provisions of this Section 10.9, if and
to the extent that the enforceability of any provisions in this Agreement

relating to Defaulting Lenders shall be limited by Debtor Relief Laws, as determined in good faith by the Administrative
Agent, as applicable, then such provisions shall be deemed to be in effect only to the extent not so limited.
1.5
Integration. This Agreement and the other Loan Documents represent the entire agreement of the Borrower,
the Administrative Agent, and the Lenders with respect to the subject matter hereof and thereof, and there are no promises,
undertakings, representations or warranties by the Administrative Agent, or any Lender relative to the subject matter hereof
not expressly set forth or referred to herein or in the other Loan Documents.
1.6
GOVERNING LAW. THIS AGREEMENT AND THE RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE PARTIES
UNDER  THIS  AGREEMENT  SHALL  BE  GOVERNED  BY,  AND  CONSTRUED  AND  INTERPRETED  IN
ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAW OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
1.7
Submission To Jurisdiction; Waivers. The Borrower hereby irrevocably and unconditionally:
(a) submits for itself and its property in any legal action or proceeding relating to this Agreement and the other
Loan Documents to which it is a party, or for recognition and enforcement of any judgment in respect thereof, to the non-
exclusive jurisdiction of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York sitting in the Borough of
Manhattan (or if such court lacks subject matter jurisdiction, the Supreme Court of the State of New York sitting in the
Borough of Manhattan), and any appellate court from any thereof;
(b) consents that any such action or proceeding may be brought in such courts and waives any objection that it
may  now  or  hereafter  have  to  the  venue  of  any  such  action  or  proceeding  in  any  such  court  or  that  such  action  or
proceeding was brought in an inconvenient court and agrees not to plead or claim the same;
(c) agrees that service of process in any such action or proceeding may be effected by mailing a copy thereof by
registered or certified mail (or any substantially similar form of mail), postage prepaid, to the Borrower at its address set
forth in Section 10.2(a) or at such other address of which the Administrative Agent shall have been notified pursuant
thereto;
(d) agrees that nothing herein shall affect the right to effect service of process in any other manner permitted by
law or shall limit the right to sue in any other jurisdiction; and
(e) waives, to the maximum extent not prohibited by law, and agrees not to assert any right it may have to claim
or  recover  in  any  legal  action  or  proceeding  relating  to  this  Agreement  or  any  other  Loan  Document  any  special,
exemplary, punitive or consequential damages.
NOTHING IN THIS AGREEMENT OR IN ANY OTHER LOAN DOCUMENT SHALL AFFECT ANY RIGHT THAT
THE  ADMINISTRATIVE  AGENT  OR  ANY  LENDER  MAY  OTHERWISE  HAVE  TO  BRING  ANY  ACTION  OR
PROCEEDING RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY OTHER LOAN

DOCUMENT AGAINST THE BORROWER OR ITS PROPERTIES IN THE COURTS OF ANY JURISDICTION.
1.8
Acknowledgments. The Borrower hereby acknowledges that:
(a) it has been advised by counsel in the negotiation, execution and delivery of this Agreement and the other Loan
Documents;
(b) none of the Administrative Agent or any Lender has any fiduciary relationship with or duty to the Borrower
arising out of or in connection with this Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents, and the relationship between
Administrative Agent and Lenders, on one hand, and the Borrower, on the other hand, in connection herewith or therewith
is solely that of debtor and creditor; and
(c) no  joint  venture  is  created  hereby  or  by  the  other  Loan  Documents  or  otherwise  exists  by  virtue  of  the
transactions contemplated hereby among the Lenders or among the Borrower and the Lenders.
1.9
Confidentiality. Each of the Administrative Agent and each Lender agrees to keep confidential in accordance
with such party’s customary practices (and in any event in compliance with applicable law regarding material non-public
information) all non-public information provided to it by the Borrower, the Administrative Agent or any Lender pursuant to
or in connection with this Agreement that is designated by the provider thereof as confidential; provided that nothing herein
shall prevent the Administrative Agent or any Lender from disclosing any such information (a) to the Administrative Agent,
any  other  Lender  or  any  Affiliate  thereof,  (b)  subject  to  an  agreement  to  comply  with  the  provisions  of  this  Section  or
substantially equivalent provisions, to any actual or prospective Transferee, any direct or indirect counterparty to any Swap
Agreement  (or  any  professional  advisor  to  such  counterparty)  or  any  credit  insurance  providers,  (c)  to  its  employees,
directors, agents, attorneys, service providers, accountants and other professional advisors or those of any of its Affiliates (as
long  as  such  attorneys,  service  providers,  accountants  and  other  professional  advisors  are  directed  to  comply  with
confidentiality requirements substantially equivalent to this Section), (d) upon the request or demand of any Governmental
Authority,  (e)  in  response  to  any  order  of  any  court  or  other  Governmental  Authority  or  as  may  otherwise  be  required
pursuant  to  any  Requirement  of  Law,  (f)  if  requested  or  required  to  do  so  in  connection  with  any  litigation  or  similar
proceeding, (g) that has been publicly disclosed, (h) to the National Association of Insurance Commissioners or any similar
organization  or  any  nationally  recognized  rating  agency  that  requires  access  to  information  about  a  Lender’s  investment
portfolio in connection with ratings issued with respect to such Lender, (i) in connection with the exercise of any remedy
hereunder  or  under  any  other  Loan  Document,  (j)  any  rating  agency  in  connection  with  rating  of  the  Borrower  or  its
Subsidiaries  or the credit facilities provided hereunder  or (k) to the extent such information  (i) becomes available  to the
Administrative Agent, any Lender or any of their respective Affiliates on a nonconfidential basis from a source other than the
Borrower  or  its  Subsidiaries  or  (ii)  is  independently  discovered  or  developed  by  a  party  hereto  without  utilizing  any
information received from the Borrower or its Subsidiaries or violating the terms of this Section 10.14, provided that, in the
case of clauses (d), (e) and (f) of this Section 10.14, with the exception of disclosure to bank regulatory authorities, the

Borrower (to the extent legally permissible) shall be given prompt prior notice so that it may seek a protective order or other
appropriate remedy.
1.10
WAIVERS OF JURY TRIAL. TO THE FULLEST  EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, THE BORROWER,
THE  ADMINISTRATIVE  AGENT  AND  THE  LENDERS  HEREBY  IRREVOCABLY  AND  UNCONDITIONALLY
WAIVE TRIAL BY JURY IN ANY LEGAL ACTION OR PROCEEDING RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY
OTHER LOAN DOCUMENT AND FOR ANY COUNTERCLAIM THEREIN.
1.11
USA Patriot Act; Beneficial Ownership Regulation. Each Lender hereby notifies the Borrower that pursuant to
the requirements of the USA Patriot Act (Title III of Pub. L. 107-56 (signed into law October 26, 2001)) (the “Patriot Act”),
it is required to obtain, verify and record information that identifies the Borrower, which information includes the name and
address of the Borrower and other information that will allow such Lender to identify the Borrower in accordance with the
Patriot Act.
1.12
Judicial Reference. If any action or proceeding is filed in a court of the State of California by or against any
party hereto in connection with any of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement or any other Loan Document, (i) the
court shall, and is hereby directed to, make a general reference pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 638 to
a referee (who shall be a single active or retired judge) to hear and determine all of the issues in such action or proceeding
(whether of fact or of law) and to report a statement of decision, provided that at the option of any party to such proceeding,
any such issues pertaining to a “provisional remedy” as defined in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1281.8 shall be
heard and determined by the court, and (ii) without limiting the generality of Section 10.5, the Borrower shall be solely
responsible to pay all fees and expenses of any referee appointed in such action or proceeding.
1.13
No Advisory or Fiduciary Responsibility. In connection  with all aspects  of each transactions  contemplated
hereby (including in connection with any amendment, waiver or other modification hereof or of any other Loan Document),
the Borrower acknowledges and agrees that: (i) (A) the arranging and other services regarding this Agreement provided by
the Agents, the Arrangers and the Lenders are arm’s-length commercial transactions between the Borrower, on the one hand,
and the Agents, the Arrangers and the Lenders, on the other hand, (B) the Borrower has consulted its own legal, accounting,
regulatory  and  tax  advisors  to  the  extent  it  has  deemed  appropriate,  and  (C)  the  Borrower  is  capable  of  evaluating,  and
understands  and  accepts,  the  terms,  risks  and  conditions  of  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby  and  by  the  other  Loan
Documents; (ii) (A) each Agent, Arranger and Lender is and has been acting solely as a principal and, except as expressly
agreed in writing by the relevant parties, has not been, is not, and will not be acting as an advisor, agent or fiduciary for the
Borrower or any other Person and (B) none of the Agents, Arrangers or Lenders has any obligation to the Borrower or any of
its Affiliates with respect to the transactions contemplated hereby except those obligations expressly set forth herein and in
the  other  Loan  Documents;  and  (iii)  the  Agents,  the  Arrangers  and  the  Lenders  and  their  respective  Affiliates  may  be
engaged in a broad range of transactions that involve interests that differ from those of the Borrower and its Affiliates, and
none of the Agents, Arrangers or Lenders has any obligation to disclose any of such interests to the Borrower or its Affiliates.
To the fullest extent permitted by

law, the Borrower hereby waives and releases any claims that it may have against the Agents, the Arrangers and the Lenders
with respect to any breach or alleged breach of agency or fiduciary duty in connection with any aspect of any transaction
contemplated hereby other than a breach of the confidentiality provisions set forth in Section 10.14.
1.14
Acknowledgement Regarding Any Supported QFCs.
(a) To  the  extent  that  the  Loan  Documents  provide  support,  through  a  guarantee  or  otherwise,  for  Swap
Agreements or any other agreement or instrument that is a QFC (such support “QFC Credit Support” and each such
QFC a “Supported QFC”), the parties acknowledge and agree as follows with respect to the resolution power of the
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  under  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Act  and  Title  II  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall
Street Reform  and Consumer Protection  Act (together  with the regulations  promulgated  thereunder,  the “U.S. Special
Resolution Regimes”) in respect of such Supported QFC and QFC Credit Support (with the provisions below applicable
notwithstanding that the Loan Documents and any Supported QFC may in fact be stated to be governed by the laws of the
State of New York and/or of the United States or any other state of the United States):
(b) In the event a Covered Entity that is party to a Supported QFC (each, a “Covered Party”) becomes subject to
a proceeding under a U.S. Special Resolution Regime, the transfer of such Supported QFC and the benefit of such QFC
Credit Support (and any interest and obligation in or under such Supported QFC and such QFC Credit Support, and any
rights in property securing such Supported QFC or such QFC Credit Support) from such Covered Party will be effective to
the same extent as the transfer would be effective under the U.S. Special Resolution Regime if the Supported QFC and
such QFC Credit Support (and any such interest, obligation  and rights in property) were governed by the laws of the
United States or a state of the United States. In the event a Covered Party or a BHC Act Affiliate of a Covered Party
becomes subject to a proceeding under a U.S. Special Resolution Regime, Default Rights under the Loan Documents that
might otherwise apply to such Supported QFC or any QFC Credit Support that may be exercised against such Covered
Party are permitted to be exercised to no greater extent than such Default Rights could be exercised under the U.S. Special
Resolution Regime if the Supported QFC and the Loan Documents were governed by the laws of the United States or a
state of the United States. Without limitation of the foregoing, it is understood and agreed that rights and remedies of the
parties  with  respect  to a Defaulting  Lender  shall  in no event  affect  the  rights  of any  Covered  Party  with  respect  to a
Supported QFC or any QFC Credit Support..
1.15
Acknowledgement and Consent to Bail-In of Affected Financial Institutions. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in any Loan Document or in any other agreement, arrangement or understanding among any such parties, each party
hereto acknowledges that any liability of any Affected Financial Institution arising under any Loan Document, to the extent
such liability is unsecured, may be subject to the Write-Down and Conversion Powers of the applicable Resolution Authority
and agrees and consents to, and acknowledges and agrees to be bound by:
(a) the application  of any  Write-Down  and  Conversion  Powers  by  the applicable  Resolution  Authority  to any
such liabilities arising hereunder which

may be payable to it by any party hereto that is an Affected Financial Institution; and
(b) the effects of any Bail-In Action on any such liability, including, if applicable:
Section 60.
a reduction in full or in part or cancellation of any such liability;
Section 61.
a conversion of all, or a portion of, such liability into shares or other instruments of ownership in such Affected
Financial Institution, its parent undertaking, or a bridge institution that may be issued to it or otherwise conferred on it, and that such
shares or other instruments of ownership will be accepted by it in lieu of any rights with respect to any such liability under this
Agreement or any other Loan Document; or
Section 62.
the variation of the terms of such liability in connection with the exercise of the Write-Down and Conversion Powers
of the applicable Resolution Authority.
[Remainder of page intentionally left blank. Signature pages follow.]

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed and delivered by their proper and duly
authorized officers as of the day and year first above written.
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC
COMPANY
By:
Name:
Title:

JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A. 
as Administrative Agent and as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

BANK OF AMERICA, N.A. 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

BARCLAYS BANK PLC 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

CITIBANK, N.A. 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

GOLDMAN SACHS BANK USA 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

BNP PARIBAS 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
By:
Name:
Title:

CREDIT SUISSE AG, NEW YORK
BRANCH 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
By:
Name:
Title:

MIZUHO BANK, LTD. 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

MUFG UNION BANK, N.A. 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

BANK OF MONTREAL, CHICAGO
BRANCH 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

THE BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:

BANK OF CHINA, LOS ANGELES
BRANCH 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:


Exhibit 10.30
AMENDMENT NO. 3 TO CREDIT AGREEMENT
This AMENDMENT NO. 3, dated as of February 8, 2022 (this “Amendment”), is entered into by and among PACIFIC GAS AND
ELECTRIC COMPANY, a California corporation (the “Borrower”), the Consenting Lenders (as defined below), and JPMORGAN CHASE
BANK,  N.A.  (“JPMCB”),  as  administrative  agent  (in  such  capacity  and  including  any  successors  in  such  capacity,  the  “Administrative
Agent”).
RECITALS:
WHEREAS, reference is hereby made to the Term Loan Credit Agreement, dated as of July 1, 2020, among the Borrower, the
lenders party thereto from time to time, the Administrative Agent and the other parties thereto (as amended by that certain Amendment No. 1
to Credit Agreement dated as of October 29, 2021 (the “Amendment No. 1”) and that certain Amendment No. 2 to Credit Agreement dated as
of December 31, 2021 (the “Amendment No. 2”), the “Credit Agreement”, capitalized terms used (including in the preamble and recitals
hereto) but not defined herein shall have the meanings assigned to such terms in the Credit Agreement (as amended hereby));
WHEREAS, the Borrower, the Lenders party thereto and the Administrative Agent previously entered into the Amendment No. 1
pursuant to which the Lenders party thereto agreed to extend the maturity date of the Loans held by such Lenders, which Loans are the 18-
Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A);
WHEREAS, the Borrower, the Lenders party thereto and the Administrative Agent previously entered into the Amendment No. 2
pursuant to which the Lenders party thereto agreed to extend the maturity date of the Loans held by such Lenders, which Loans are the 18-
Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B);
WHEREAS, as of the date hereof, the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A) and the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B) have the
same maturity date;
WHEREAS,  each  Lender  that  executes  and  delivers  an  executed  counterpart  to  this  Amendment  agrees  to  the  terms  of  this
Amendment upon the effectiveness of this Amendment on the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date (such Lenders, the “Consenting Lenders”),
whereby the maturity date of the Loans held by such Consenting Lenders will be extended from October 1, 2022 to January 1, 2023 (the
Loans so extended, the “Extended Loans”);
WHEREAS,  the  Loans  that  are  not  Extended  Loans  are  being  prepaid  on  the  date  of  effectiveness  of  this  Amendment  (the
“Prepayment”);
WHEREAS, the Consenting Lenders, constituting the Required Lenders and, after immediately giving effect to the Prepayment,
constituting all the Lenders, agree to the other changes to the Credit Agreement set forth herein;
WHEREAS,  JPMCB  (or  an  Affiliate  thereof)  is  acting  as  a  joint  lead  arranger  and  bookrunner  (in  such  capacity,  the  “Lead
Arranger”) in respect of this Amendment; and
WHEREAS, this Amendment is an amendment made with the consent of all Lenders, the Borrower and the Administrative Agent
pursuant to Section 10.1 of the Credit Agreement.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and for other good and valuable consideration (the receipt and sufficiency of
which is hereby acknowledged), the parties hereto hereby agree as follows:
    
    

A.
Amendments to Credit Agreement.
(i)
Effective on the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date (as defined below) the Credit Agreement is hereby amended to:
(A)
Amend Section 1.1 of the Credit Agreement by adding the following defined term in correct alphabetical order:
“Amendment No. 3 Effective Date”: February 8, 2022.
(B)
Amending and restating the following defined terms contained in Section 1.1 of the Credit Agreement in their entirety as
follows:
“18-Month Tranche Maturity Date”: January 1, 2023.
“Commitment”: as to any Lender, its 18-Month Tranche Commitment.
“Loans”: the 18-Month Tranche Loans.
“Maturity Date”: with respect to the 18-Month Tranche Loans, the 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date.
“Senior Bonds”: with respect to the 18-Month Tranche Loans, those certain First Mortgage Bonds in the aggregate combined
initial principal amount of $1,500,000,000, in each case, issued to the Administrative Agent pursuant to the Supplemental Indenture.
“Tranche”: the 18-Month Tranche Commitments or the 18-Month Tranche Loans (or, with respect to the 18-Month Tranche
Loans, the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A) and the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B)).
(C)
Amend  Section  1.1  of  the  Credit  Agreement  by  deleting  the  following  defined  terms:  “364-Day  Tranche  Commitment”,
“364-Day Tranche Lender”, “364-Day Tranche Loans” and “364-Day Tranche Maturity Date”.
(D)
Amend and restate Section 2.1(a) of the Credit Agreement in its entirety as follows:
“[Reserved].”
(E)
Amend and restate Section 2.1(b) of the Credit Agreement in its entirety as follows:
(b)    Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, each 18-Month Tranche Lender (severally and not jointly) agrees to
make a term loan (the “18-Month Tranche Loans”) to the Borrower in Dollars on the Effective Date in an aggregate amount
equal  to  the  amount  of  such  18-Month  Tranche  Lender’s  18-Month  Tranche  Commitment.  Loans  under  the  18-Month
Tranche may be ABR Loans or Term Benchmark Loans, as further provided herein. 18-Month Tranche Loans borrowed
under this Section 2.1(b) and paid or prepaid may not be reborrowed. As of the Amendment No. 1 Effective Date, a portion
of the 18-Month Tranche Loans in an aggregate amount of $1,315,735,897.44 (the “18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A)”)
shall have  an  18-Month Tranche  Maturity Date of  October  1, 2022  and  a portion  of the 18-Month Tranche  Loans  in an
aggregate  amount  of  $184,264,102.56  (the  “18-Month  Tranche  Loans  (Tranche  B)”)  shall  have  an  18-Month  Tranche
Maturity Date of January 1, 2022. As of the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date, the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B)
shall have an 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date of October 1, 2022. As of the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date, all 18-Month
Tranche Loans shall have an 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date of January 1, 2023.
2
    

(F)
Amend Section 2.6 of the Credit Agreement by amending and restating clause (c) thereof as follows:
(c)    On April 1, 2022, the Borrower agrees to pay to the Administrative Agent, for the account of each Lender that holds any
18-Month Tranche Loans outstanding on such date, a fee equal to 0.075% of the principal amount of such Loans.
(G)
Amend Section 2.6 of the Credit Agreement by deleting clause (d) thereof.
(H)
Amend and restate Section 2.14(b) of the Credit Agreement in its entirety as follows:
(b)     Each payment (including each prepayment) by the Borrower on account of principal of and interest on the Loans shall
be made pro rata in the case of the 18-Month Tranche Loans, according to the respective outstanding principal amounts of the
18-Month Tranche Loans then held by the 18-Month Tranche Lenders.
(ii)
Effective on February 18, 2022, which is the last day of the Interest Period in effect immediately prior to the Amendment No.
3 Effective Date for the outstanding Loans, the Credit Agreement is hereby amended to delete the stricken text (indicated textually in the
same manner as the following example: stricken text) and to add the double-underlined text (indicated textually in the same manner as the
following example: double-underlined text) as set forth in the pages of the Credit Agreement attached as Exhibit A hereto.
(iii)
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section 2.14(b) or any other provision of the Credit Agreement, the Consenting
Lenders hereby consent to the Prepayment on the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date without the ratable repayment of the Extended Loans
(and interest thereon) on such date.
B.
Allocations of Loans. On the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date, after giving effect to the Prepayment, the allocation of the
18-Month Tranche Loans are as set forth as Schedule 1.1 hereto.
C.
Conditions Precedent. This Amendment shall become effective as of the date first above written when, and only when, each
of  the  following  conditions  precedent  shall  have  been  satisfied  or,  to  the  extent  permitted  under  the  Credit  Agreement,  waived  (the
“Amendment No. 3 Effective Date”):
1.
Executed Counterparts. The Administrative Agent shall have received a counterpart to this Amendment duly executed by
the Borrower, the Consenting Lenders, the Required Lenders and the Administrative Agent.
2.
Organizational Documents; Certificates. The Administrative Agent shall have received (i) a certificate of the Borrower,
dated the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date (with a recent short-form good standing certificate of the Borrower), similar to the one delivered
pursuant to Section 5.1(f) of the Credit Agreement, with appropriate insertions and attachments and (ii) a certificate of a Responsible Officer,
dated the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date, confirming the satisfaction of the conditions precedent set forth in clauses (3) and (4) below.
3.
Representations and Warranties. The representations and warranties of the Borrower contained in Section 4 of the Credit
Agreement (other than the representations and warranties set forth in Sections 4.2, 4.6(b) and 4.13) shall be true and correct in all material
respects  immediately  prior  to  and  immediately  after  giving  effect  to  this  Amendment; provided that  each  of  such  representations  and
warranties that contains a materiality qualification shall be true and correct on and as of the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date (or, to the
extent such representations and warranties specifically relate to an earlier date, such representations and warranties were true and correct in
all material respects, or true and correct, as the case may be, as of such earlier date).
4.
No Default. No Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing immediately prior to, and immediately
after giving effect to, the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date.
3
    

5.
Fees and Expenses. On or prior to the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date, the Borrower shall have paid all reasonable out-of-
pocket  costs  and  expenses  of  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  Lead  Arrangers  required  to  be  paid  or  reimbursed  by  the  Borrower  in
connection with the preparation, negotiation, execution and delivery of this Amendment and related documentation (including, in each case,
without  limitation,  the  reasonable  fees  and  disbursements  of  counsel  for  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  Lead  Arrangers  with  respect
thereto).
6.
KYC Information. At least three (3) Business Days prior to the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date, the Administrative Agent
and each Consenting Lender shall have received all documentation and information relating to the Borrower as is reasonably requested in
writing by the Administrative Agent and/or any such Consenting Lender at least ten (10) Business Days prior to the Amendment No. 3
Effective Date that is required by Governmental Authorities under applicable “know your customer” and anti-money laundering rules and
regulations, including the Patriot Act and the Beneficial Ownership Regulation. If the Borrower qualifies as a “legal entity customer” under
the Beneficial Ownership Regulation and the Administrative Agent or any Consenting Lender so request at least five (5) Business Days prior
to the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date, then at least three (3) Business Days prior to the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date, the Borrower
shall have delivered to the Administrative Agent and/or any such Consenting Lender a Beneficial Ownership Certification in relation to the
Borrower.
7.
Bond Documents. The Administrative Agent shall have received evidence reasonably satisfactory to it that the Borrower has
caused to be delivered to the Trustee under the FMB Indenture the items described in Section IV Extension Procedures for the Bonds of the
Thirty-Fourth Series of the Eleventh Supplemental Indenture.
D. Other Terms.
1.
Reference to the Effect on the Loan Documents.
(i)
As  of  the  Amendment  No.  3  Effective  Date,  each  reference  in  the  Credit  Agreement  to  “this  Agreement,”
“hereunder,”  “hereof,”  “herein,”  or  words  of  like  import,  and  each  reference  in  the  other  Loan  Documents  to  the  “Credit  Agreement”
(including, without limitation, by means of words like “thereunder,” “thereof” and words of like import), shall mean and be a reference to the
Credit  Agreement  as  amended  hereby,  and  this  Amendment  and  the  Credit  Agreement  shall  be  read  together  and  construed  as  a  single
instrument.
(ii) Except as expressly amended hereby or specifically waived or consented to above, all of the terms and provisions of
the Credit Agreement and all other Loan Documents are and shall remain in full force and effect and are hereby ratified and confirmed.
(iii) The execution, delivery and effectiveness of this Amendment shall not, except as expressly provided herein, operate
as a waiver of any right, power or remedy of the Lenders, the Borrower, the Lead Arrangers or the Administrative Agent under any of the
Loan Documents, nor constitute a waiver or amendment of any other provision of any of the Loan Documents or for any purpose except as
expressly set forth herein.
(iv) This Amendment is a Loan Document.
2.
Execution in Counterparts. This Amendment may be executed in any number of counterparts and by different parties in
separate counterparts, each of which when so executed shall be deemed to be an original and all of which taken together shall constitute one
and  the  same  agreement.  Delivery  of  an  executed  counterpart  of  a  signature  page  of  (x)  this  Amendment  and/or  (y)  any  document,
amendment,  approval,  consent,  information,  notice,  certificate,  request,  statement,  disclosure  or  authorization  related  to  this  Amendment
and/or the transactions contemplated hereby (each an “Ancillary Document”) that is an electronic sound, symbol, or process attached to, or
associated with, a contract or other record and adopted by a Person with the intent to sign, authenticate or accept such contract or record
(each, an “Electronic Signature”) transmitted by telecopy, emailed pdf. or any other electronic means that reproduces an image of an actual
executed signature page shall be effective as delivery of a manually
4
    

executed  counterpart  of  this  Amendment  or  such  Ancillary  Document,  as  applicable.  The  words  “execution,”  “signed,”  “signature,”
“delivery,” and words of like import in or relating to this Amendment and/or any Ancillary Document shall be deemed to include Electronic
Signatures, deliveries or the keeping of records in any electronic form (including deliveries by telecopy, emailed pdf. or any other electronic
means  that  reproduces  an  image  of  an  actual  executed  signature  page),  each  of  which  shall  be  of  the  same  legal  effect,  validity  or
enforceability as a manually executed signature, physical delivery thereof or the use of a paper-based recordkeeping system, as the case may
be.
3.
Ratification. This Amendment shall be effective pursuant to Section 10.1 of the Credit Agreement (and approved and ratified
by the Consenting Lenders, the Required Lenders and the Administrative Agent for all purposes under the Loan Documents).
4.
Governing Law. THIS  AMENDMENT  AND  THE  RIGHTS  AND  OBLIGATIONS  OF  THE  PARTIES  HEREUNDER
SHALL BE GOVERNED BY, AND CONSTRUED AND INTERPRETED IN ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAW OF THE STATE OF
NEW YORK.
5.
Section Titles. The section titles contained in this Amendment are and shall be without substantive meaning or content of any
kind whatsoever and are not a part of the agreement between the parties hereto, except when used to reference a section.
6.
Notices. All communications and notices hereunder shall be given as provided in the Credit Agreement.
7.
Severability. The fact that any term or provision of this Amendment is held invalid, illegal or unenforceable as to any person
in any situation in any jurisdiction shall not affect the validity, enforceability or legality of the remaining terms or provisions hereof or the
validity, enforceability or legality of such offending term or provision in any other situation or jurisdiction or as applied to any person.
8.
Successors. The terms of this Amendment shall be binding upon, and shall inure to the benefit of, the parties hereto and their
respective successors and assigns.
9.
Jurisdiction; Waiver of Jury Trial. The jurisdiction and waiver of right to trial by jury provisions in Section 10.12 and
Section 10.15, respectively, of the Credit Agreement are incorporated herein by reference mutatis mutandis.
[THE REMAINDER OF THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
5
    

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, each of the undersigned has caused its duly authorized officer to execute and deliver this Amendment as
of the date first set forth above.
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY, 
as the Borrower
By:    /s/ Margaret K. Becker                           
Name: Margaret K. Becker
Title: Vice President and Treasurer
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
    

JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A., 
as Administrative Agent
By:
/s/ Arina Mavilian
Name:    Arina Mavilian
Title: Executive Director
2
    

WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION, as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Gregory R. Gredvig
Name:    Gregory R. Gredvig
Title:    Director
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
    

BARCLAYS BANK PLC, as a Consenting
Lender
By:
/s/ Sam Yoo
Name:    Sam Yoo
Title:    Managing Director
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company    
    

MIZUHO BANK, LTD., as a Consenting
Lender
By:
/s/ Edward Sacks
Name:    Edward Sacks
Title:    Authorized Signatory
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company    
    

GOLDMAN SACHS BANK USA, as a
Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Thomas Manning
Name:    Thomas Manning
Title:    Authorized Signatory
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company    
    

CITIBANK, N.A., as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Richard Rivera
Name:    Richard Rivera
Title:    Vice President
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company    
    

BANK OF AMERICA, N.A., as a
Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Dee Dee Farkas
Name:    Dee Dee Farkas
Title:    Managing Director
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company    
    

BNP PARIBAS, as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Denis O’Meara
Name:    Denis O’Meara
Title:    Managing Director
By:
/s/ Victor Padilla
Name:    Victor Padilla
Title:    Vice President
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company    
    

BANK OF MONTREAL, CHICAGO
BRANCH, as a Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Darren Thomas
Name:    Darren Thomas
Title:    Director
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company    
    

MUFG UNION BANK, N.A., as a
Consenting Lender
By:
/s/ Nietzsche Rodricks
Name:    Nietzsche Rodricks
Title:    Managing Director
Signature Page to Amendment No. 3 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company    
    

Execution Version
EXHIBIT A
Attached.
$3,000,000,000
TERM LOAN CREDIT AGREEMENT
among
    

PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC COMPANY, 
as Borrower,
the Several Lenders from Time to Time Parties Hereto,
JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A., 
as Administrative Agent,
BOFA SECURITIES, INC.,
BARCLAYS BANK PLC,
CITIBANK, N.A.,
and GOLDMAN SACHS BANK USA, 
as Co-Syndication Agents,
and
BNP PARIBAS,
CREDIT SUISSE AG, NEW YORK BRANCH,
MIZUHO BANK, LTD.,
MUFG UNION BANK, N.A.,
and WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION, 
as Co-Documentation Agents
Dated as of July 1, 2020
as amended by Amendment No. 23 to Credit Agreement dated as of December 31, 2021February 8, 2022
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., 
BofA Securities, Inc., 
Barclays Bank PLC, 
Citibank, N.A. 
and Goldman Sachs Bank USA 
as Joint Lead Arrangers and 
Joint Bookrunners
13
    

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SECTION 1.    DEFINITIONS    1
1.1    Defined Terms    1
1.2    Other Definitional Provisions and Interpretative Provisions    30
1.3    Divisions    31
1.4    Interest Rates; LIBORBenchmark Notification    31
SECTION 2.    AMOUNT AND TERMS OF THE TERM LOANS    32
2.1    Loans    32
2.2    Procedures for Borrowing    3233
2.3    [Reserved]    33
2.4    [Reserved]    33
2.5    [Reserved]    33
2.6    Fees, Etc.    33
2.7    Termination of Commitments    33
2.8    Prepayments    3334
2.9    Conversion and Continuation Options    3435
2.10    Limitations on EurodollarTerm Benchmark Tranches    35
2.11    Interest Rates and Payment Dates    35
2.12    Computation of Interest and Fees    36
2.13    Inability to Determine Interest Rate    36
2.14    Pro Rata Treatment and Payments; Notes    3839
2.15    Change of Law    3941
2.16    Taxes    4142
2.17    Indemnity    4546
2.18    Change of Lending Office    4547
2.19    Replacement of Lenders    4647
i
    

2.20    Defaulting Lenders    4647
2.21    [Reserved]    49
SECTION 3.    [RESERVED].    4749
SECTION 4.    REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES    4749
4.1    Financial Condition    4749
4.2    No Change    4849
4.3    Existence; Compliance with Law    4849
4.4    Power; Authorization; Enforceable Obligations    4850
4.5    No Legal Bar    4950
4.6    Litigation    4950
4.7    No Default    4951
4.8    Taxes    4951
4.9    Federal Regulations    5051
4.10    ERISA    5051
4.11    Investment Company Act; Other Regulations    5052
4.12    Use of Proceeds    5152
4.13    Environmental Matters    5152
4.14    Regulatory Matters    5152
4.15    Sanctions; Anti-Corruption    5152
4.16    Affected Financial Institutions    5153
4.17    Solvency    5153
4.18    Disclosure    5153
4.19    Status of Obligations    5253
4.20    Ownership of Property    5253
4.21    Covered Entity    53
SECTION 5.    CONDITIONS PRECEDENT    5254
5.1    Conditions to the Effective Date    5254
ii
    

SECTION 6.    AFFIRMATIVE COVENANTS    5456
6.1    Financial Statements    5456
6.2    Certificates; Other Information    5556
6.3    Payment of Taxes.    5657
6.4    Maintenance of Existence; Compliance    5657
6.5    Maintenance of Property; Insurance    5658
6.6    Inspection of Property; Books and Records; Discussions    5658
6.7    Notices    5758
6.8    Maintenance of Licenses, etc.    5759
6.9    Further Assurances    5759
6.10    Use of Proceeds    59
SECTION 7.    NEGATIVE COVENANTS    5859
7.1    Indebtedness    5859
7.2    Consolidated Capitalization Ratio    6061
7.3    Liens    6061
7.4    Fundamental Changes    6061
7.5    Sale and Lease Back Transactions    6062
7.6    Swap Agreements    6162
7.7    Amendments to FMB Indenture    6162
SECTION 8.    EVENTS OF DEFAULT    6163
SECTION 9.    THE AGENTS    6465
9.1    Appointment and Authority    6465
9.2    Delegation of Duties    6466
9.3    Exculpatory Provisions    6466
9.4    Reliance by Administrative Agent    6567
9.5    Notice of Default    6667
9.6    Non-Reliance on Agents and Other Lenders    6668
iii
    

9.7    Indemnification    6668
9.8    Agent in Its Individual Capacity    6768
9.9    Successor Agents    6768
9.10    Documentation Agents and Syndication Agents    6870
9.11    Administrative Agent May File Proofs of Claim    6870
9.12    Certain ERISA Matters    6970
9.13    Erroneous Payment    6972
SECTION 10.    MISCELLANEOUS    7073
10.1    Amendments and Waivers    7073
10.2    Notices    7276
10.3    No Waiver; Cumulative Remedies    7477
10.4    Survival of Representations and Warranties    7478
10.5    Payment of Expenses and Taxes    7578
10.6    Successors and Assigns; Participations and Assignments.    7679
10.7    Adjustments; Set off    8083
10.8    Counterparts; Electronic Execution; Binding Effect    8184
10.9    Severability    8185
10.10    Integration    8285
10.11    GOVERNING LAW    8285
10.12    Submission To Jurisdiction; Waivers    8286
10.13    Acknowledgments    8386
10.14    Confidentiality    8387
10.15    WAIVERS OF JURY TRIAL    8487
10.16    USA Patriot Act; Beneficial Ownership Regulation    8487
10.17    Judicial Reference    8488
10.18    No Advisory or Fiduciary Responsibility    8488
10.19    Acknowledgement Regarding Any Supported QFCs    8588
iv
    

10.20    Acknowledgement and Consent to Bail-In of Affected Financial Institutions    8589
v
    

SCHEDULES:
1.1    Commitments
7.5    Sale and Lease Back Transactions
EXHIBITS:
A    [Reserved]
B    [Reserved]
C    Form of Compliance Certificate
D    Form of Closing Certificate
E    Form of Assignment and Assumption
F    [Reserved]
G    Forms of U.S. Tax Compliance Certificates
H    Form of Note
I    Form of Solvency Certificate
vi
    

This  TERM  LOAN  CREDIT  AGREEMENT  (this  “Agreement”),  dated  as  of  July  1,  2020,  among  PACIFIC  GAS  AND
ELECTRIC COMPANY, a California corporation (the “Borrower”), the several banks and other financial institutions or entities
from time to time parties to this Agreement (the “Lenders”) and JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A., as administrative agent (in
such capacity, together with any permitted successor thereto, the “Administrative Agent”).
W I T N E S S E T H:
WHEREAS, on January 29, 2019, the Borrower and PG&E Corporation, a California corporation and the holder of all of the issued
and outstanding common stock of the Borrower (“PCG”) filed voluntary petitions for relief in the United States Bankruptcy Court
for the Northern District of California (the “Bankruptcy Court”), and commenced their respective cases under chapter 11 of title 11
of the United States Code;
WHEREAS, on June 19, 2020, the Borrower and PCG filed the Debtors’ and Shareholder Proponents’ Joint Chapter 11 Plan of
Reorganization  Dated  June  19,  2020  [Docket  No.  8048]  (together  with  all  exhibits,  schedules,  annexes,  supplements,  and  other
attachments thereto, and as may be further amended, modified or otherwise changed in accordance with this Agreement, the “Plan
of Reorganization”);
WHEREAS, on June 20, 2020, the Plan of Reorganization was confirmed by the Bankruptcy Court and was consummated on the
Effective Date;
WHEREAS, in connection with the foregoing, the Borrower has requested that the Lenders provide the term loans set forth herein
and the Lenders are willing to make available to the Borrower such term loans upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth
herein; and
WHEREAS, in connection with and pursuant to Amendment No. 1, the Borrower has requested that this Agreement be amended as
set forth in Amendment No. 1.
NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1.
DEFINITIONS
1.1
Defined Terms.  As  used  in  this  Agreement,  the  terms  listed  in  this  Section  1.1  shall  have  the  respective
meanings set forth in this Section 1.1.
“18-Month  Tranche  Commitment”:  as  to  each  18-Month  Tranche  Lender,  its  obligation  to  make  Loans  under  the  18-Month
Tranche to the Borrower on the Effective Date pursuant to Section 2.1(b), in an aggregate principal amount equal to the amount set
forth  opposite  such  18-Month  Tranche  Lender’s  name  on  Schedule  1.1,  as  such  amount  may  be  adjusted  from  time  to  time  in
accordance with this Agreement. As of the Effective Date, the aggregate amount of the 18-Month Tranche Commitments for all 18-
Month Tranche Lenders is $1,500,000,000.
“18-Month Tranche Lender”: a Lender with an 18-Month Tranche Commitment or holding 18-Month Tranche Loans.
“18-Month Tranche Loans”: as defined in Section 2.1(b).
“18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A)”: as defined in Section 2.1(b).
1    
    

“18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B)”: as defined in Section 2.1(b).
“18-Month Tranche Maturity Date”: (a) with respect to the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A), October 1, 2022 and (b)
with respect to the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B), January 1, 20222023.
“364-Day Tranche Commitment”: as to each 364-Day Tranche Lender, its obligation to make Loans under the 364-
Day Tranche to the Borrower on the Effective Date pursuant to Section 2.1(a), in an aggregate principal amount equal to the
amount set forth opposite such 364-Day Tranche Lender’s name on Schedule 1.1, as such amount may be adjusted from time
to  time  in  accordance  with  this  Agreement.  As  of  the  Effective  Date,  the  aggregate  amount  of  the  364-Day  Tranche
Commitments for all 364-Day Tranche Lenders is $1,500,000,000.
“364-Day Tranche Lender”: a Lender with a 364-Day Tranche Commitment or holding 364-Day Tranche Loans.
“364-Day Tranche Loans”: as defined in Section 2.1(a).
“364-Day Tranche Maturity Date”: the date that is 364 days after the Effective Date.
“ABR”: for any day, a rate per annum equal to the greatest of (a) the Prime Rate in effect on such day, (b) the NYFRB Rate in effect
on such day plus ½ of 1% and (c) the EurodollarAdjusted Term SOFR Rate for a one month Interest Period commencing onas
published  two  U.S.  Government  Securities  Business  Days  prior  to such  day  (or  if  such  day  is  not  a  Business  Day,  the
immediately  preceding Business Day) plus 1%; provided that for the purpose of this definition,  the EurodollarAdjusted Term
SOFR Rate for any day shall be based on the Eurodollar Screen Rate (or if the Eurodollar Screen Rate is not available for such
one month Interest Period, the Interpolated Rate)Term SOFR Reference Rate at approximately 11:00 a.m. London5:00 a.m.
Chicago time on such day (or any amended publication time for the Term SOFR Reference Rate, as specified by the CME
Term SOFR Administrator in the Term SOFR Reference Rate methodology). Any change in the ABR due to a change in the
Prime Rate, the NYFRB Rate or the EurodollarAdjusted Term SOFR Rate shall be effective from and including the effective date
of such change in the Prime Rate, the NYFRB Rate or the EurodollarAdjusted Term SOFR Rate, respectively. If ABR is being
used as an alternate rate of interest pursuant to Section 2.13 (for the avoidance of doubt, only until any amendment has become
effective pursuant to Section 2.13(b)), then ABR shall be the greater of clauses (a) and (b) above and shall be determined without
reference to clause (c) above. If the ABR as determined pursuant to the foregoing would be less than 1.00%, such rate shall be
deemed to be 1.00% for purposes of this Agreement.
“ABR Loans”: Loans the rate of interest applicable to which is based upon the ABR.
“Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR”: an interest rate per annum equal to (a) the Daily Simple SOFR, plus (b) 0.10%; provided
that if the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR Rate as so determined would be less than the Floor, such rate shall be deemed to be
equal to the Floor for the purposes of this Agreement.
“Adjusted Term SOFR Rate”: for any Interest Period, an interest rate per annum equal to (a) the Term SOFR Rate for such
Interest Period, plus (b) 0.10%; provided that if the Adjusted Term SOFR Rate as so determined would be less than the
Floor,
2    
    

such rate shall be deemed to be equal to the Floor for the purposes of this Agreement.
“Administrative Agent”: as defined in the preamble hereto.
“Affected Financial Institution”: (a) any EEA Financial Institution or (b) any UK Financial Institution.
“Affiliate”:  with  respect  to  a  specified  Person,  another  Person  that  directly,  or  indirectly  through  one  or  more  intermediaries,
Controls or is Controlled by or is under common Control with the Person specified.
“Agent Parties”: as defined in Section 10.2(d)(ii).
“Agents”: the collective reference to the Syndication Agents, the Documentation Agents, and the Administrative Agent.
“Agreement”: as defined in the preamble hereto.
“Amendment No. 1”: that certain Amendment No. 1 to Credit Agreement, dated as of the Amendment No. 1 Effective Date, among
the Borrower, each Lender party thereto, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.
“Amendment No. 1 Effective Date”: October 29, 2021.
“Amendment No. 2”: that certain Amendment No. 2 to Credit Agreement, dated as of the Amendment No. 2 Effective Date,
among the Borrower, each Lender party thereto, and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.
“Amendment No. 2 Effective Date”: December 31, 2021.
“Amendment No. 3 Effective Date”: February 8, 2022.
“Anti-Corruption Laws”: as defined in Section 4.15.
“Applicable Margin”: for any day, (a) (i) with respect to any ABR Loans under the 364-Day Tranche, 1.00% per annum and
(ii) with respect to Eurodollar Loans under the 364-Day Tranche, 2.00% per annum and (b) (i) with respect to any ABR Loans
under the 18-Month Tranche, 1.25% per annum and (ii) with respect to EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans under the 18-Month
Tranche, 2.25% per annum.
“Approved Fund”: with respect to any Lender, any Person (other than a natural person) that is engaged in making, purchasing,
holding or otherwise investing in commercial loans and similar extensions of credit in the ordinary course of its business that is
administered  or  managed  by  (a)  such  Lender,  (b)  an  Affiliate  of  such  Lender  or  (c)  an  entity  or  an  Affiliate  of  any  entity  that
administers or manages such Lender.
“Arrangers”: the Joint Lead Arrangers and Joint Bookrunners identified on the cover hereto.
“A/R Securitization Assets”: (i) any accounts receivable, notes receivable, rights to future accounts receivable, notes receivable or
residuals or other similar rights to payments due or any other rights to payment or related assets in respect of the provision of gas and
electric service to consumers or otherwise (whether then existing or arising in
3    
    

the future) of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries and the proceeds thereof and (ii) all collateral securing such receivable or asset,
all contracts and contract rights, guarantees or other obligations in respect of such receivable or asset, lockbox accounts and records
with respect to such receivables or asset and any other assets customarily transferred (or in respect of which security interests are
customarily granted) together with receivables or assets in connection with a securitization transaction involving such assets.
“A/R Securitization Subsidiary”: PG&E AR Facility, LLC and any other Subsidiary formed and operating solely for the purpose of
entering into A/R Securitization Transactions and engaging in activities ancillary thereto.
“A/R Securitization Transaction”: any financing transaction or series of financing transactions entered into by the Borrower or any
Subsidiary of the Borrower pursuant to which the Borrower may sell, convey or otherwise transfer to any Person (including, without
limitation, an A/R Securitization Subsidiary), or may grant a security interest in any A/R Securitization Assets and that are (other
than to the extent of the Standard A/R Securitization Obligations) non-recourse to the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries (other than
an A/R Securitization Subsidiary).
“Assignee”: as defined in Section 10.6(b).
“Assignment and Assumption”: an Assignment and Assumption, substantially in the form of Exhibit E.
“Available Tenor”: as of any date of determination and with respect to the then-current Benchmark, as applicable, (x) if the then-
current  Benchmark  is  a  term  rate, any  tenor  for  such  Benchmark (or  component  thereof)  or  payment  period  for  interest
calculated with reference to such Benchmark (or component thereof), as applicable, that is or may be used for determining the
length of an Interest Period or (y)for any term rate or otherwise, any payment period forfor determining any frequency of
making payments of interest calculated with reference to such Benchmark, as applicable, pursuant to this Agreement as of such
date and not including, for the avoidance of doubt, any tenor for such Benchmark that is then-removed from the definition of
“Interest Period” pursuant to clause (e) of Section 2.13.
“Bail-In Action”: the exercise of any Write-Down and Conversion Powers by the applicable Resolution Authority in respect of any
liability of an Affected Financial Institution.
“Bail-In Legislation”:  (a)  with  respect  to  any  EEA  Member  Country  implementing  Article  55  of  Directive  2014/59/EU  of  the
European Parliament and of the Council of the European Union, the implementing law, regulation, rule or requirement for such EEA
Member Country from time to time which is described in the EU Bail-In Legislation Schedule and (b) with respect to the United
Kingdom, Part I of the United Kingdom Banking Act 2009 (as amended from time to time) and any other law, regulation or rule
applicable  in  the  United  Kingdom  relating  to  the  resolution  of  unsound  or  failing  banks,  investment  firms  or  other  financial
institutions or their affiliates (other than through liquidation, administration or other insolvency proceedings).
“Bankruptcy Court”: as defined in the first recital paragraph.
“Benchmark”: initially, the Eurodollar Basewith respect to any Term Benchmark Loan, the Term SOFR Rate; provided that if
a replacement of the Benchmark has occurred pursuant to Section 2.13Benchmark Transition Event, and the related
4    
    

Benchmark Replacement Date have occurred with respect to the Daily Simple SOFR or Term SOFR Rate, as applicable, or
the then-current Benchmark, then “Benchmark” means the applicable Benchmark Replacement to the extent that such Benchmark
Replacement has replaced such prior benchmark rate. Any reference to “Benchmark” shall include, as applicable, the published
component used in the calculation thereof pursuant to clause (b) of Section 2.13.
“Benchmark Replacement”: for any Available Tenor:
(1) for purposes of Section 2.13(b), the first alternative set forth in the order below that can be determined by the
Administrative Agent for the applicable Benchmark Replacement Date:
(1)    the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR; and
(a) the sum of: (i) Term SOFR and (ii) 0.11448% (11.448 basis points) for an Available Tenor of one-month’s
duration, 0.26161% (26.161 basis points) for an Available Tenor of three-months’ duration, 0.42826% (42.826 basis
points) for an Available Tenor of six-months’ duration and 0.71513% (71.513 basis points) for an Available Tenor of
twelve-months’ duration; provided, that if any Available Tenor of the Eurodollar Base Rate does not correspond to
an Available Tenor of Term SOFR, the Benchmark Replacement for such Available Tenor of the Eurodollar Base
Rate shall be the closest corresponding Available Tenor (based on tenor) for Term SOFR, or and if such Available
Tenor of the Eurodollar Base Rate corresponds equally to two Available Tenors of Term SOFR, the corresponding
tenor of Term SOFR with the shorter duration shall be applied;
(b) the sum of: (i) Daily Simple SOFR and (ii) the spread adjustment selected or recommended by the Relevant
Governmental Body for the replacement of the tenor of the Eurodollar Base Rate with a SOFR-based rate having
approximately the same length as the interest payment period specified in clause (b) of Section 2.13 (which spread
adjustment, for the avoidance of doubt, shall be 0.11448% (11.448 basis points); and
(2) for purposes of clause (c) of Section 2.13,     the sum of: (a) the alternate benchmark rate and (b) an adjustment
(which may be a positive or negative value or zero), in each case, that has been selected by the Administrative Agent and
the  Borrower  as  the  replacement  for such  Available  Tenor  of  suchthe  then-current Benchmark for  the  applicable
Corresponding Tenor giving due consideration to (i) any selection or recommendation of a replacement benchmark
rate or the mechanism for determining such a rate by the Relevant Governmental Body or (ii) any evolving or then-
prevailing market convention, including any applicable recommendations made by the Relevant Governmental Body,
for U.S. for determining a benchmark rate as a replacement for the then-current Benchmark for dollar-denominated
syndicated credit facilities at such time in the United States and (b) the related Benchmark Replacement Adjustment;
provided that, ifIf the Benchmark Replacement as determined pursuant to clause (1) or (2) above would be less than the Floor, the
Benchmark Replacement will be deemed to be the Floor for the purposes of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents.
5    
    

“Benchmark  Replacement  Adjustment”:  with  respect  to  any  replacement  of  the  then-current  Benchmark  with  an
Unadjusted  Benchmark  Replacement  for  any  applicable  Interest  Period  and  Available  Tenor  for  any  setting  of  such
Unadjusted  Benchmark  Replacement,  the  spread  adjustment,  or  method  for  calculating  or  determining  such  spread
adjustment, (which may be a positive or negative value or zero) that has been selected by the Administrative Agent and the
Borrower  for  the  applicable  Corresponding  Tenor  giving  due  consideration  to  (i)  any  selection  or  recommendation  of  a
spread  adjustment,  or  method  for  calculating  or  determining  such  spread  adjustment,  for  the  replacement  of  such
Benchmark  with  the  applicable  Unadjusted  Benchmark  Replacement  by  the  Relevant  Governmental  Body  as  of  the
applicable Benchmark Replacement Date and/or (ii) any evolving or then-prevailing market convention for determining a
spread  adjustment,  or  method  for  calculating  or  determining  such  spread  adjustment,  for  the  replacement  of  such
Benchmark with the applicable Unadjusted Benchmark Replacement for dollar-denominated syndicated credit facilities at
such time.
“Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes”: with respect to any Benchmark Replacement, any technical, administrative or
operational  changes  (including  changes  to  the  definition  of  “ABR,”  the  definition  of  “Business  Day,”  the  definition  of  “U.S.
Government Securities Business Day,” the definition of “Interest Period,” timing and frequency of determining rates and making
payments of interest, timing of borrowing requests or prepayment, conversion or continuation notices, the applicability and length
of lookback periods, the applicability of breakage provisions, the formula for calculating any successor rates identified pursuant
to the definition of “Benchmark Replacement” and other technical, administrative or operational matters) that the Administrative
Agent decides may be appropriate to reflect the adoption and implementation of such Benchmark Replacement and to permit the
administration  thereof  by  the  Administrative  Agent  in  a  manner  substantially  consistent  with  market  practice  (or,  if  the
Administrative  Agent  decides  that  adoption  of  any  portion  of  such  market  practice  is  not  administratively  feasible  or  if  the
Administrative Agent determines that no market practice for the administration of such Benchmark Replacement exists, in such
other manner of administration as the Administrative Agent decides is reasonably necessary in connection with the administration of
this Agreement and the other Loan Documents), the formula, methodology or convention for applying the successor Floor to the
successor Benchmark Replacement.
“Benchmark Replacement Date”: with respect to any Benchmark, the earliest to occur of the following events with respect to
such then-current Benchmark:
(1)    in the case of clause (1) or (2) of the definition of “Benchmark Transition Event,” the later of (a) the date of the public
statement or publication of information referenced therein and (b) the date on which the administrator of such Benchmark
(or  the  published  component  used  in  the  calculation  thereof)  permanently  or  indefinitely  ceases  to  provide  all  Available
Tenors of such Benchmark (or such component thereof); or
(2)    in the case of clause (3) of the definition of “Benchmark Transition Event,” the first date on which such Benchmark (or
the published component used in the calculation thereof) has been determined and announced by the regulatory supervisor
for the administrator of such Benchmark (or such component thereof) to be no longer representative; provided, that such
non-representativeness will be determined by reference to the most recent statement or publication referenced in such clause
(c) and even if any Available Tenor of such Benchmark (or such component thereof) continues to be provided on such date.
6    
    

For the avoidance of doubt, (i) if the event giving rise to the Benchmark Replacement Date occurs on the same day as, but
earlier than, the Reference Time in respect of any determination, the Benchmark Replacement Date will be deemed to have
occurred prior to the Reference Time for such determination and (ii) the “Benchmark Replacement Date” will be deemed to
have occurred in the case of clause (1) or (2) with respect to any Benchmark upon the occurrence of the applicable event or
events set forth therein with respect to all then-current Available Tenors of such Benchmark (or the published component
used in the calculation thereof).
“Benchmark  Transition  Event”:  with  respect  to  any then-current Benchmark other  than  the  Eurodollar  Base  Rate ,  the
occurrence of one or more of the following events: a public statement or publication of information by or on behalf of the
administrator of the with respect to such then-current Benchmark, :
(1)  a  public  statement  or  publication  of  information  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  administrator  of  such  Benchmark  (or  the
published component used in the calculation thereof) announcing that such administrator has ceased or will cease to provide
all Available Tenors of such Benchmark (or such component thereof), permanently or indefinitely, provided that, at the time
of such statement or publication, there is no successor administrator that will continue to provide any Available Tenor of
such Benchmark (or such component thereof);
(2) a public statement or publication of information by the regulatory supervisor for the administrator of such Benchmark (or the
published  component  used  in  the  calculation  thereof),  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  the  NYFRB,  the  CME  Term  SOFR
Administrator,  an  insolvency  official  with  jurisdiction  over  the  administrator  for  such  Benchmark (or  such  component) ,  a
resolution authority with jurisdiction over the administrator for such Benchmark (or such component) or a court or an entity with
similar insolvency or resolution authority over the administrator for such Benchmark, announcing or stating that (a) such (or such
component), in each case, which states that the administrator of such Benchmark (or such component) has ceased or will cease
on a specified date to provide all Available Tenors of such Benchmark, (or such component thereof) permanently or indefinitely,;
provided that, at the time of such statement or publication, there is no successor administrator that will continue to provide any
Available Tenor of such Benchmark or (b) all Available Tenors of such Benchmark are or will no longer be representative of
the underlying market and economic reality that such Benchmark is intended to measure and that representativeness will
not be restored.(or such component thereof); or
(3) a public statement or publication of information by the regulatory supervisor for the administrator of such Benchmark
(or the published component used in the calculation thereof) announcing that all Available Tenors of such Benchmark (or
such component thereof) are no longer, or as of a specified future date will no longer be, representative.
For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  a  “Benchmark  Transition  Event”  will  be  deemed  to  have  occurred  with  respect  to  any
Benchmark  if  a  public  statement  or  publication  of  information  set  forth  above  has  occurred  with  respect  to  each  then-
current Available Tenor of such Benchmark (or the published component used in the calculation thereof).
“Benchmark Unavailability Period”: with respect to any Benchmark, the period (if any) (x) beginning at the time that a
Benchmark Replacement Date has occurred if,
7    
    

at such time, no Benchmark Replacement has replaced such then-current Benchmark for all purposes hereunder and under
any Loan Document in accordance with Section 2.13 and (y) ending at the time that a Benchmark Replacement has replaced
such then-current Benchmark for all purposes hereunder and under any Loan Document in accordance with Section 2.13.
“Beneficial Owner”: as defined in Rule 13d-3 and Rule 13d-5 under the Exchange Act, except that in calculating the beneficial
ownership of any particular “person” (as that term is used in Sections 13(d) and 14(d) of the Exchange Act), such “person” will be
deemed to have beneficial ownership of all securities that such “person” has the right to acquire by conversion or exercise of other
securities, whether such right is currently exercisable or is exercisable only upon the occurrence of a subsequent condition. The
terms “Beneficially Owns” and “Beneficially Owned” have correlative meanings.
“Beneficial  Ownership  Certification”:  a  certification  regarding  beneficial  ownership  or  control  as  required  by  the  Beneficial
Ownership Regulation.
“Beneficial Ownership Regulation”: 31 C.F.R. § 1010.230.
“Benefit Plan”: any of (a) an “employee benefit plan” (as defined in ERISA) that is subject to Title I of ERISA, (b) a “plan” as
defined in and subject to Section 4975 of the Code or (c) any Person whose assets include (for purposes of ERISA Section 3(42) or
otherwise for purposes of Title I of ERISA or Section 4975 of the Code) the assets of any such “employee benefit plan” or “plan”.
“Benefitted Lender”: as defined in Section 10.7(a).
“BHC Act Affiliate”: an “affiliate” (as such term is defined under, and interpreted in accordance with, 12 U.S.C. 1841(k)).
“Bond Delivery Agreement”: (i) that certain Bond Delivery Agreement, dated as of the Effective Date, between the Borrower and
the Administrative Agent and (ii) that certain Bond Delivery Agreement, dated as of the Amendment No. 1 Effective Date, between
the Borrower and the Administrative Agent.
“Bond  Documents”:  collectively,  the  FMB  Indenture,  the  Supplemental  Indenture,  the  Senior  Bonds  and  the  Bond  Delivery
Agreement.
“Borrower”: as defined in the preamble hereto.
“Bridge Facilities”: each of the bridge facilities outstanding, as of any date of determination, pursuant to the terms of the Utility
Commitment Letter and the PCG Commitment Letter.
“Business Day”: a day (other than a Saturday, or a Sunday or other day) on which commercial banks are open for business in
New York City or San Francisco, California are authorized or required by law to close, provided, that with respect to notices
and determinations in connection with, and payments of principal and interest on, Eurodollar Loans, such day is also a day
for trading by and between banks in Dollar deposits in the London interbank eurodollar market.Chicago; provided that, in
relation to RFR Loans and any interest rate settings, fundings, disbursements, settlements or payments of any such RFR
Loan, or any other dealings of such RFR Loan, any such day that is only an U.S. Government Securities Business Day.
8    
    

“Capital Lease Obligations”: as to any Person, the obligations of such Person to pay rent or other amounts under any lease of (or
other arrangement conveying the right to use) real or personal property, or a combination thereof, which obligations are required to
be classified and accounted for as capital leases on the balance sheet of such Person under GAAP and, for the purposes of this
Agreement, the amount of such obligations at any time shall be the capitalized amount thereof at such time determined in accordance
with GAAP, subject to Section 1.2(f).
“Capital  Stock”:  any  and  all  shares,  interests,  participations  or  other  equivalents  (however  designated)  of  capital  stock  of  a
corporation, any and all equivalent ownership interests in a Person (other than a corporation) and any and all warrants, rights or
options to purchase any of the foregoing.
“Cash Management Agreement”: any agreement to establish or maintain accounts or provide cash management services, including
treasury, depository, overdraft, netting services, cash pooling arrangements, credit or debit card, purchasing card, electronic funds
transfer, automated clearing house, foreign exchange facilities and other cash management arrangements.
“Change of Control”: the occurrence of one of the following:
Section 2.
(A) PCG shall at any time not be the Beneficial Owner of 100% of the common stock of the Borrower or (B) PCG
shall at any time not be the Beneficial Owner of at least 70% of the voting Capital Stock of the Borrower; or
Section 3.
any person or group (within the meaning of the Exchange Act and the rules of the SEC thereunder as of the Effective
Date) shall become the Beneficial Owner of shares representing more than 35% of the voting power of the Capital Stock of PCG; or
Section 4.
at any point during any period of 24 consecutive months, commencing after the Effective Date, individuals who at the
beginning of such 24-month period were directors of PCG, together with any directors whose election or nomination for election to
the board of directors of PCG (whether by the board of directors of PCG or any shareholder of PCG) was approved by a majority of
the  directors  who  either  were  directors  of  PCG  at  the  beginning  of  such  24-month  period  or  whose  election  or  nomination  for
election was so approved, cease to constitute a majority of the board of directors of PCG (it being understood and agreed that, for the
avoidance of doubt, the change of directors of PCG contemplated by the Plan of Reorganization shall not constitute a Change of
Control); or
Section 5.
there shall have been (A) [reserved] or (B) a transfer of the license and/or operating assets constituting more than
10% of the Net Tangible Assets of the Borrower to the State of California, to any other Governmental Authority or to a third party at
the direction of State of California, the CPUC or any similar Governmental Authority.
“Change of Law”: the occurrence, after the Effective Date, of any of the following: (a) the adoption or taking effect of any law,
rule,  regulation,  statute,  treaty,  policy,  guideline  or  directive  by  any  Governmental  Authority,  (b)  any  change  in  any  law,  rule,
regulation,  statute,  treaty,  policy,  guideline  or  directive  or  in  the  application,  interpretation,  promulgation,  implementation,
administration or enforcement thereof by any Governmental Authority or (c) the making or issuance of any request, rule, guideline
or directive (whether or not having the force of law) by any Governmental Authority; provided that notwithstanding anything herein
to the contrary, (x) the Dodd-Frank Wall
9    
    

Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act  and  all  requests,  rules,  guidelines  or  directives  thereunder  or  issued  in  connection
therewith  and  (y)  all  requests,  rules,  guidelines  or  directives  promulgated  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the  Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (or any successor or similar authority) or the United States or foreign regulatory authorities, in
each case pursuant to Basel III, shall in each case be deemed to be a “Change of Law”, regardless of the date enacted, adopted or
issued.
“CME Term SOFR Administrator”: CME Group Benchmark Administration Limited as administrator of the term Secured
Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) (or a successor administrator; provided that, in the event there are multiple successor
administrators, the successor administrator hereunder shall be selected by the Administrative Agent and the Borrower).
“Code”: the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time.
“Commitment”: as to any Lender, its 364-Day Tranche Commitment or 18-Month Tranche Commitment.
“Commitment Letter”: that  certain  Term  Loan  Commitment  Letter  dated  as of May 26,  2020 among  Pacific  Gas  and Electric
Company, as the borrower, PG&E Corporation and the commitment parties from time to time party thereto, as amended, modified or
supplemented from time to time prior to the date hereof.
“Commonly Controlled Entity”: an entity, whether or not incorporated, that is under common control with the Borrower within the
meaning of Section 4001 of ERISA or is part of a group that includes the Borrower and that is treated as a single employer under
Section 414 of the Code.
“Communications”: as defined in Section 10.2(d)(ii).
“Compliance Certificate”: a certificate duly executed by a Responsible Officer substantially in the form of Exhibit C.
“Conduit Lender”: any special purpose corporation organized and administered by any Lender for the purpose of making Loans
otherwise required to be made by such Lender and designated by such Lender in a written instrument; provided, that the designation
by any Lender of a Conduit Lender shall not relieve the designating Lender of any of its obligations to fund a Loan under this
Agreement if, for any reason, its Conduit Lender fails to fund any such Loan, and the designating Lender (and not the Conduit
Lender) shall have the sole right and responsibility to deliver all consents and waivers required or requested under this Agreement
with respect to its Conduit Lender, and provided, further, that no Conduit Lender shall (a) be entitled to receive any greater amount
pursuant  to  Sections  2.15,  2.16,  2.17  or 10.5  than  the  designating  Lender  would  have  been  entitled  to  receive  in  respect  of  the
extensions of credit made by such Conduit Lender or (b) be deemed to have any Commitment.
“Connection Income Taxes”: Other Connection Taxes that are imposed on or measured by net income (however denominated) or
that are franchise Taxes or branch profits Taxes.
“Consolidated Capitalization”: on any date of determination, the sum of (a) Consolidated Total Debt on such date, plus without
duplication, (b) (i) the amounts set forth opposite the captions “common shareholders’ equity” (or any similar caption) and
10    
    

“preferred stock” (or any similar caption) on the consolidated balance sheet, prepared in accordance with GAAP, of the Borrower
and  its  Subsidiaries  as  of  such  date,  and  (ii)  the  outstanding  principal  amount  of  any  junior  subordinated  deferrable  interest
debentures or other similar securities issued by the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries after the Effective Date.
“Consolidated Capitalization Ratio”: on any date of determination, the ratio of (a) Consolidated Total Debt to (b) Consolidated
Capitalization.
“Consolidated  Total  Debt”:  at  any  date,  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  all  obligations  of  the  Borrower  and  its  Significant
Subsidiaries at such date that in accordance with GAAP would be classified as debt on a consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower,
and  without  duplication  all  Guarantee  Obligations  of  the  Borrower  and  its  Significant  Subsidiaries  at  such  date  in  respect  of
obligations of any other Person that in accordance with GAAP would be classified as debt on a consolidated balance sheet of such
Person; provided that, the determination of “Consolidated Total Debt” shall exclude, without duplication, (a) the Securitized Bonds
and any Indebtedness under any A/R Securitization Transaction, (b) Indebtedness of the Borrower and its Significant Subsidiaries in
an amount equal to the amount of cash held as cash collateral for any fully cash collateralized letter of credit issued for the account
of the Borrower or any Significant Subsidiary, (c) imputed Indebtedness of the Borrower or any Significant Subsidiary incurred in
connection  with  power  purchase  and  fuel  agreements,  (d)  any  junior  subordinated  deferrable  interest  debenture  or  other  similar
securities issued by the Borrower and (e) as of any date of determination, the amount of any securities included within the caption
“preferred stock” (or any similar caption) on a consolidated balance sheet, prepared in accordance with GAAP, of the Borrower as of
such date.
“Contractual Obligation”: as to any Person, any provision of any security issued by such Person or of any agreement, instrument or
other undertaking to which such Person is a party or by which it or any of its property is bound.
“Control”: the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of a
Person,  whether  through  the  ability  to  exercise  voting  power,  by  contract  or  otherwise.  “Controlling”  and  “Controlled”  have
meanings correlative thereto.
“Corresponding Tenor”: with respect to any Available Tenor means, as applicable, either a tenor (including overnight) or an
interest payment period having approximately the same length (disregarding business day adjustment) as such Available
Tenor.
“Covered Entity”: any of the following:
(i)
a “covered entity” as that term is defined in, and interpreted in accordance with, 12 C.F.R. § 252.82(b);
Section 6.
a “covered bank” as that term is defined in, and interpreted in accordance with, 12 C.F.R. § 47.3(b); or
Section 7.
a “covered FSI” as that term is defined in, and interpreted in accordance with, 12 C.F.R. § 382.2(b).
“Covered Party”: as defined in Section 10.19.
11    
    

“CPUC”: the California Public Utilities Commission or its successor.
“Daily Simple SOFR”: for any day, (a “SOFR, with the conventions for this rate (which will include a lookback) being
established  by  the  Administrative  Agent  in  accordance  with  the  conventions  for  this  rate  recommended  by  the  Relevant
Governmental  Body  for  determining  “Daily  Simple  SOFR”  for  syndicated  business  loans; provided,  that  if  the
Administrative Agent decides that any such convention is not administratively feasible for the Administrative Agent, then
the Administrative Agent may establish another convention in its reasonable discretion. Rate Day”), a rate per annum equal
to SOFR for the day (such day “SOFR Determination Date”) that is five (5) U.S. Government Securities Business Day prior
to (i) if such SOFR Rate Day is a U.S. Government Securities Business Day, such SOFR Rate Day or (ii) if such SOFR Rate
Day is not a U.S. Government Securities Business Day, the U.S. Government Securities Business Day immediately preceding
such SOFR Rate Day, in each case, as such SOFR is published by the SOFR Administrator on the SOFR Administrator’s
Website. Any change in Daily Simple SOFR due to a change in SOFR shall be effective from and including the effective date
of such change in SOFR without notice to the Borrower.
“Debt  Issuance”:  the  issuance  of  Securitized  Bonds  under  or  pursuant  to  the  Application  of  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric
Company for (1) Administration of Stress Test Methodology Developed Pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 451.2(b) and (2)
Determination That $7.5 Billion of 2017 Catastrophic Wildfire Costs and Expenses Are Stress Test Costs That May Be Financed
Through Issuance of Recovery Bonds Pursuant to Section 451.2(c) and Section 850 et seq. (U39E) - Application No. 20-04-023
dated as of April 30, 2020, or the contemplated subsequent and related application for the issuance of a financing order authorizing
the securitization transaction described in A.20-04-023, to be filed later in 2020 and consolidated therewith, by the Borrower or any
of its Subsidiaries.
“Debtor Relief Laws”: the Bankruptcy Code of the United States, and all other liquidation, conservatorship, bankruptcy, assignment
for the benefit of creditors, moratorium, rearrangement, receivership, insolvency, reorganization, or similar debtor relief laws of the
United States or other applicable jurisdictions from time to time in effect.
“Default”: any of the events specified in Section 8, whether or not any requirement for the giving of notice, the lapse of time, or
both, has been satisfied.
“Default Right”: the meaning assigned to that term in, and shall be interpreted in accordance with, 12 C.F.R. §§ 252.81, 47.2 or
382.1, as applicable.
“Defaulting  Lender”:  subject  to  the  penultimate  paragraph  of  Section  2.20,  any  Lender,  as  reasonably  determined  by  the
Administrative Agent, that has (a) failed to fund any portion of its Loans within two (2) Business Days of the date required to be
funded by it under this Agreement, unless such Lender notifies the Administrative Agent in writing that such failure is the result of
such  Lender’s  good  faith  determination  that  one  or  more  conditions  precedent  to  funding  (each  of  which  conditions  precedent,
together  with  any  applicable  Default,  shall  be  specifically  identified  in  such  writing)  has  not  been  satisfied,  (b)  notified  the
Borrower,  the  Administrative  Agent  or  any  other  Lender  in  writing  that  it  does  not  intend  to  comply  with  any  of  its  funding
obligations under this Agreement or has made a public statement to the effect that it does not intend to comply with its funding
obligations under this Agreement (other than a notice of a good faith dispute or related communications) or generally under other
agreements in which it commits to
12    
    

extend credit, unless such writing or public statement relates to such Lender’s obligation to fund a Loan hereunder and states that
such position is based on such Lender’s good faith determination that a condition precedent to funding (which condition precedent,
together with any applicable Default, shall be specifically identified in such writing or public statement) cannot be satisfied, (c)
failed, within  two (2)  Business Days after written request by the Administrative Agent or  the  Borrower,  to  confirm that  it will
comply with the terms of this Agreement relating to its obligations to fund prospective Loans, unless the subject of a good faith
dispute (provided that such Lender shall cease to be a Defaulting Lender pursuant to this clause (c) upon receipt of such written
confirmation by the Administrative Agent or the Borrower), (d) otherwise failed to pay over to the Administrative Agent or any
other Lender any other amount required to be paid by it under this Agreement within two (2) Business Days of the date when due,
unless the subject of a good faith dispute, or (e) has, or has a direct or indirect parent company that has, (i) become the subject of a
proceeding under any Debtor Relief Law, (ii) had a custodian appointed for it, or has consented to, approved of or acquiesced in any
such proceeding or appointment or has a parent company that has become the subject of a bankruptcy or insolvency proceeding, or
has had a receiver, conservator, trustee or custodian appointed for it, or has consented to, approved of or acquiesced in any such
proceeding or appointment, or (iii) become the subject of a Bail-In Action; provided that (x) if a Lender would be a “Defaulting
Lender” solely by reason of events relating to a parent company of such Lender or solely because a Governmental Authority has
been appointed as receiver, conservator, trustee or custodian for such Lender, in each case as described in clause (e) above, the
Administrative  Agent  may,  in  its  discretion,  determine  that  such  Lender  is  not  a  “Defaulting  Lender”  if  and  for  so  long  as  the
Administrative Agent is satisfied that such Lender will continue to perform its funding obligations hereunder and (y) a Lender shall
not be a Defaulting Lender solely by virtue of the ownership or acquisition of voting stock or any other Capital Stock in such Lender
or a parent company thereof by a Governmental Authority or an instrumentality thereof, or the exercise of control over such Lender
or parent company thereof, by a Governmental Authority or instrumentality thereof so long as such ownership interest does not
result in or provide such Lender with immunity from the jurisdiction of courts within the United States or from the enforcement of
judgments or writs of attachment on its assets or permit such Lender (or such Governmental Authority) to reject, repudiate, disavow
or disaffirm any contracts or agreements made with such Lender. Any determination by the Administrative Agent that a Lender is a
Defaulting Lender under any one or more of clauses (a) through (e) above shall be conclusive and binding absent manifest error, and
such Lender shall be deemed to be a Defaulting Lender (subject to the penultimate paragraph of Section 2.20) upon delivery of
written notice of such determination to the Borrower and each Lender.
“Disposition”:  with  respect  to  any  property,  any  sale,  lease,  sale  and  leaseback,  assignment,  conveyance,  transfer  or  other
disposition thereof. The term “Dispose of” shall have a correlative meaning.
“Documentation Agents”: as defined on the cover hereto.
“Dollars” and “$”: dollars in lawful currency of the United States.
“Early Opt-in Effective Date”: with respect to any Early Opt-in Election, the sixth (6th) Business Day after the date
notice of such Early Opt-in Election is provided to the Lenders, so long as the Administrative Agent has not received, by 5:00
p.m. (New York City time) on the fifth (5th) Business Day after the date notice of such Early Opt-in Election is provided to
the Lenders, written notice of objection to such Early Opt-in Election from Lenders comprising the Required Lenders.
13    
    

“Early Opt-in Election”: the occurrence of the following:
(1)    a notification by the Administrative Agent to (or the request by the Borrower to the Administrative Agent to
notify) each of the other parties hereto that at least five currently outstanding U.S. dollar-denominated syndicated credit
facilities  in the U.S. syndicated  loan market at such time contain  (as a result of amendment  or as originally  executed)  a
SOFR-based  rate  (including  SOFR,  a  term  SOFR  or  any  other  rate  based  upon  SOFR)  as  a  benchmark  rate  (and  such
syndicated credit facilities are identified in such notice and are publicly available for review); and
(2)    the joint election by the Administrative Agent and the Borrower to trigger a fallback from Eurodollar Base Rate
and the provision by the Administrative Agent of written notice of such election to the Lenders.
“EEA Financial Institution”: (a) any credit institution or investment firm established in any EEA Member Country which is subject
to the supervision of an EEA Resolution Authority, (b) any entity established in an EEA Member Country which is a parent of an
institution described in clause (a) of this definition, or (c) any financial institution established in an EEA Member Country which is a
subsidiary of an institution described in clauses (a) or (b) of this definition and is subject to consolidated supervision with its parent.
“EEA Member Country”: any of the member states of the European Union, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.
“EEA Resolution Authority”: any public administrative authority or any person entrusted with public administrative authority of
any EEA Member Country (including any delegee) having responsibility for the resolution of any EEA Financial Institution.
“Effective Date”: the date on which the conditions precedent set forth in Section 5.1 shall have been satisfied or waived, which date
is July 1, 2020.
“Eligible Assignee”: (a) any commercial bank or other financial institution having a senior unsecured debt rating by Moody’s of A3
or better and by S&P of A- or better, which is domiciled in a country which is a member of the OECD or (b) with respect to any
Person referred to in the preceding clause (a), any other Person that is engaged in making, purchasing, holding or investing in bank
loans and similar extensions of credit in the ordinary course of business all of the Capital Stock of which is owned, directly or
indirectly, by such Person; provided that in the case of clause (b), the Administrative Agent shall have consented to the designation
of such Person as an Eligible Assignee (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed).
“Environmental Laws”: any and all foreign, Federal, state, local or municipal laws, rules, orders, regulations, statutes, ordinances,
codes, decrees, requirements of any Governmental Authority or other Requirements of Law (including common law) regulating,
relating to or imposing liability or standards of conduct concerning protection of human health or the environment, as now or may at
any time hereafter be in effect.
“ERISA”: the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended from time to time.
“ERISA Event”: (a) any Reportable Event; (b) the failure of the Borrower or any Commonly Controlled Entity to timely make a
required contribution with respect to any
14    
    

Plan or any Multiemployer Plan; (c) the imposition of a Lien under Section 430 of the Code or Section 303 of ERISA with respect to
any  Single  Employer  Plan;  (d)  the  failure  of  the  Borrower  or  any  Commonly  Controlled  Entity  to  meet  the  minimum  funding
standard under Section 412 or 430 of the Code with respect to any Plan or the filing of an application for a funding waiver with
respect to any Single Employer Plan; (e) the incurrence by the Borrower or any Commonly Controlled Entity of any liability under
Title IV of ERISA, including with respect to the termination of any Plan (other than the payment of PBGC premiums in the ordinary
course); (f) (i) the termination of, or the filing or receipt of a notice of intent to terminate, a Single Employer Plan under Section
4041 of ERISA, or the treatment of a plan amendment as a termination under Section 4041 of ERISA, or (ii) (A) the appointment of
a trustee to administer a Single Employer Plan under Section 4042, or (B) the institution by the PBGC of proceedings to terminate a
Single Employer Plan or to have a trustee appointed to administer a Single Employer Plan, or receipt by the Borrower of notice from
the PBGC thereof, where such proceedings continue unstayed or in effect for more than 60 days, or such notice is not withdrawn by
the PBGC within 60 days following delivery by PBGC; (g) the incurrence by the Borrower or any Commonly Controlled Entity of
any liability with respect to the complete withdrawal or partial withdrawal under Title IV of ERISA from any Multiemployer Plan;
(h)  the  receipt  by  the  Borrower  or  any  Commonly  Controlled  Entity  of  any  notice  from  a  Multiemployer  Plan  concerning  the
imposition  of  Withdrawal  Liability;  (i)  receipt  of  notification  by  Borrower  or  any  Commonly  Controlled  Entity  from  a
Multiemployer Plan that such Multiemployer Plan is in endangered or critical status (within the meaning of Section 305 of ERISA)
or in Insolvency; (j) the incurrence by the Borrower or any Commonly Controlled Entity of any liability pursuant to Section 4063 or
4064 of ERISA or a substantial cessation of operations with respect to a Plan within the meaning of Section 4062(e) of ERISA; (k)
the posting of a bond or security under Section 436(f) of the Code with respect to any Plan; or (l) the Borrower incurs material tax
liability with respect to any Plan (including Sections 4975, 4980B, 4980D, 4980H and 4980I of the Code, as applicable).
“Erroneous Payment”: as defined in Section 9.13(a).
“EU  Bail-In  Legislation  Schedule”:  the  EU  Bail-In  Legislation  Schedule  published  by  the  Loan  Market  Association  (or  any
successor person), as in effect from time to time.
“Eurocurrency Liabilities”: as defined in Regulation D of the Federal Reserve Board.
“Eurocurrency Reserve Requirements”: of any Lender for any Interest Period as applied to a Eurodollar Loan, the
reserve percentage applicable during such Interest Period (or if more than one such percentage shall be so applicable, the
daily average of such percentages for those days in such Interest Period during any such percentage shall be so applicable)
under any regulations of the Federal Reserve Board or other Governmental Authority having jurisdiction with respect to
determining the maximum reserve requirement (including basic, supplemental and emergency reserves) for such Lender
with respect to liabilities or assets consisting of or including Eurocurrency Liabilities having a term equal to such Interest
Period.
“Eurodollar Base Rate”: with respect to each day during each Interest Period pertaining to a Eurodollar Loan, the
Eurodollar Screen Rate at approximately 11:00 a.m., London time, two Business Days prior to the commencement of such
Interest Period; provided that if the Eurodollar Screen Rate shall not be available at such time for such Interest Period (an
“Impacted Interest Period”) then the Eurodollar Base Rate shall be the Interpolated Rate.
15    
    

“Eurodollar Loans”: Loans the rate of interest applicable to which is based upon the Eurodollar Rate.
“Eurodollar Rate”: with respect to each day during each Interest Period pertaining to a Eurodollar Loan, a rate per
annum determined for such day in accordance with the following formula (rounded upwards, if necessary, to the next 1/16 of
1%):
Eurodollar Base Rate
1.00 - Eurocurrency Reserve Requirements
“Eurodollar Screen Rate”: for any day and time, with respect to any Eurodollar Loan for any Interest Period, the
London interbank offered rate as administered by ICE Benchmark Administration (or any other Person that takes over the
administration of such rate) for a period equal in length to such Interest Period as displayed on such day and time on pages
LIBOR01 or LIBOR02 of the Reuters screen that displays such rate (or, in the event such rate does not appear on a Reuters
page or screen, on any successor or substitute page on such screen that displays such rate, or on the appropriate page of such
other information service that publishes such rate from time to time as selected by the Administrative Agent in its reasonable
discretion); provided that if the Eurodollar Screen Rate as so determined would be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed
to zero for the purposes of this Agreement.
“Eurodollar Tranche”: the collective reference to Eurodollar Loans the then current Interest Periods with respect to
all of which begin on the same date and end on the same later date (whether or not such Loans shall originally have been
made on the same day).
“Event of Default”: any of the events specified in Section 8, provided that any requirement for the giving of notice, the lapse of
time, or both, has been satisfied.
“Exchange Act”: Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
“Excluded Taxes”: any of the following Taxes imposed on or with respect to any Recipient or required to be withheld or deducted
from a payment to a Recipient, (a) Taxes imposed on or measured by net income (however denominated), franchise Taxes, and
branch profits Taxes, in each case, (i) imposed as a result of such Recipient being organized under the laws of, or having its principal
office or, in the case of any Lender, its lending office located in, the jurisdiction imposing such Tax (or any political subdivision
thereof) or (ii) that are Other Connection Taxes, (b) in the case of a Lender, U.S. federal withholding Taxes imposed on amounts
payable to or for the account of such Lender with respect to an applicable interest in a Loan pursuant to a law in effect on the date on
which  (i)  such  Lender  acquires  such  interest  in  the  Loan  (other  than  pursuant  to  an  assignment  request  by  the  Borrower  under
Section 2.19) or (ii) such Lender changes its lending office, except in each case to the extent that, pursuant to Section 2.16(a) or (c),
amounts with respect to such Taxes were payable either to such Lender’s assignor immediately before such Lender became a party
hereto or to such Lender immediately before it changed its lending office, (c) Taxes attributable to such Recipient’s failure to
16    
    

comply with Section 2.16(e) and (d) any U.S. federal withholding Taxes imposed pursuant to FATCA.
“FATCA”:  Sections  1471  through  1474  of  the  Code,  as  of  the  Effective  Date  (or  any  amended  or  successor  version  that  is
substantively  comparable  and  not  materially  more  onerous  to  comply  with),  any  current  or  future  regulations  or  official
interpretations thereof and any agreements entered into pursuant to Section 1471(b)(1) of the Code.
“FCA”: as defined in Section 2.13(b).
“FCPA”: as defined in Section 4.15.
“Federal Funds Effective Rate”: for any day, the rate calculated by the NYFRB based on such day’s federal funds transactions by
depositary institutions, as determined in such manner as shall be set forth on the NYFRB’s Website from time to time, and published
on the next succeeding Business Day by the NYFRB as the effective federal funds rate; provided that if the Federal Funds Effective
Rate as so determined would be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to be zero for the purposes of this Agreement.
“Federal Reserve Board”: the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System of the United States of America.
“First Mortgage Bonds”: bonds issued by the Borrower pursuant to the FMB Indenture.
“Floor”:  the  benchmark  rate  floor,  if  any,  provided  in  this  Agreement  initially  (as  of  the  execution  of  this  Agreement,  the
modification, amendment or renewal of this Agreement or otherwise) with respect to Eurodollar Base Rate.the Adjusted Term
SOFR Rate. For the avoidance of doubt the initial Floor for each of the Adjusted Term SOFR Rate or the Adjusted Daily
Simple SOFR shall be 0.0%.
“FMB Indenture”: the Indenture of Mortgage (Mortgage), dated as of June 19, 2020, between the Borrower and the Indenture
Trustee (as supplemented by the Supplemental Indenture) and as further supplemented or amended from time to time.
“Foreign Lender”: a Lender that is not a U.S. Person.
“FPA”: the Federal Power Act, as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
“Funding Office”: the office of the Administrative Agent specified in Section 10.2(a) or such other office as may be specified from
time to time by the Administrative Agent as its funding office by written notice to the Borrower and the Lenders.
“GAAP”: generally accepted accounting principles in the United States as in effect from time to time, except as noted below. In the
event that any “Change in Accounting Principles” (as defined below) shall occur and such change results in a change in the method
of calculation of financial covenants, standards or terms in this Agreement, then, upon the request of the Borrower or the Required
Lenders,  the  Borrower  and  the  Administrative  Agent  agree  to  enter  into  negotiations  in  order  to  amend  such  provisions  of  this
Agreement so as to reflect equitably such Change in Accounting Principles with the desired result that the criteria for evaluating the
Borrower’s  financial  condition  shall  be  the  same  after  such  Change  in  Accounting  Principles  as  if  such  Change  in  Accounting
Principles had not been made. Until such time as such an amendment shall have been executed and delivered by the Borrower, the
Administrative Agent and the Required
17    
    

Lenders,  all  financial  covenants,  standards  and  terms  in  this  Agreement  shall  continue  to  be  calculated  or  construed  as  if  such
Change  in  Accounting  Principles  had  not  occurred.  “Change  in  Accounting  Principles”  refers  to  (i)  changes  in  accounting
principles required by the promulgation of any rule, regulation, pronouncement or opinion by the Financial Accounting Standards
Board  of  the  American  Institute  of  Certified  Public  Accountants  or  any  successor  thereto,  the  SEC  or,  if  applicable,  the  Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board and (ii) any change in the application of GAAP concurred by the Borrower’s independent
public accountants and disclosed in writing to the Administrative Agent.
“Governmental Authority”:  any  nation  or  government,  any  state  or  other  political  subdivision  thereof,  any  agency,  authority,
instrumentality, regulatory body, court, central bank or other entity exercising executive, legislative, judicial, taxing, regulatory or
administrative functions of or pertaining to government, any securities exchange and any self-regulatory organization (including the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners and supra-national bodies such as the European Union or the European Central
Bank).
“Guarantee  Obligation”:  as  to  any  Person  (the  “guaranteeing  person”),  any  obligation,  including  a  reimbursement,
counterindemnity  or  similar  obligation,  of  the  guaranteeing  person  that  guarantees  any  Indebtedness,  leases,  dividends  or  other
obligations  (the  “primary obligations”)  of  any  other  third  Person  (the  “primary obligor”)  in  any  manner,  whether  directly  or
indirectly,  including  any  obligation  of  the  guaranteeing  person,  whether  or  not  contingent,  (i)  to  purchase  any  such  primary
obligation or any property constituting direct or indirect security therefor, (ii) to advance or supply funds (1) for the purchase or
payment of any such primary obligation or (2) to maintain working capital or equity capital of the primary obligor or otherwise to
maintain the net worth or solvency of the primary obligor, (iii) to purchase property, securities or services primarily for the purpose
of  assuring  the  owner  of  any  such  primary  obligation  of  the  ability  of  the  primary  obligor  to  make  payment  of  such  primary
obligation, (iv) otherwise to assure or hold harmless the owner of any such primary obligation against loss in respect thereof or (v) to
reimburse or indemnify an issuer of a letter of credit, surety bond or guarantee issued by such issuer in respect of primary obligations
of a primary obligor other than the Borrower or any Significant Subsidiary; provided, however, that the term Guarantee Obligation
shall  not  include  endorsements  of  instruments  for  deposit  or  collection  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business.  The  amount  of  any
Guarantee  Obligation  of  any  guaranteeing  person  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  lower  of  (a)  an  amount  equal  to  the  stated  or
determinable amount of the primary obligation in respect of which such Guarantee Obligation is made and (b) the maximum amount
for which such guaranteeing person may be liable pursuant to the terms of the instrument embodying such Guarantee Obligation,
unless  such  primary  obligation  and  the  maximum  amount  for  which  such  guaranteeing  person  may  be  liable  are  not  stated  or
determinable, in which case the amount of such Guarantee Obligation shall be such guaranteeing person’s reasonably anticipated
liability in respect thereof as determined by the Borrower in good faith.
“IBA”: as defined in Section 2.13(b).
“Indebtedness”: of any Person at any date, without duplication, (a) all indebtedness of such Person for borrowed money, (b) all
obligations of such Person for the deferred purchase price of property or services (other than trade payables, including under energy
procurement and transportation contracts, incurred in the ordinary course of such Person’s business), (c) all obligations of such
Person  evidenced  by  notes,  bonds,  debentures  or  other  similar  instruments,  (d)  all  indebtedness  created  or  arising  under  any
conditional sale or other title retention agreement with respect to property acquired by
18    
    

such Person (even though the rights and remedies of the seller or lender under such agreement in the event of default are limited to
repossession or sale of such property), (e) all Capital Lease Obligations of such Person, (f) all obligations of such Person, contingent
or  otherwise,  as  an  account  party  or  applicant  under  or  in  respect  of  acceptances,  letters  of  credit,  surety  bonds  or  similar
arrangements (other than reimbursement obligations, which are not due and payable on such date, in respect of documentary letters
of credit issued to provide for the payment of goods and services in the ordinary course of business), (g) the liquidation value of all
mandatorily  redeemable  preferred  Capital  Stock  of  such  Person,  (h)  all  Guarantee  Obligations  of  such  Person  in  respect  of
obligations of the kind referred to in clauses (a) through (g) above, (i) all obligations of the kind referred to in clauses (a) through (h)
above secured by (or for which the holder of such obligation has an existing right, contingent or otherwise, to be secured by) any
Lien on property (including accounts and contract rights) owned by such Person, whether or not such Person has assumed or become
liable for the payment of such obligation (provided, that if such Person is not liable for such obligation, the amount of such Person’s
Indebtedness with respect thereto shall be deemed to be the lesser of the stated amount of such obligation and the value of the
property subject to such Lien), and (j) for the purposes of Sections 7.1 and 8(e) only, all obligations of such Person in respect of
Swap Agreements, provided that Indebtedness as used in this Agreement shall exclude any Non-Recourse Debt and any obligations
under  any  A/R  Securitization  Transaction.  The  Indebtedness  of  any  Person  shall  include  the  Indebtedness  of  any  other  entity
(including any partnership in which such Person is a general partner) to the extent such Person is liable therefor as a result of such
Person’s ownership interest in or other relationship with such entity, except to the extent the terms of such Indebtedness expressly
provide that such Person is not liable therefor.
“Indebtedness Covenant Release Date”: the date of the expiration of the temporary waiver from its authorized capital structure
granted by the CPUC on May 28, 2020.
“Indemnified Liabilities”: as defined in Section 10.5.
“Indemnified Taxes”: (a) Taxes, other than Excluded Taxes, imposed on or with respect to any payment made by or on account of
any obligation of the Borrower under any Loan Document and (b) to the extent not otherwise described in (a), Other Taxes.
“Indemnitee”: as defined in Section 10.5.
“Indenture Trustee”: The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A. and any successor thereto as trustee under the FMB
Indenture.
“Insolvency”: with respect to any Multiemployer Plan, the condition that such plan is insolvent within the meaning of Section 4245
of ERISA.
“Interest Payment Date”: (a) as to any ABR Loan, the last day of each March, June, September and December to occur while such
Loan is outstanding and the final maturity date of such Loan, (b) as to any Eurodollar Loan having an Interest Period of three
months or less,with  respect  to  any  RFR  Loan,  each  date  that  is  on  the  numerically  corresponding  day  in  each  calendar
month that is one month after the Borrowing of such Loan (or, if there is no such numerically corresponding day in such
month, then the last day of such Interest Period, (c) as to any Eurodollar Loan having an Interest Period longer than three
months, each day that is three months, or a whole multiple thereof, after the first day of such Interest Period andmonth), (c)
with respect to any Term Benchmark Loan, the last day of sucheach Interest Period
19    
    

applicable to the Borrowing of which such Loan is a part and (d) as to any Loan, the date of any repayment or prepayment made
in respect thereof.
“Interest  Period”:  as  to  any EurodollarTerm  Benchmark Loan,  (a)  initially,  the  period  commencing  on  the  borrowing  or
conversion date, as the case may be, with respect to such EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loan and ending one weekmonth thereafter
or one, three or six or (if agreed to by all Lenders) twelve months thereafter, as selected by the Borrower in its notice of
borrowing or notice of conversion, as the case may be, given with respect thereto; and (b) thereafter, each period commencing
on the last day of the next preceding Interest Period applicable to such EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loan and ending one, three or
six  or  (if  agreed  to  by  all  Lenders)  twelve  months  thereafter,  as  selected  by  the  Borrower  by  irrevocable  notice  to  the
Administrative Agent not later than 12:00 Noon, New York City time, on the date that is three Business Days prior to the last
day of the then current Interest Period with respect thereto month thereafter ; provided that, all of the foregoing provisions
relating to Interest Periods are subject to the following:
(i) if any Interest Period would otherwise end on a day that is not a Business Day, such Interest Period shall be
extended to the next succeeding Business Day unless the result of such extension would be to carry such Interest Period into
another calendar month in which event such Interest Period shall end on the immediately preceding Business Day;
Section 8.
the Borrower may not select an Interest Period that would extend beyond the applicable Maturity Date;
Section 9.
any Interest Period that begins on the last Business Day of a calendar month (or on a day for which there is no
numerically corresponding day in the calendar month at the end of such Interest Period) shall end on the last Business Day of a
calendar month;
Section 10.
[reserved]; and
Section 11.
at the election of the Borrower, the initial Interest Period for any EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans made on the
Effective Date, shall commence on the Effective Date and end on the last day of the calendar month during which the Effective Date
occurs; and.
(vi) the option to elect a one week Interest Period shall only be available during the calendar year ending
December 31, 2021 and solely to the extent such Interest Period is available to the Administrative Agent.
“Interpolated  Rate”:  at  any  time,  for  any  Interest  Period,  the  rate  per  annum  (rounded  to  the  same  number  of
decimal  places  as  the  Eurodollar  Screen  Rate)  determined  by  the  Administrative  Agent  (which  determination  shall  be
conclusive  and  binding  absent  manifest  error)  to  be  equal  to  the  rate  that  results  from  interpolating  on  a  linear  basis
between: (a) the Eurodollar Screen Rate for the longest period (for which the Eurodollar Screen Rate is available) that is
shorter  than  the  Impacted  Interest  Period;  and  (b)  the  Eurodollar  Screen  Rate  for  the  shortest  period  (for  which  that
Eurodollar Screen Rate is available) that exceeds the Impacted Interest Period, in each case, at such time.
“IRS”: the United States Internal Revenue Service.
20    
    

“knowledge of the Borrower”: actual knowledge of any Responsible Officer of the Borrower.
“Laws”: collectively, all international, foreign, federal, state and local statutes, treaties, rules, guidelines, regulations, ordinances,
codes  and  administrative  or  judicial  precedents  or  authorities,  including  the  interpretation  or  administration  thereof  by  any
Governmental Authority charged with the enforcement, interpretation or administration thereof, and all applicable administrative
orders, directed duties, requests, licenses, authorizations and permits of, and agreements with, any Governmental Authority, in each
case whether or not having the force of law.
“Lenders”:  as  defined  in  the  preamble  hereto,  including  each  Lender  set  forth  under  the  heading  “Lender”  on  Schedule  I  of
Amendment No. 1 and their respective successors and assigns as permitted hereunder; provided, that unless the context otherwise
requires, each reference herein to the Lenders shall be deemed to include any Conduit Lender.
“LIBOR”: as defined in Section 1.4.
“Lien”: any mortgage, pledge, hypothecation, assignment, deposit arrangement, encumbrance, lien (statutory or other), charge or
other  security  interest  or  any  preference,  priority  or  other  security  agreement  or  preferential  arrangement  of  any  kind  or  nature
whatsoever (including any conditional sale or other title retention agreement and any Capital Lease Obligation having substantially
the same economic effect as any of the foregoing).
“Loans”: the 364-Day Tranche Loans and the 18-Month Tranche Loans.
“Loan Documents”: this Agreement, the Notes, the Supplemental Indenture, the Senior Bonds, the Bond Delivery Agreement, the
FMB Indenture and, in each case, any amendment, waiver, supplement or other modification to any of the foregoing; provided, that
the term “Loan Documents” shall not include the FMB Indenture for any purposes under Section 2.16, Section 8 or Section 10 (other
than for the purposes of Sections 10.1(iv) 10.1(x)).
“Material  Adverse  Effect”:  (a)  a  change  in  the  business,  property,  operations  or  financial  condition  of  the  Borrower  and  its
Subsidiaries taken as a whole that could reasonably be expected to materially and adversely affect the Borrower’s ability to perform
its obligations under the Loan Documents or (b) a material adverse effect on (i) the validity or enforceability of this Agreement or
any of the other Loan Documents or (ii) the rights and remedies of the Administrative Agent and the Lenders, taken as a whole,
under this Agreement or any other Loan Document.
“Materials of Environmental Concern”:  any  gasoline  or  petroleum  (including  crude  oil  or  any  fraction  thereof)  or  petroleum
products or any hazardous or toxic substances, materials or wastes, defined or regulated as such in or under any Environmental Law,
including asbestos, polychlorinated biphenyls and urea-formaldehyde insulation.
“Maturity Date”: (a) with respect to the 364-Day Tranche Loans, the 364-Day Tranche Maturity Date, and (b) with respect to
the 18-Month Tranche Loans, the 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date.
“Moody’s”: Moody’s Investors Service, Inc.
“Mortgaged Property”: as defined in the FMB Indenture.
21    
    

“Multiemployer Plan”: a plan that is a multiemployer plan as defined in Section 4001(a)(3) of ERISA.
“Net Cash Proceeds”: with respect to any Debt Issuance, the excess, if any, of (i) cash actually received by the Borrower or its
Subsidiaries  in  connection  with  such  incurrence,  issuance,  offering  or  placement  over  (ii)  the  underwriting  discounts  and
commissions and other fees and expenses incurred by the Borrower or its Subsidiaries in connection with such incurrence, issuance,
offering or placement.
“Net Tangible Assets”: the total amount of the Borrower’s assets determined on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP as
of the last day of the most recently ended fiscal quarter for which financial statements have been delivered under Section 6.1, less (a)
the  sum  of  the  Borrower’s  consolidated  current  liabilities  determined  in  accordance  with  GAAP,  and  (b)  the  amount  of  the
Borrower’s consolidated assets classified as intangible assets, determined in accordance with GAAP.
“Non-Recourse Debt”: Indebtedness of the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries that is incurred in connection with the
acquisition, construction, sale, transfer or other Disposition of specific assets, to the extent recourse, whether contractual or as a
matter of law, for non-payment of such Indebtedness is limited (a) to such assets, or (b) if such assets are (or are to be) held by a
Subsidiary formed solely for such purpose, to such Subsidiary or the Capital Stock of such Subsidiary.
“Notes”: as defined in Section 2.14(f).
“NYFRB”: the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
“NYFRB Rate”: for any day, the greater of (a) the Federal Funds Effective Rate in effect on such day and (b) the Overnight Bank
Funding  Rate  in  effect  on  such  day  (or  for  any  day  that  is  not  a  Business  Day,  for  the  immediately  preceding  Business  Day);
provided that if none of such rates are published for any day that is a Business Day, the term “NYFRB Rate” means the rate for a
federal funds transaction quoted at 11:00 a.m. (New York City time) on such day received by the Administrative Agent from a
federal funds broker of recognized standing selected by it; provided, further, that if any of the aforesaid rates as so determined would
be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to be zero for purposes of this Agreement.
“NYFRB’s Website”: the website of the NYFRB at http://www.newyorkfed.org, or any successor source.
“Obligations”: the unpaid principal of and interest on (including, without limitation, interest accruing after the maturity of the Loans
and interest accruing after the filing of any petition in bankruptcy, or the commencement of any insolvency, reorganization or like
proceeding, relating to the Borrower, whether or not a claim for post-filing or post-petition interest is allowed in such proceeding)
the Loans and all other obligations and liabilities of the Borrower to the Administrative Agent or to any Lender, whether direct or
indirect, absolute or contingent, due or to become due, or now existing or hereafter incurred, which may arise under, out of, or in
connection with, this Agreement, any other Loan Document or any other document made, delivered or given in connection herewith
or therewith,  whether  on  account  of principal,  interest,  reimbursement  obligations,  fees,  indemnities,  costs,  expenses  (including,
without limitation, all fees, charges and disbursements of counsel to the Administrative Agent or to any Lender that are required to
be paid by the Borrower pursuant hereto) or otherwise.
22    
    

“OECD”: the countries constituting the “Contracting Parties” to the Convention on the Organisation For Economic Co-operation
and Development, as such term is defined in Article 4 of such Convention.
“Other Connection Taxes”: with respect to any Recipient, Taxes imposed as a result of a present or former connection between
such  Recipient  and  the  jurisdiction  imposing  such  Tax  (other  than  connections  arising  from  such  Recipient  having  executed,
delivered, become a party to, performed its obligations under, received payments under, received or perfected a security interest
under, engaged in any other transaction pursuant to or enforced any Loan Document, or sold or assigned an interest in any Loan or
Loan Document).
“Other Taxes”: all present or future stamp, court or documentary, intangible, recording, filing or similar Taxes that arise from any
payment made under, from the execution, delivery, performance, enforcement or registration of, from the receipt or perfection of a
security interest under, or otherwise with respect to, any Loan Document, except any such Taxes that are Other Connection Taxes
imposed with respect to an assignment (other than an assignment made pursuant to Section 2.19).
“Overnight Bank Funding Rate”: for any day, the rate comprised of both overnight federal funds and overnight Eurodollar
borrowings by U.S.-managed banking offices of depository institutions, as such composite rate shall be determined by the NYFRB
as set forth on the NYFRB’s Website from time to time, and published on the next succeeding Business Day by the NYFRB as an
overnight bank funding rate.
“Participant”: as defined in Section 10.6(c).
“Participant Register”: as defined in Section 10.6(c)(iii).
“Patriot Act”: as defined in Section 10.16.
“Payment Recipient”: as defined in Section 9.13(a).
“PBGC”: the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation established pursuant to Subtitle A of Title IV of ERISA (or any successor).
“PCG”: as defined in the first recital paragraph.
“PCG  Commitment  Letter”:  that  certain  Commitment  Letter  dated  as  of  October  4,  2019  among  PG&E  Corporation,  as  the
borrower, Pacific Gas and Electric Company and the commitment parties from time to time party thereto, as amended, modified or
supplemented from time to time prior to the date hereof.
“PCG Revolving Credit Agreement”: that certain Credit Agreement dated as of the Effective Date, among PCG, the lenders from
time to time party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.
“Percentage”: as to any Lender at any time with respect to a Tranche, the percentage which the aggregate principal amount of such
Lender’s Loans then outstanding constitutes of the aggregate principal amount of the Loans then outstanding with respect to such
Tranche.
“Permitted  Refinancing”:  with  respect  to  any  Indebtedness  (the  “Refinanced  Indebtedness”),  any  extension,  refinancing,
refunding or replacement thereof with
23    
    

Indebtedness provided that (i) the amount of such Indebtedness does not exceed the aggregate principal amount of the Refinanced
Indebtedness,  plus  any  premium,  interest,  fee  or  expenses  payable  in  connection  therewith,  (ii)  the  final  maturity  date  of  such
Indebtedness is no earlier than the maturity date of the Refinanced Indebtedness, and (iii) the weighted average life to maturity of
such Indebtedness is not shorter than the weighted average life to maturity of the Refinanced Indebtedness.
“Person”:  an  individual,  partnership,  corporation,  limited  liability  company,  business  trust,  joint  stock  company,  trust,
unincorporated association, joint venture, Governmental Authority or other entity of whatever nature.
“Plan”:  at  a  particular  time,  any  employee  benefit  plan  that  is  covered  by  ERISA  and  in  respect  of  which  the  Borrower  or  a
Commonly Controlled Entity is (or, if such plan were terminated at such time, would under Section 4069 of ERISA be deemed to
be) an “employer” as defined in Section 3(5) of ERISA.
“Plan of Reorganization”: as defined in the second recital paragraph.
“Platform”: as defined in Section 10.2(d).
“Prime Rate”: the rate of interest last quoted by The Wall Street Journal as the “Prime Rate” in the U.S. or, if The Wall Street
Journal ceases to quote such rate, the highest per annum interest rate published by the Federal Reserve Board in Federal Reserve
Statistical Release H.15 (519) (Selected Interest Rates) as the “bank prime loan” rate or, if such rate is no longer quoted therein, any
similar rate quoted therein (as determined by the Administrative Agent) or in any similar release by the Federal Reserve Board (as
determined by the Administrative Agent). Each change in the Prime Rate shall be effective from and including the date such change
is publicly announced or quoted as being effective.
“PTE”: a prohibited transaction class exemption issued by the U.S. Department of Labor, as any such exemption may be amended
from time to time.
“QFC”: the meaning assigned to the term “qualified financial contract” in, and shall be interpreted in accordance with, 12 U.S.C.
5390(c)(8)(D).
“QFC Credit Support” in Section 10.19.
“Qualified  Securitization  Bond  Issuer”:  a  Subsidiary  of  the  Borrower  formed  and  operating  solely  for  the  purpose  of  (a)
purchasing and owning property created under a “financing order” (as such term is defined in the California Public Utilities Code) or
similar order issued by the CPUC, (b) issuing such securities pursuant to such order, (c) pledging its interests in such property to
secure such securities and (d) engaging in activities ancillary to those described in (a), (b) and (c).
“Rating”: each rating announced by S&P and Moody’s in respect of the Borrower’s senior secured debt.
“Recipient”: the Administrative Agent or any Lender.
“Reference Time”: with respect to any setting of the then-current Benchmark means (1) if such Benchmark is the Term
SOFR Rate, 5:00 a.m. (Chicago time) on the day that is two Business Days preceding the date of such setting, (2) if such
Benchmark is Daily Simple SOFR, then four Business Days prior to such setting or
24    
    

(3) if such Benchmark is none of the Term SOFR Rate or Daily Simple SOFR, the time determined by the Administrative
Agent in its reasonable discretion.
“Register”: as defined in Section 10.6(b).
“Regulation U”: Regulation U of the Federal Reserve Board as in effect from time to time.
“Related Parties”:  with  respect  to  any  Person,  such  Person’s  Affiliates  and  the  partners,  directors,  officers,  employees,  agents,
trustees, administrators, managers, advisors and representatives of such Person and of such Person’s Affiliates.
“Relevant  Governmental  Body”:  the  Federal  Reserve  Board and/or  the  NYFRB,  the  CME  Term  SOFR  Administrator,  as
applicable, or a committee officially endorsed or convened by the Federal Reserve Board and/or the NYFRB or, in each case, any
successor thereto.
“Relevant Rate”: (i) with respect to any Term Benchmark Borrowing, the Adjusted Term SOFR Rate or (ii) with respect to
any RFR Borrowing, the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR, as applicable.
“Removal Effective Date”: as defined in Section 9.9(b).
“Reportable Event”: any of the events set forth in Section 4043(c) of ERISA, other than those events as to which the thirty-day
notice period is waived under subsections .27, .28, .29, .30, .31, .32, .34 or .35 of PBGC Reg. § 4043.
“Required Lenders”:  at  any  time,  the  holders  of  more  than  50%  of  the  aggregate  Loans  then  outstanding.  The  Loans  of  any
Defaulting Lender shall be disregarded in determining Required Lenders at any time.
“Requirement  of  Law”:  as  to  any  Person,  the  Articles  of  Incorporation  and  By-Laws  or  other  organizational  or  governing
documents of such Person, and any law, treaty, rule or regulation or determination of an arbitrator or a court or other Governmental
Authority, in each case applicable to or binding upon such Person or any of its property or to which such Person or any of its
property is subject.
“Resignation Effective Date”: as defined in Section 9.9(a).
“Resolution Authority”: with respect to any EEA Financial Institution, an EEA Resolution Authority and, with respect to any UK
Financial Institution, a UK Resolution Authority.
“Responsible Officer”: the chief executive officer, president, chief financial officer, treasurer or assistant treasurer of the Borrower,
but in any event, with respect to financial matters, the chief financial officer, treasurer or assistant treasurer of the Borrower.
“RFR Borrowing”: as to any Borrowing, the RFR Loans comprising such Borrowing.
“RFR Loan”: a Loan that bears interest at a rate based on the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR.
25    
    

“S&P”: Standard & Poor’s Global Ratings, a division of S&P Global Inc., and any successor thereto.
“Sanctions”: as defined in Section 4.15.
“SEC”: the Securities and Exchange Commission, any successor thereto and any analogous Governmental Authority.
“Securitized Bonds”: without duplication, securities, however denominated, that are (i) issued by a Qualified Securitization Bond
Issuer, (ii) secured by or otherwise payable from charges authorized by the financing order referred to in clause (a) of the definition
of “Qualified Securitization Bond Issuer,” and (iii) non-recourse to the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries (other than the issuer of
such securities).
“Senior Bonds”: (i) with respect to the 364-Day Tranche Loans, that certain First Mortgage Bond in the aggregate principal
amount  of  $1,500,000,000  and  (ii) with  respect  to  the  18-Month  Tranche  Loans,  those  certain  First  Mortgage  Bonds  in  the
aggregate combined initial principal amount of $1,500,000,000, in each case, issued to the Administrative Agent pursuant to the
Supplemental Indenture.
“Significant Subsidiary”: as defined in Article 1, Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X of the Exchange Act as of the Effective Date,
provided  that  notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  no  special  purpose  finance  subsidiary,  no  A/R  Securitization  Subsidiary  (or
Subsidiaries of any A/R Securitization Subsidiary) nor any Qualified Securitization Bond Issuer (or Subsidiaries of any Qualified
Securitization  Bond  Issuer)  shall  constitute  a  Significant  Subsidiary.  Unless  otherwise  qualified,  all  references  to  a  “Significant
Subsidiary” or to “Significant Subsidiaries” in this Agreement shall refer to a “Significant Subsidiary” or “Significant Subsidiaries”
of the Borrower.
“Single Employer Plan”: any Plan that is covered by Title IV of ERISA, but that is not a Multiemployer Plan.
“SOFR”: a rate equal to the secured overnight financing rate as administered by the SOFR Administrator.
“SOFR Administrator”: the NYFRB (or a successor administrator of the secured overnight financing rate).
“SOFR”: a rate per annum equal to the secured overnight financing rate for such Business Day published by the NYFRB (or
a successor administrator of the secured overnight financing rate) on the NYFRB’s Website ( Administrator’s Website”: the
NYFRB’s website, currently at http://www.newyorkfed.org, or any successor source for the secured  overnight  financing  rate
identified as such by the administrator of the secured overnight financing rateSOFR Administrator from time to time).
“SOFR Determination Date”: has the meaning specified in the definition of “Daily Simple SOFR”.
“SOFR Rate Day”: has the meaning specified in the definition of “Daily Simple SOFR”.
“Solvent”: with respect to the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis, that as of the date of determination, (i) the fair
value of the assets of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis, at a fair valuation on a going concern basis,
26    
    

exceeds, on a consolidated basis, their debts and liabilities, subordinated, contingent or otherwise, (ii) the present fair saleable value
of the property of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated and going concern basis, is greater than the amount that will
be required to pay the probable liability, on a consolidated basis, of their debts and other liabilities, subordinated, contingent or
otherwise, as such debts and other liabilities become absolute and matured in the ordinary course of business, (iii) the Borrower and
its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis, are able to pay their debts and liabilities, subordinated, contingent or otherwise, as such
liabilities become absolute and matured in the ordinary course of business, (iv) the Borrower and its Subsidiaries are not engaged in
businesses, and are not about to engage in businesses for which they have unreasonably small capital. For purposes of this definition,
the amount of any contingent liability at any time shall be computed as the amount that, in light of all the facts and circumstances
existing as of the Effective Date, would reasonably be expected to become an actual and matured liability.
“Specified Exchange Act Filings”: the Borrower’s Form 10-K annual report for the year ended December 31, 2020 and each and all
of the Form 10-Qs and Form 8-Ks (and to the extent applicable proxy statements) filed by the Borrower or PCG with the SEC after
December 31, 2020 and prior to the date that is one Business Day before the Amendment No. 1 Effective Date.
“Specified Material Adverse Effect”: any occurrence, fact, change, event, effect, violation, penalty, inaccuracy or circumstance
that, individually or in the aggregate with any such other results, occurrences, facts, changes, events, effects, violations, penalties,
inaccuracies, or circumstances, (i) would have or would reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on the business,
operations, assets, liabilities, capitalization, financial performance, financial condition or results of operations, in each case, of PCG
and the Borrower, taken as a whole, or (ii) would reasonably be expected to prevent or materially delay the ability of the Borrower to
consummate the transactions contemplated by this Agreement or perform its obligations hereunder; provided, however, that none of
the following results, occurrences, facts, changes, events, effects, violations, penalties, inaccuracies or circumstances shall constitute
or be taken into account in determining whether a Specified Material Adverse Effect has occurred, is continuing or would reasonably
be  expected  to  occur:  (A)  [reserved],  (B)  results,  occurrences,  facts,  changes,  events,  violations,  inaccuracies  or  circumstances
affecting  (1) the electric  or gas utility businesses in the United States generally  or (2) the economy, credit,  financial,  capital  or
commodity markets, in the United States or elsewhere in the world, including changes in interest rates, monetary policy or inflation,
(C) changes or prospective changes in law (other than any law or regulation of California or the United States that is applicable to
any  electrical  utility)  or  in  GAAP  or  accounting  standards,  or  any  changes  or  prospective  changes  in  the  interpretation  or
enforcement of any of the foregoing, (D) any decline in the market price, or change in trading volume, of any securities of PCG,
(E)  any  failure  to  meet  any  internal  or  public  projections,  forecasts,  guidance,  estimates,  milestones,  credit  ratings,  budgets  or
internal or published financial or operating predictions of revenue, earnings, cash flow or cash position, (F) [reserved], and (G) one
or more wildfires, occurring on or after January 1, 2020, that destroys or damages fewer than 500 dwellings or commercial structures
in  the  aggregate  (it  being  understood  that  (I)  the  exceptions  in  clauses  (D)  and  (E)  shall  not  prevent  or  otherwise  affect  a
determination that the underlying cause of any such change, decline or failure referred to therein is a Specified Material Adverse
Effect, and (II) a Specified Material Adverse Effect shall include the occurrence of one or more wildfires on or after January 1, 2020
destroying or damaging at least 500 dwellings or commercial structures within PCG’s service area at a time when the portion of
PCG’s system at the location of such wildfire was not successfully de-energized).
27    
    

“Standard A/R Securitization Obligations”: representations, warranties, covenants, indemnities, repurchase obligations, servicing
obligations,  guarantees,  intercompany  notes  and  obligations  relating  to  contributions  of  A/R  Securitization  Assets  to  an  A/R
Securitization  Subsidiary  and  other  obligations  entered  into  by  the  Borrower  or  any  of  its  Subsidiaries  which  are  reasonably
customary in A/R Securitization Transactions.
“Subsidiary”: as to any Person, a corporation, partnership, limited liability company or other entity of which shares of stock or other
ownership interests having ordinary voting power (other than stock or such other ownership interests having such power only by
reason  of  the  happening  of  a  contingency)  to  elect  a  majority  of  the  board  of  directors  or  other  managers  of  such  corporation,
partnership or other entity are at the time owned, or the management of which is otherwise controlled, directly or indirectly through
one or more intermediaries, or both, by such Person. Unless otherwise qualified, all references to a “Subsidiary” or to “Subsidiaries”
in this Agreement shall refer to a Subsidiary or Subsidiaries of the Borrower.
“Supplemental  Indenture”:  with  respect  to  those  certain  First  Mortgage  Bonds  in  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of
$3,000,000,000 issued to the Administrative Agent, the Supplemental Indenture, dated as of the Effective Date, by and between the
Borrower and the Indenture Trustee.
“Supported QFC”: as defined in Section 10.19.
“Swap  Agreement”:  any  agreement  with  respect  to  any  swap,  forward,  future  or  derivative  transaction  or  option  or  similar
agreement involving, or settled by reference to, one or more rates, currencies, commodities, equity or debt instruments or securities,
or economic, financial or pricing indices or measures of economic, financial or pricing risk or value or any similar transaction or any
combination  of  these  transactions;  provided  that  no  phantom  stock  or  similar  plan  providing  for  payments  only  on  account  of
services provided by current or former directors, officers, employees or consultants of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries shall
be a “Swap Agreement”.
“Syndication Agents”: as defined on the cover hereto.
“Taxes”: all present or future taxes, levies, imposts, duties, deductions, withholdings (including backup withholding), assessments,
fees  or  other  charges  imposed  by  any  Governmental  Authority,  including  any  interest,  additions  to  tax  or  penalties  applicable
thereto.
“Term  Benchmark”:  when  used  in  reference  to  any  Loan  or  Borrowing,  refers  to  whether  such  Loan,  or  the  Loans
comprising such Borrowing, are bearing interest at a rate determined by reference to the Adjusted Term SOFR Rate.
“Term SOFR”: for the applicable corresponding tenor, the forward-looking term rate based on SOFR that has been selected
or  recommended  by  the  Relevant  Governmental  Body. Determination  Day”:  has  the  meaning  assigned  to  it  under  the
definition of Term SOFR Rate.
“Term  SOFR  Rate”:  with  respect  to  any  Term  Benchmark  Borrowing  and  for  any  tenor  comparable  to  the  applicable
Interest Period, the Term SOFR Reference Rate at approximately 5:00 a.m., Chicago time, two U.S. Government Securities
Business Days prior to the commencement of such tenor comparable to the applicable Interest Period (such day, the “Term
SOFR Determination Day”), as such rate is published by the CME Term SOFR Administrator.
28    
    

“Term  SOFR  Reference  Rate”:  for any  day and time,  with  respect  to any Term  Benchmark  Borrowing  denominated  in
Dollars  and  for  any  tenor  comparable  to  the  applicable  Interest  Period,  the  rate  per  annum  determined  by  the
Administrative Agent as the forward-looking term rate based on SOFR. If by 5:00 pm (New York City time) on the Term
SOFR Determination Day, the “Term SOFR Reference Rate” for the applicable tenor has not been published by the CME
Term SOFR Administrator and a Benchmark Replacement Date with respect to the Term SOFR Rate has not occurred,
then the Term SOFR Reference Rate for such Term SOFR Determination Day will be the Term SOFR Reference Rate as
published in respect of the first preceding U.S. Government Securities Business Day for which such Term SOFR Reference
Rate was published by the CME Term SOFR Administrator, so long as such first preceding Business Day is not more than
five (5) Business Days prior to such Term SOFR Determination Day.
“Tranche”: (i) the 364-Day Tranche Commitments or the 364-Day Tranche Loans or (ii) the 18-Month Tranche Commitments
or the 18-Month Tranche Loans (or, with respect to the 18-Month Tranche Loans, the 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A) and the
18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B)).
“Transferee”: any Assignee or Participant.
“Type”: as to any Loan, its nature as an ABR Loan or a EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loan.
“UK Financial Institution”: any BRRD Undertaking (as such term is defined under the PRA Rulebook (as amended form time to
time) promulgated by the United Kingdom Prudential Regulation Authority)) or any person falling within IFPRU 11.6 of the FCA
Handbook (as amended from time to time) promulgated by the United Kingdom Financial Conduct Authority, which includes certain
credit institutions and investment firms, and certain affiliates of such credit institutions or investment firms.
“UK  Resolution  Authority”:  the  Bank  of  England  or  any  other  public  administrative  authority  having  responsibility  for  the
resolution of any UK Financial Institution.
“Unadjusted  Benchmark  Replacement”:  the  applicable  Benchmark  Replacement  excluding  the  related  Benchmark
Replacement Adjustment.
“United States” or “U.S.”: the United States of America.
“U.S. Government Securities Business Day”: any day except for (i) a Saturday, (ii) a Sunday or (iii) a day on which the
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association recommends that the fixed income departments of its members be
closed for the entire day for purposes of trading in United States government securities.
“U.S. Person”: any Person that is a “United States Person” as defined in Section 7701(a)(30) of the Code.
“U.S. Special Resolution Regime”: as defined in Section 10.19.
“U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate”: as defined in Section 2.16(e)(ii)(B)(III).
“Utility  Commitment  Letter”:  that  certain  Commitment  Letter  dated  as  of  October  4,  2019  among  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric
Company, as the borrower, PG&E Corporation and
29    
    

the commitment parties from time to time party thereto, as amended, modified or supplemented from time to time prior to the date
hereof.
“Utility Revolving Credit Agreement”: that certain Credit Agreement dated as of the Effective Date, among the Borrower, the
lenders from time to time party thereto and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent.
“Withdrawal Liability”: any liability to a Multiemployer Plan as a result of a complete or partial withdrawal by the Borrower or
any Commonly Controlled Entity from such Multiemployer Plan, as such terms are defined in Title IV of ERISA.
“Write-Down and Conversion Powers”: (a) with respect to any EEA Resolution Authority, the write-down and conversion powers
of  such  EEA  Resolution  Authority  from  time  to  time  under  the  applicable  Bail-In  Legislation  for  the  applicable  EEA  Member
Country, which write-down and conversion powers are described in the EU Bail-In Legislation Schedule, and (b) with respect to any
UK Resolution Authority, any powers of such UK Resolution Authority under the applicable Bail-In Legislation to cancel, reduce,
modify or change the form of a liability of any UK Financial Institution or any contract or instrument under which that liability
arises, to convert all or part of that liability into shares, securities or obligations of that person or any other person, to provide that
any such contract or instrument is to have effect as if a right had been exercised under it or to suspend any obligation in respect of
that liability or any of the powers under that Bail-In Legislation that are related to or ancillary to any of those powers.
1.1
Other Definitional Provisions and Interpretative Provisions.
(a) Unless otherwise specified therein, all terms defined in this Agreement shall have the defined meanings when
used in the other Loan Documents or any certificate or other document made or delivered pursuant hereto or thereto.
(b) As used herein and, except as otherwise provided therein, in the other Loan Documents, and any certificate or
other  document  made  or  delivered  pursuant  hereto  or  thereto,  (i)  accounting  terms  relating  to  the  Borrower  and  its
Significant  Subsidiaries  defined  in  Section  1.1  and  accounting  terms  partly  defined  in  Section  1.1,  to  the  extent  not
defined,  shall  have  the  respective  meanings  given  to  them  under  GAAP,  (ii)  the  words  “include”,  “includes”  and
“including” shall be deemed to be followed by the phrase “without limitation”, (iii) the word “incur” shall be construed to
mean incur, create, issue, assume or become liable in respect of (and the words “incurred” and “incurrence” shall have
correlative meanings), (iv) the words “asset” and “property” shall be construed to have the same meaning and effect and to
refer  to  any  and  all  tangible  and  intangible  assets  and  properties,  including  cash,  Capital  Stock,  securities,  revenues,
accounts, leasehold interests and contract rights, and (v) references to agreements or other Contractual Obligations shall,
unless otherwise specified, be deemed to refer to such agreements or Contractual Obligations as amended, supplemented,
restated or otherwise modified from time to time.
(c) The words “hereof”, “herein” and “hereunder” and words of similar import, when used in this Agreement,
shall refer to this Agreement as a whole and not to any particular provision of this Agreement, and Section,
30    
    

Schedule and Exhibit references are to this Agreement unless otherwise specified.
(d) The meanings given to terms defined herein shall be equally applicable to both the singular and plural forms
of such terms.
(e) The Borrower shall not be required to perform, nor shall it be required to guarantee the performance of, any of
the  affirmative  covenants  set  forth  in  Section  6  that  apply  to  any  of  its  Significant  Subsidiaries  nor  shall  any  of  the
Borrower’s Significant Subsidiaries be required to perform, nor shall any of such Significant Subsidiaries be required to
guarantee the performance of, any of the Borrower’s affirmative covenants set forth in Section 6 or any of the affirmative
covenants set forth in Section 6 that apply to any other Significant Subsidiary; provided, that nothing in this Section 1.2(e)
shall  prevent  the  occurrence  of  a  Default  or  an  Event  of  Default  arising  out  of  the  Borrower’s  failure  to  cause  any
Significant Subsidiary to comply with the provisions of this Agreement applicable to such Significant Subsidiary.
(f)
Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  contained  herein,  all  terms  of  an  accounting  or  financial  nature  used
herein shall be construed, and all computations of amounts and ratios referred to herein shall be made, without giving
effect  to  any  change  in  accounting  for  leases  pursuant  to  GAAP  resulting  from  the  implementation  of  Financial
Accounting Standards Board ASU No. 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842), to the extent such adoption would require treating
any lease (or similar arrangement conveying the right to use) as a capital lease where such lease (or similar arrangement)
would not have been required to be so treated under GAAP as in effect on December 31, 2015.
1.2
Divisions. For all purposes under the Loan Documents, in connection with any division or plan of division
under Delaware law (or any comparable event under a different jurisdiction’s laws): (a) if any asset, right, obligation or
liability of any Person becomes the asset, right, obligation or liability of a different Person, then it shall be deemed to have
been transferred from the original Person to the subsequent Person, and (b) if any new Person comes into existence, such new
Person shall be deemed to have been organized and acquired on the first date of its existence by the holders of its Capital
Stock at such time.
1.3
Interest Rates; LIBORBenchmark Notification. The interest rate on Eurodollar Loans is determined by
reference to the Eurodollar Base Rate, which is derived from the London interbank offered rate (“LIBOR”). LIBOR
is intended to represent the rate at which contributing banks may obtain short-term borrowings from each other in
the London interbank market. On March 5, 2021, the FCA publicly announced that: (a) immediately after December
31, 2021, publication of all seven euro LIBOR settings, all seven Swiss Franc LIBOR settings, the spot next, 1-week, 2-
month and 12-month Japanese Yen LIBOR settings, the overnight, 1-week, 2-month and 12-month British Pound
Sterling LIBOR settings, and the 1-week and 2-month U.S. Dollar LIBOR settings will permanently cease;
immediately after June 30, 2023, publication of the overnight and 12-month U.S. Dollar LIBOR settings will
permanently cease; immediately after December 31, 2021, the 1-month, 3-month and 6-month Japanese Yen LIBOR
settings and the 1-month, 3-month and 6-month British Pound Sterling LIBOR settings will cease to be provided or,
subject to consultation
31    
    

by the FCA, be provided on a changed methodology (or “synthetic”) basis and no longer be representative of the
underlying market and economic reality they are intended to measure and that representativeness will not be
restored; and immediately after June 30, 2023, the 1-month, 3- month and 6-month U.S. Dollar LIBOR settings will
cease to be provided or, subject to the FCA’s consideration of the case, be provided on a synthetic basis and no longer
be representative of the underlying market and economic reality they are intended to measure and that
representativeness will not be restored. There is no assurance that dates announced by the FCA will not change or
that the administrator of LIBOR and/or regulators will not take further action that could impact the availability,
composition, or characteristics of LIBOR or the currencies and/or tenors for which LIBOR is published. Each party
to this agreement should consult its own advisors to stay informed of any such developments. Public and private
sector industry initiatives are currently underway to identify new or alternative reference rates to be used in place of
LIBORa Loan denominated in Dollars may be derived from an interest rate benchmark that may be discontinued or
is, or may in the future become, the subject of regulatory reform. Upon the occurrence of a Benchmark Transition Event
or an Early Opt-In Election, Section 2.13(b) and 2.13(cb) provide theprovides a mechanism for determining an
alternative rate of interest. The Administrative Agent will promptly notify the Borrower, pursuant to Section 2.13(e), of
any change to the reference rate upon which the interest rate on Eurodollar Loans is based. However, the
Administrative Agent does not warrant or accept any responsibility for, and shall not have any liability with respect to, the
administration, submission, performance or any other matter related to LIBOR or other rates in the definition of
“Eurodollar Base Rate”any interest rate used in this Agreement, or with respect to any alternative or successor rate
thereto, or replacement rate thereof (including, without limitation, (i) any such alternative, successor or replacement
rate implemented pursuant to Section 2.13(b) or (c), whether upon the occurrence of a Benchmark Transition Event
or an Early Opt-In Election, and (ii) the implementation of any Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes
pursuant to Section 2.13(d)),, including without limitation, whether the composition or characteristics of any such
alternative, successor or replacement reference rate will be similar to, or produce the same value or economic equivalence of,
the Eurodollar Base Rateexisting interest rate being replaced or have the same volume or liquidity as did the London
interbank offeredany existing interest rate prior to its discontinuance or unavailability. The Administrative Agent and its
affiliates and/or other related entities may engage in transactions that affect the calculation of any interest rate used
in this Agreement or any alternative, successor or alternative rate (including any Benchmark Replacement) and/or
any relevant adjustments thereto, in each case, in a manner adverse to the Borrower. The Administrative Agent may
select information sources or services in its reasonable discretion to ascertain any interest rate used in this
Agreement, any component thereof, or rates referenced in the definition thereof, in each case pursuant to the terms of
this Agreement, and shall have no liability to the Borrower, any Lender or any other person or entity for damages of
any kind, including direct or indirect, special, punitive, incidental or consequential damages, costs, losses or expenses
(whether in tort, contract or otherwise and whether at law or in equity), for any error or calculation of any such rate
(or component thereof) provided by any such information source or service.
32    
    

Section 12.
AMOUNT AND TERMS OF THE TERM LOANS
1.1
Loans.
(a) Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, each 364-Day Tranche Lender (severally and not jointly)
agrees to make a term loan (the “364-Day Tranche Loans”) to the Borrower in Dollars on the Effective Date in an amount
equal to such 364-Day Tranche Lender’s 364-Day Tranche Commitment. Loans under the 364-Day Tranche may be ABR
Loans or Eurodollar Loans, as further provided herein. 364-Day Tranche Loans borrowed under this Section 2.1(a) and paid
or prepaid may not be reborrowed.
(a)
[Reserved].
(b) Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, each 18-Month Tranche Lender (severally and not jointly)
agrees to make a term loan (the “18-Month Tranche Loans”) to the Borrower in Dollars on the Effective Date in an
aggregate amount equal to the amount of such 18-Month Tranche Lender’s 18-Month Tranche Commitment. Loans under
the 18-Month Tranche may be ABR Loans or Eurodollar RateTerm Benchmark Loans, as further provided herein. 18-
Month Tranche Loans borrowed under this Section 2.1(b)2.1(b) and paid or prepaid may not be reborrowed. As of the
Amendment No. 1 Effective Date, a portion of the 18-Month Tranche Loans in an aggregate amount of $1,315,735,897.44
(the “18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A)”) shall have an 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date of October 1, 2022 and a
portion of the 18-Month Tranche Loans in an aggregate amount of $184,264,102.56 (the “18-Month Tranche Loans
(Tranche B)”) shall have an 18-Month Tranche Maturity Date of January 1, 2022. As of the Amendment No. 2 Effective
Date, the 18-Month  Tranche  Loans (Tranche  B) shall have an 18-Month  Tranche  Maturity  Date of October  1,
2022. As of the Amendment No. 3 Effective Date, all 18-Month Tranche Loans shall have an 18-Month Tranche
Maturity Date of January 1, 2023.
1.2
Procedures  for  Borrowing.  The  Borrower  may  borrow  the  Loans  on  the  Effective  Date  (so  long  as  the
Effective Date is a Business Day), provided that the Borrower shall give the Administrative Agent irrevocable notice (which
notice must be received by the Administrative Agent (a) prior to 12:00 Noon, New York City time, three Business Days prior
to the Effective Date, in the case of EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans, or (b) prior to 1:00 P.M., New York City time, one
Business Day prior to the Effective Date, in the case of ABR Loans) specifying (i) the amount and Type of Loans to be
borrowed on the Effective Date and (ii) in the case of EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans, the respective amounts of each
such Type of Loan and the respective lengths of the initial Interest Period therefor. Upon receipt of any such notice from the
Borrower, the Administrative Agent shall promptly notify each Lender thereof. Each Lender will make the amount of its pro
rata share of each borrowing available to the Administrative Agent for the account of the Borrower at the Funding Office
prior to 10:00 A.M., New York City time, on the Effective Date requested by the Borrower in funds immediately available to
the  Administrative  Agent.  Such  borrowing  will  then  be  made  available  to  the  Borrower  by  the  Administrative  Agent
crediting the account of the Borrower on the books of such office with the aggregate of the amounts made available to the
Administrative Agent by the Lenders and in like funds as received by the Administrative Agent
33    
    

1.3
[Reserved].
1.4
[Reserved].
1.5
[Reserved].
1.6
Fees, Etc.
(a) The  Borrower  agrees  to  pay  to  the  Administrative  Agent,  for  the  account  of  each  Lender  (other  than  a
Defaulting Lender to the extent provided in Section 2.20), any fees payable in the amounts and at the times separately
agreed upon between the Borrower and the Lenders.
(b) The Borrower agrees to pay to the Administrative Agent the fees in the amounts and on the dates as set forth
in  any  written,  duly  executed  fee  agreements  with  the  Administrative  Agent  and  to  perform  any  other  obligations
contained therein.
(c) On JuneApril 1,  2022,  the  Borrower  agrees  to  pay  to  the  Administrative  Agent,  for  the  account  of  each
Lender that holds any 18-Month Tranche Loans (Tranche A) outstanding on such date, a fee equal to 0.075% of the
principal amount of such Loans.
1.7
Termination of Commitments. The Commitments shall automatically terminate in full on the Effective Date
after the proceeds of the Loans have been made available to the Borrower.
1.8
Prepayments.
(a) Optional. The Borrower may at any time and from time to time prepay the Loans, in whole or in part, without
premium or penalty, upon irrevocable notice delivered to the Administrative Agent no later than 12:00 Noon, New York
City time, three Business Days prior thereto, in the case of EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans, and no later than 2:00
p.m., New York City time, one Business Day prior thereto, in the case of ABR Loans, which notice shall specify the date
and amount of prepayment and whether the prepayment is of EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans or ABR Loans. Upon
receipt of any such notice the Administrative Agent shall promptly notify each relevant Lender thereof. If any such notice
is given, the amount specified in such notice shall be due and payable on the date specified therein, together with accrued
interest to such date on the amount prepaid. Partial prepayments of Loans shall be in an aggregate principal amount of
$1,000,000 or a whole multiple of $500,000 in excess thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any notice of prepayment
delivered in connection with any refinancing of all of the Loans with the proceeds of such refinancing or of any other
incurrence of Indebtedness or the occurrence of some other identifiable event or condition, may be, if expressly so stated
to be, contingent upon the consummation of such refinancing or incurrence or occurrence of such other identifiable event
or  condition  and  may  be  revoked  by  the  Borrower,  subject  to  compliance  with  the  obligations  under  Section  2.17  in
connection with any such revocation, in the event such contingency is not met. Each prepayment of Loans under this
clause (a) shall be applied to the prepayment in full of the aggregate principal amount and any accrued but unpaid
interest with respect to the 364-Day Tranche Loans before being applied to prepay the aggregate principal
34    
    

amount  and  any  accrued  but  unpaid  interest  with  respect  to  the  18-Month  Tranche  Loans  and  shall  be
accompanied by accrued interest and fees on the amount prepaid to the date fixed for prepayment, plus, in the case of any
EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans that are prepaid on any day other than the last day of the Interest Period applicable
to it, the Borrower shall pay any amounts due to the Lenders as a result thereof pursuant to Section 2.17.
(b) Mandatory. So long as (i) the commitments in respect of each of the Bridge Facilities have been terminated
without the funding of any loans thereunder or (ii) the loans and any accrued interest, fees and other obligations under the
Bridge Facilities have been paid in full, in the event that the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries receives any Net Cash
Proceeds arising from any Debt Issuance, then the Borrower shall prepay the Loans hereunder in an amount equal to 100%
of such Net Cash Proceeds not later than five (5) Business Days following the receipt by the Borrower or such Subsidiary
of such Net Cash Proceeds. The Borrower shall promptly (and not later than five (5) Business Days following receipt
thereof) notify the Administrative Agent of the receipt by the Borrower or any Subsidiary, as applicable, of such Net Cash
Proceeds  and  such  notice  shall  be  accompanied  by  a  reasonably  detailed  calculation  of  the  Net  Cash  Proceeds.  Each
prepayment  of  Loans  under  this  clause  (b)  shall  be applied  to  the  prepayment  in  full  of  the  aggregate  principal
amount and any accrued but unpaid interest with respect to the 364-Day Tranche Loans before being applied to
prepay the aggregate principal amount and any accrued but unpaid interest with respect to the 18-Month Tranche
Loans and shall be accompanied by accrued interest and fees on the amount prepaid to the date fixed for prepayment,
plus, in the case of any EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans that are prepaid on any day other than the last day of the
Interest Period applicable to it, the Borrower shall pay any amounts due to the Lenders as a result thereof pursuant to
Section 2.17.
1.9
Conversion and Continuation Options.
(a) The Borrower may elect from time to time to convert EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans to ABR Loans by
giving the Administrative Agent prior irrevocable notice of such election no later than 12:00 Noon, New York City time,
on the Business  Day preceding  the proposed  conversion  date, provided that any such conversion  of EurodollarTerm
Benchmark Loans may only be made on the last day of an Interest Period with respect thereto. The Borrower may elect
from time to time to convert ABR Loans to EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans by giving the Administrative Agent
prior  irrevocable  notice  of  such  election  no  later  than  12:00  Noon,  New  York  City  time,  on  the  third  Business  Day
preceding  the  proposed  conversion  date  (which  notice  shall  specify  the  length  of  the  initial  Interest  Period  therefor),
provided that no ABR Loan may be converted into a EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loan when any Event of Default has
occurred  and  is  continuing  and  the  Required  Lenders  have  determined  in  their  sole  discretion  not  to  permit  such
conversions. Upon receipt of any such notice the Administrative Agent shall promptly notify each relevant Lender thereof.
(b) Any EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loan may be continued as such upon the expiration of the then current
Interest Period with respect thereto by the Borrower giving irrevocable notice to the Administrative Agent, in accordance
with  the  applicable  provisions  of  the  defined  term  “Interest  Period”,  of  the  length  of  the  next  Interest  Period  to  be
applicable to such Loans,
35    
    

provided that no EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loan may be continued as such when any Event of Default has occurred
and is continuing and the Required Lenders have determined in their sole discretion not to permit such continuations;
provided, further, that if the Borrower shall fail to give any required notice as described above in this paragraph, subject to
the  preceding  proviso,  such  Loans  shall  be  automatically  continued  as EurodollarTerm  Benchmark Loans  with  an
Interest Period of one month on the last day of such then expiring Interest Period. Upon receipt of any such notice the
Administrative Agent shall promptly notify each relevant Lender thereof.
1.10
Limitations  on EurodollarTerm  Benchmark Tranches .  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  in  this
Agreement,  all  borrowings,  conversions  and  continuations  of EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans  and  all  selections  of
Interest Periods shall be in such amounts and be made pursuant to such elections so that (a) after giving effect thereto, the
aggregate  principal  amount  of  the EurodollarTerm  Benchmark Loans  comprising  each EurodollarTerm  Benchmark
Tranche  shall  be  equal  to  $1,000,000  or  a  whole  multiple  of  $500,000  in  excess  thereof  and  (b)  no  more  than  5
EurodollarTerm Benchmark Tranches shall be outstanding at any one time.
1.11
Interest Rates and Payment Dates.
(a) Each EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loan shall bear interest for each day during each Interest Period with
respect thereto at a rate per annum equal to the Eurodollar RateTerm Benchmark determined for such day plus the
Applicable Margin.
(b) Each ABR Loan shall bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the ABR plus the Applicable Margin.
(c) (i) If all or a portion of the principal amount of the Loans shall not be paid when due (whether at the stated
maturity, by acceleration or otherwise), such overdue amount shall bear interest at a default rate per annum equal to the
rate that would otherwise be applicable thereto pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this Section plus 2% and (ii) if all
or a portion of any interest payable on the Loans or any other fee payable in connection herewith (excluding any expenses
or other indemnity) shall not be paid when due (whether at the stated maturity, by acceleration or otherwise), such overdue
amount shall bear interest at a default rate per annum equal to the rate then applicable to ABR Loans plus 2%, in each
case, with respect to clauses (i) and (ii) above, from the date of such non-payment until such amount is paid in full (as well
after as before judgment).
(d) Interest shall be payable in arrears on each Interest Payment Date, provided that interest accruing pursuant to
Section 2.11(c) shall be payable from time to time on demand.
(e) The amount of each interest payment received by the Administrative Agent under the applicable Senior Bond
shall be deemed to be a payment of interest payable by the Borrower hereunder and shall reduce, dollar-for-dollar, the
amount of interest then owing by the Borrower hereunder.
1.12
Computation of Interest and Fees.
36    
    

(a) Interest and fees payable pursuant hereto shall be calculated on the basis of a 360-day year for the actual days
elapsed, except that, with respect to ABR Loans the rate of interest on which is calculated on the basis of ABR, the interest
thereon shall be calculated on the basis of a 365- (or 366-, as the case may be) day year for the actual days elapsed. The
Administrative Agent shall as soon as practicable notify the Borrower and the relevant Lenders of each determination of a
Eurodollar RateTerm Benchmark. Any change in the interest rate on a Loan resulting from a change in the ABR or the
Eurocurrency Reserve RequirementsTerm Benchmark shall become effective as of the opening of business on the day
on which such change becomes effective. The Administrative Agent shall as soon as practicable notify the Borrower and
the relevant Lenders of the effective date and the amount of each such change in interest rate.
(b) Each  determination  of  an  interest  rate  by  the  Administrative  Agent  pursuant  to  any  provision  of  this
Agreement shall constitute prima facie evidence of such amounts. The Administrative Agent shall, at the request of the
Borrower  or  any  Lender,  deliver  to  the  Borrower  or  such  Lender  a  statement  showing  the  quotations  used  by  the
Administrative Agent in determining any interest rate pursuant to Section 2.11(a).
1.13
Inability to Determine Interest Rate.
(a) Subject to clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) and (g) of this Section 2.13, if prior to the commencement of any
Interest Period for a Eurodollar Loan:
Section 13.
the Administrative Agent determines (which determination shall be conclusive absent manifest error) (A) prior to the
commencement of any Interest Period for a Term Benchmark Borrowing, that adequate and reasonable means do not exist for
ascertaining the EurodollarAdjusted Term SOFR Rate or the Eurodollar BaseTerm SOFR Rate, as applicable (including
because the Eurodollar ScreenTerm SOFR Reference Rate is not available or published on a current basis), for such Interest
Period, provided that no Benchmark Transition Event shall have occurred at such time or (B) at any time, that adequate and
reasonable means do not exist for ascertaining the applicable Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR, Daily Simple SOFR; or
Section 14.
the Administrative Agent is advised by the Required Lenders that the Eurodollar Rate or the Eurodollar Base
Rate, as applicable,(A) prior to the commencement of any Interest Period for a Term Benchmark Borrowing, the Adjusted
Term SOFR Rate for such Interest Period will not adequately and fairly reflect the cost to such Lenders (or Lender) of making or
maintaining their Loans (or its Loan) included in the applicable borrowingsuch Borrowing for such Interest Period or (B) at any
time, Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR will not adequately and fairly reflect the cost to such Lenders (or Lender) of making or
maintaining their Loans (or its Loan) included in such Borrowing;
then the Administrative Agent shall give notice thereof to the Borrower and the Lenders by telephone, telecopy or electronic mail as
promptly as practicable thereafter and, until the Administrative Agent notifies the Borrower and the Lenders that the circumstances
giving rise to such notice no longer exist, (A) any notice from the Borrower to the Administrative Agent that requests the conversion
of any Loans to, or continuation of any Loans as, a Eurodollar borrowing shall be ineffectiveTerm Benchmark Borrowing shall
instead be deemed to request the conversion of any Loans to, or continuation
37    
    

of any Loans as, (x) a RFR Borrowing so long as the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is not also the subject of Section 2.13(a)(i)
or (ii) above or (y) an ABR Borrowing if the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR also is the subject of Section 2.13(a)(i) or (ii) above
and (B) if any borrowing notice delivered pursuant to Section 2.2 requests a borrowing of EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans,
such borrowing shall be made as an ABR Loan(x) a RFR Loan so long as the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is not also the
subject of Section 2.13(a)(i) or (ii) above or (y) an ABR Borrowing if the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR also is the subject of
Section 2.13(a)(i) or (ii) above; provided that if the circumstances giving rise to such notice affect only one Type of borrowings,
then the other Type of borrowings shall be permitted.
(a) Replacing USD LIBOR. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in any other Loan Document, on
March 5, 2021 the Financial Conduct Authority (“FCA”), the regulatory supervisor of the Eurodollar Base Rate’s
administrator  (“IBA”),  announced  in  a  public  statement  the  future  cessation  or  loss  of  representativeness  of
overnight/Spot Next, 1-week, 1-month, 3-month, 6-month and 12-month Eurodollar Base Rate tenor settings. On
the  earlier  of  (i)  the  date  that  all  Available  Tenors  of  the  Eurodollar  Base  Rate  have  either  permanently  or
indefinitely ceased to be provided by IBA or have been announced by the FCA pursuant to public statement or
publication  of  information  to  be  no  longer  representative  and  (ii)  the  Early  Opt-in  Effective  Date,  if  the  then-
current Benchmark is the Eurodollar Base Rate, the Benchmark (and any Swap Agreement shall be deemed not to
be  a  “Loan  Document”  for  purposes  of  this  Section  2.13),  if  a  Benchmark  Transition  Event  and  its  related
Benchmark Replacement Date have occurred prior to the Reference Time in respect of any setting of the then-
current  Benchmark,  then  (x)  if  a  Benchmark  Replacement  is  determined  in  accordance  with  clause  (1)  of  the
definition  of  “Benchmark  Replacement”  for  such  Benchmark  Replacement  Date,  such  Benchmark Replacement
will replace such Benchmark for all purposes hereunder and under any Loan Document in respect of any setting of such
Benchmark on such day and allsetting and subsequent Benchmark settings without any amendment to, or further action
or consent of any other party to, this Agreement or any other Loan Document. If the and (y) if a Benchmark Replacement
is Daily Simple SOFR, all interest payments will be payable on a monthly basis.
(c) determined in accordance with clause (2) of Replacing Future Benchmarks. Upon the occurrence of a Benchmark
Transition Event, the the definition of “Benchmark Replacement” for such Benchmark Replacement Date, such Benchmark
Replacement will replace the then-currentsuch Benchmark for all purposes hereunder and under any Loan Document in respect of
any Benchmark setting at or after 5:00 p.m. (New York City time) on the fifth (5th) Business Day after the date notice of such
Benchmark Replacement is provided to the Lenders without any amendment to, or further action or consent of any other party to,
this Agreement or any other Loan Document so long as the Administrative Agent has not received, by such time, written notice of
objection to such Benchmark Replacement from Lenders comprising the Required Lenders. Upon the occurrence of a Benchmark
Transition Event, the Borrower may revoke any request for a borrowing of, conversion to or continuation of Loans to be
made,  converted  or  continued  that  would  bear  interest  by  reference  to  such  Benchmark  until  the  Borrower’s  receipt  of
notice from the Administrative Agent that a Benchmark Replacement has replaced such Benchmark, and, failing that, the
Borrower will be deemed to have converted any such request into a request for a borrowing of or conversion to ABR Loans.
During
38    
    

the period referenced in the foregoing sentence, the component of ABR based upon the Benchmark will not be used in any
determination of ABR. of each affected Class.
(b)
(d) Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes. In connection with the implementation and administration
of  a  Benchmark  Replacement,Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  herein  or  in  any  other  Loan  Document, the
Administrative  Agent  will  have  the  right  to  make  Benchmark  Replacement  Conforming  Changes  from  time  to  time  and,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in any other Loan Document, any amendments implementing such Benchmark
Replacement Conforming Changes will become effective without any further action or consent of any other party to this Agreement
or any other Loan Document.
(c)
(e) Notices;  Standards  for  Decisions  and  Determinations. The  Administrative  Agent  will  promptly  notify  the
Borrower and the Lenders of (i) (i)any occurrence of a Benchmark Transition Event, (ii)the implementation of any Benchmark
Replacement and (ii), (iii)the effectiveness of any Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes. For the avoidance of doubt, any
notice required to be delivered by the Administrative Agent as set forth in this Section 2.13 may be provided, at the option of
the Administrative Agent (in its sole discretion), in one or more notices and may be delivered together with, or as part of any
amendment  which  implements  any  Benchmark  Replacement  or  Benchmark  Replacement  Conforming  Changes,  (iv)the
removal or reinstatement of any tenor of a Benchmark pursuant to clause (f) below and (v)the commencement or conclusion
of any Benchmark Unavailability Period. Any determination, decision or election that may be made by the Administrative Agent
or, if applicable, any Lender (or group of Lenders) pursuant to this Section 2.13, including any determination with respect to a tenor,
rate or adjustment or of the occurrence or non-occurrence of an event, circumstance or date and any decision to take or refrain from
taking  any  action or any selection ,  will  be  conclusive  and  binding  absent  manifest  error  and  may  be  made  in  its  or  their  sole
discretion and without consent from any other party heretoto this Agreement or any other Loan Document, except, in each case,
as expressly required pursuant to this Section 2.13.
(d)
(f) Unavailability of Tenor of Benchmark. AtNotwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in any other
Loan Document, at any time (including in connection with the implementation of a Benchmark Replacement), (i) (i) if the then-
current Benchmark is a term rate (including the Term SOFR or Eurodollar Base Rate)Rate) and either (A) any tenor for such
Benchmark is not displayed on a screen or other information service that publishes such rate from time to time as selected by
the  Administrative  Agent  in  its  reasonable  discretion  or  (B)  the  regulatory  supervisor  for  the  administrator  of  such
Benchmark has provided a public statement or publication of information announcing that any tenor for such Benchmark is
or  will  be  no  longer  representative,  then  the  Administrative  Agent  may remove  any  tenor  of  suchmodify  the  definition  of
“Interest Period” for any Benchmark that issettings at or after such time to remove such unavailable or non-representative
fortenor and (ii) if a tenor that was removed pursuant to clause (i) above either (A)is subsequently displayed on a screen or
information service for a Benchmark (including a Benchmark Replacement) settings and (ii)or (B)is not, or is no longer, subject
to an announcement that it is or will no longer be representative for a Benchmark (including a Benchmark Replacement),
then the Administrative Agent may modify the definition of “Interest Period” for all Benchmark settings at or after such time
to reinstate any such previously removed tenor for Benchmark (including Benchmark Replacement) settings.
39    
    

(g) Disclaimer. The Administrative Agent does not warrant or accept any responsibility for, and shall not have any
liability with respect to (i) the administration, submission or any other matter related to the London interbank offered rate
or  other  rates  in  the  definition  of  “Eurodollar  Rate”  or  “Eurodollar  Base  Rate”  or  with  respect  to  any  alternative  or
successor rate thereto, or replacement rate thereof (including, without limitation any Benchmark Replacement implemented
hereunder), (ii) the composition or characteristics of any Benchmark Replacement, including whether it is similar to, or
produces the same value or economic equivalence to the Eurodollar Base Rate (or any other Benchmark) or have the same
volume or liquidity as did the Eurodollar Base Rate (or any other Benchmark), (iii) any actions or use of its discretion or
other  decisions  or  determinations  made  with  respect  to  any  matters  covered  by  this  Section  2.13  including,  without
limitation, whether or not a Benchmark Transition Event has occurred, the removal or lack thereof of unavailable or non-
representative tenors, the implementation or lack thereof of any Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes, the delivery
or non-delivery of any notices required by clause (e) above or otherwise in accordance herewith, and (iv) the effect of any of
the foregoing provisions of this Section 2.13.
(e) Upon the Borrower’s receipt of notice of the commencement of a Benchmark Unavailability Period, the
Borrower may revoke any request for a Term Benchmark Borrowing or conversion to or continuation of Term
Benchmark Loans to be made, converted or continued during any Benchmark Unavailability Period and, failing
that, the Borrower will be deemed to have converted any request for a Term Benchmark Borrowing into a request
for a Borrowing of or conversion to (A) an RFR Borrowing so long as the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is not the
subject of a Benchmark Transition  Event or (B) an ABR Borrowing if the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is the
subject of a Benchmark Transition Event. During any Benchmark Unavailability Period or at any time that a tenor
for the then-current Benchmark is not an Available Tenor, the component of ABR based upon the then-current
Benchmark  or  such  tenor  for  such  Benchmark,  as  applicable,  will  not  be  used  in  any  determination  of  ABR.
Furthermore, if any Term Benchmark Loan is outstanding on the date of the Borrower’s receipt of notice of the
commencement of a Benchmark Unavailability Period with respect to a Relevant Rate applicable to such Term
Benchmark Loan or RFR Loan, then until such time as a Benchmark Replacement is implemented pursuant to this
Section 2.13, any Term Benchmark Loan shall on the last day of the Interest Period applicable to such Loan (or the
next succeeding Business Day if such day is not a Business Day), be converted by the Administrative Agent to, and
shall  constitute,  (x)  an  RFR  Borrowing  so  long  as  the  Adjusted  Daily  Simple  SOFR  is  not  the  subject  of  a
Benchmark  Transition  Event  or  (y)  an  ABR  Loan  if  the  Adjusted  Daily  Simple  SOFR  is  the  subject  of  a
Benchmark Transition Event, on such day.
1.2
Pro Rata Treatment and Payments; Notes.
(a) [Reserved].
(b) Each payment (including each prepayment) by the Borrower on account of principal of and interest on the
Loans (other than, for the avoidance of doubt, payment in full of all principal and interest due with respect to the 18-
Month Tranche Loans (Tranche B) on or prior to the 18-Month Tranche
40    
    

Maturity Date for such Loans) shall be made pro rata (i) in the case of the 364-Day Tranche Loans, according to the
respective  outstanding  principal  amounts  of  the  364-Day  Tranche  Loans  then  held  by  the  364-Day  Tranche
Lenders and (ii) in the case of the 18-Month Tranche Loans, according to the respective outstanding principal amounts of
the 18-Month Tranche Loans then held by the 18-Month Tranche Lenders.
(c) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, all payments (including prepayments) to be made by the
Borrower  hereunder,  whether  on  account  of  principal,  interest,  fees  or  otherwise,  shall  be  made  without  setoff  or
counterclaim and shall be made prior to 4:00 P.M., New York City time, on the due date thereof to the Administrative
Agent, for the account of the Lenders, as applicable, at the Funding Office, in Dollars and in immediately available funds.
The Administrative Agent shall distribute such payments to the Lenders promptly upon receipt in like funds as received. If
any payment hereunder (other than payments on the EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans) becomes due and payable on a
day other than a Business Day, such payment shall be extended to the next succeeding Business Day. If any payment on a
EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loan becomes due and payable on a day other than a Business Day, the maturity thereof
shall  be  extended  to  the  next  succeeding  Business  Day  unless  the  result  of  such  extension  would  be  to  extend  such
payment into another calendar month, in which event such payment shall be made on the immediately preceding Business
Day. In the case of any extension of any payment of principal pursuant to the preceding two sentences, interest thereon
shall be payable at the then applicable rate during such extension.
(d) Unless the Administrative Agent shall have been notified in writing by any Lender prior to a borrowing that
such Lender will not make the amount that would constitute its share of such borrowing available to the Administrative
Agent, the Administrative Agent may assume that such Lender is making such amount available to the Administrative
Agent,  and  the  Administrative  Agent  may,  in  reliance  upon  such  assumption,  make  available  to  the  Borrower  a
corresponding amount. If such amount is not made available to the Administrative Agent by the required time on the
Effective Date, such Lender shall pay to the Administrative Agent, on demand, such amount with interest thereon, at a rate
equal to the greater of (i) the Federal Funds EffectiveNYFRB Rate and (ii) a rate determined by the Administrative
Agent in accordance with banking industry rules on interbank compensation, for the period until such Lender makes such
amount immediately available to the Administrative Agent. A certificate of the Administrative Agent submitted to any
Lender with respect to any amounts owing under this paragraph shall be conclusive in the absence of manifest error. If
such Lender’s share of such borrowing is not made available to the Administrative Agent by such Lender within three
Business  Days  after  the  Effective  Date,  the  Administrative  Agent  shall  also  be  entitled  to  recover  such  amount  with
interest thereon at the rate per annum applicable to ABR Loans from the Borrower within 30 days after written demand
therefor.
(e) Unless the Administrative Agent shall have been notified in writing by the Borrower prior to the date of any
payment due to be made by the Borrower hereunder that the Borrower will not make such payment to the Administrative
Agent, the Administrative Agent may assume that the Borrower is making such payment, and the Administrative Agent
may, but shall not be
41    
    

required  to,  in  reliance  upon  such  assumption,  make  available  to  the  Lenders  their  respective pro  rata shares  of  a
corresponding amount. If such payment is not made to the Administrative Agent by the Borrower within three Business
Days after such due date, the Administrative Agent shall be entitled to recover, on demand, from each Lender to which
any amount which was made available pursuant to the preceding sentence, such amount with interest thereon at the rate
per annum equal to the daily average Federal Funds EffectiveNYFRB Rate. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the
rights of the Administrative Agent or any Lender against the Borrower.
(f)
The Borrower agrees that, upon the request to the Administrative Agent by any Lender, the Borrower will
promptly execute and deliver to such Lender a promissory note (a “Note”) of the Borrower evidencing any Loans (or any
portion thereof) of such Lender, substantially in the form of Exhibit H, with appropriate insertions as to date and principal
amount; provided, that delivery of Notes shall not be a condition precedent to the occurrence of the Effective Date or the
making of the Loans on the Effective Date.
(g) If any Lender shall fail to make any payment required to be made by it pursuant to Section 2.14(d), then the
Administrative Agent may, in its discretion and notwithstanding any contrary provision hereof, (i) apply any amounts
thereafter  received  by  the  Administrative  Agent  hereunder  for  the  account  of  such  Lender  for  the  benefit  of  the
Administrative Agent to satisfy such Lender’s obligations to the Administrative Agent, as the case may be, under such
Section until all such unsatisfied obligations are fully paid, and/or (ii) so long as such Lender is a Defaulting Lender, hold
any such amounts in a segregated account as cash collateral for, and application to, any future funding obligations of such
Lender  under  any  such  Section,  in  the  case  of  each  of  clauses  (i)  and  (ii)  above,  in  any  order  as  determined  by  the
Administrative Agent in its discretion.
1.3
Change of Law.
(a) If a Change of Law shall:
Section 15.
subject any Recipient to any Taxes (other than (A) Indemnified Taxes, (B) Taxes described in clauses (b) through (d)
of the definition of Excluded Taxes and (C) Connection Income Taxes) on its Loans, or other obligations, or its deposits, reserves,
other liabilities or capital attributable thereto;
Section  16.
impose,  modify  or  hold  applicable  any  reserve,  special  deposit,  compulsory  loan,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance
Corporation  insurance  charge  or  other  similar  insurance  charge  or  similar  requirement  against  assets  held  by,  deposits  or  other
liabilities in or for the account of, advances, loans or other extensions of credit by, or any other acquisition of funds by, any Lender
that is not otherwise included in the determination of the EurodollarTerm Benchmark Rate, which requirements are generally
applicable to advances, loans and other extensions of credit made by such Lender; or
Section 17.
impose on any Lender any other condition that is generally applicable to loans made by such Lender or participations
therein;
and the result of any of the foregoing is to increase the cost to such Lender or such other Recipient, by an amount that such Lender
or such other Recipient deems to be material,
42    
    

of making, converting into, continuing or maintaining the Loans, or to reduce any amount receivable hereunder in respect thereof,
then, in any such case, the Borrower shall promptly pay such Lender or such other Recipient, within ten Business Days after its
demand, any additional amounts necessary to compensate such Lender or such other Recipient for such increased cost or reduced
amount receivable. If any Lender or other Recipient becomes entitled to claim any additional amounts pursuant to this paragraph, it
shall promptly notify the Borrower (with a copy to the Administrative Agent) of the event by reason of which it has become so
entitled; provided, however, that no Lender or other Recipient shall be entitled to demand such compensation more than 90 days
following (x) the last day of the Interest Period in respect of which such demand is made or (y) the repayment of the Loan in respect
of which such demand is made. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, no Lender shall demand compensation pursuant to this
Section 2.15 if it shall not at the time be the general policy or practice of such Lender to demand such compensation from similarly
situated borrowers (to the extent that such Lender has the right to do so under its credit facilities with similarly situated borrowers).
(a) If any Lender shall have determined that a Change of Law regarding capital or liquidity requirements shall
have the effect of reducing the rate of return on such Lender’s capital or the capital of any corporation controlling such
Lender as a consequence of its obligations hereunder to a level below that which such Lender or such corporation could
have achieved but for such Change of Law (taking into consideration such Lender’s or such corporation’s policies with
respect to capital adequacy or liquidity) by an amount deemed by such Lender to be material, then from time to time, after
submission by such Lender to the Borrower (with a copy to the Administrative Agent) of a written request therefor, the
Borrower  shall  pay  to  such  Lender  such  additional  amount  or  amounts  as  will  compensate  such  Lender  or  such
corporation for such reduction.
(b) A certificate as to any additional amounts payable pursuant to this Section 2.15 submitted by any Lender or
any other Recipient to the Borrower (with a copy to the Administrative Agent) shall constitute prima facie evidence of
such costs or amounts. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 2.15, the Borrower shall not be required to
compensate a Lender or any other Recipient pursuant to this Section 2.15 for any amounts incurred more than six months
prior to the date that such Lender or such other Recipient notifies the Borrower of such Lender’s or such other Recipient’s
intention to claim compensation therefor; provided that, if the circumstances giving rise to such claim have a retroactive
effect, then such six-month period shall be extended to include the period of such retroactive effect not to exceed twelve
months. The obligations of the Borrower pursuant to this Section 2.15 shall survive for 90 days after the termination of
this Agreement and the payment of the Loans and all other amounts then due and payable hereunder.
1.2
Taxes.
(a) Any and all payments by or on account of any obligation of the Borrower under any Loan Document shall be
made without deduction or withholding for any Taxes, except as required by applicable laws. If any applicable laws (as
determined  in  the  good  faith  discretion  of  the  Borrower  or  Administrative  Agent  making  the  payment)  require  the
deduction  or  withholding  of  any  Tax  from  any  such  payment,  then  (A)  the  Borrower  or  Administrative  Agent,  as
applicable shall withhold or make such deductions as are determined by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent to be
required,
43    
    

(B) the Borrower or Administrative Agent, as applicable shall timely pay the full amount withheld or deducted to the
relevant Governmental Authority in accordance with such laws, and (C) to the extent that the withholding or deduction is
made on account of Indemnified Taxes, the sum payable by the Borrower shall be increased as necessary so that after any
required withholding or the making of all required deductions (including deductions applicable to additional sums payable
under this Section 2.16) the applicable Recipient receives an amount equal to the sum it would have received had no such
withholding or deduction been made.
(b) Without  limiting  the  provisions  of  subsection  (a)  above,  the  Borrower  shall  timely  pay  to  the  relevant
Governmental Authority in accordance with applicable law, or at the option of the Administrative Agent timely reimburse
it for the payment of, any Other Taxes.
(c) (i) The Borrower shall, and does hereby, indemnify each Recipient, and shall make payment in respect thereof
within 10 days after demand therefor, for the full amount of any Indemnified Taxes (including Indemnified Taxes imposed
or asserted on or attributable to amounts payable under this Section 2.16) payable or paid by such Recipient or required to
be withheld or deducted from a payment to such Recipient, and any reasonable expenses arising therefrom or with respect
thereto,  whether  or  not  such  Indemnified  Taxes  were  correctly  or  legally  imposed  or  asserted  by  the  relevant
Governmental Authority. A certificate as to the amount of such payment or liability delivered to the Borrower by a Lender
or another Recipient (with a copy to the Administrative Agent), or by the Administrative Agent on its own behalf or on
behalf of a Lender or another Recipient, shall be conclusive absent manifest error.
Section 18.
Each Lender shall, and does hereby, severally indemnify, and shall make payment in respect thereof within 10 days
after demand therefor, (x) the Administrative Agent against any Indemnified Taxes attributable to such Lender (but only to the extent
that  the  Borrower  has  not  already  indemnified  the  Administrative  Agent  for  such  Indemnified  Taxes  and  without  limiting  the
obligation of the Borrower to do so), (y) the Administrative Agent against any Taxes attributable to such Lender’s failure to comply
with the provisions of Section 10.6(c)(iii) relating to the maintenance of a Participant Register and (z) the Administrative Agent
against  any  Excluded  Taxes  attributable  to  such  Lender,  in  each  case,  that  are  payable  or  paid  by  the  Administrative  Agent  in
connection with any Loan Document, and any reasonable expenses arising therefrom or with respect thereto, whether or not such
Taxes were correctly or legally imposed or asserted by the relevant Governmental Authority. A certificate as to the amount of such
payment or liability delivered to any Lender by the Administrative Agent shall be conclusive absent manifest error. Each Lender
hereby authorizes the Administrative Agent to set off and apply any and all amounts at any time owing to such Lender, as the case
may be, under this Agreement or any other Loan Document against any amount due to the Administrative Agent under this clause
(ii).
(a) Upon request by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, as the case may be, after any payment of Taxes by
the Borrower or by the Administrative Agent to a Governmental Authority as provided in this Section 2.16, the Borrower
shall deliver to the Administrative Agent or the Administrative Agent shall deliver to the Borrower, as the case may be,
the original or a certified copy of a receipt issued by such Governmental Authority evidencing such payment, a copy of
any return required by laws to report such
44    
    

payment or other evidence of such payment reasonably satisfactory to the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, as the
case may be.
(b) (i) Any Lender that is entitled to an exemption from or reduction of withholding Tax with respect to payments
made  under  any  Loan  Document  shall  deliver  to  the  Borrower  and  the  Administrative  Agent,  at  the  time  or  times
reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, such properly completed and executed documentation
reasonably  requested  by  the  Borrower  or  the  Administrative  Agent  as  will  permit  such  payments  to  be  made  without
withholding or at a reduced rate of withholding. In addition, any Lender, if reasonably requested by the Borrower or the
Administrative Agent, shall deliver such other documentation prescribed by applicable law or reasonably requested by the
Borrower or the Administrative Agent as will enable the Borrower or the Administrative Agent to determine whether or
not such Lender is subject to backup withholding or information reporting requirements. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in the preceding two sentences, the completion, execution and submission of such documentation (other than
such documentation set forth in Sections 2.16(e)(ii)(A), (ii)(B) and (ii)(D) below) shall not be required if in the Lender’s
reasonable judgment such completion, execution or submission would subject such Lender to any material unreimbursed
cost or expense or would materially prejudice the legal or commercial position of such Lender.
Section 19.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
(A)
any Lender that is a U.S. Person shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative
Agent on or prior to the date on which such Lender becomes a Lender under this Agreement (and from
time  to  time  thereafter  upon  the  reasonable  request  of  the  Borrower  or  the  Administrative  Agent),
executed copies of IRS Form W-9 certifying that such Lender is exempt from U.S. federal backup
withholding tax;
(B)
any  Foreign  Lender  shall,  to  the  extent  it  is  legally  entitled  to  do  so,  deliver  to  the
Borrower  and  the  Administrative  Agent  (in  such  number  of  copies  as  shall  be  requested  by  the
recipient)  on  or  prior  to  the  date  on  which  such  Foreign  Lender  becomes  a  Lender  under  this
Agreement  (and  from  time  to  time  thereafter  upon  the  reasonable  request  of  the  Borrower  or  the
Administrative Agent), whichever of the following is applicable:
(I)
in the case of a Foreign Lender claiming the benefits of an income tax treaty to
which  the  United  States  is  a  party  (x)  with  respect  to  payments  of  interest  under  any  Loan
Document, executed copies of IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable, establishing
an exemption from, or reduction of, U.S. federal withholding Tax pursuant to the “interest”
article of such tax treaty and (y) with respect to any other applicable payments under any Loan
Document, IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable,
45    
    

establishing an exemption from, or reduction of, U.S. federal withholding Tax pursuant to the
“business profits” or “other income” article of such tax treaty;
(II)
executed copies of IRS Form W-8ECI;
(III)
in  the  case  of  a  Foreign  Lender  claiming  the  benefits  of  the  exemption  for
portfolio interest under Section 881(c) of the Code, (x) a certificate substantially in the form of
Exhibit  G-1  to  the  effect  that  such  Foreign  Lender  is  not  a  “bank”  within  the  meaning  of
Section  881(c)(3)(A)  of  the  Code,  a  “10  percent  shareholder”  of  the  Borrower  within  the
meaning of Section 881(c)(3)(B) of the Code, or a “controlled foreign corporation” described
in Section 881(c)(3)(C) of the Code (a “U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate”) and (y) executed
copies of IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E, as applicable; or
(IV)
to the extent a Foreign Lender is not the beneficial owner, executed copies of
IRS Form W-8IMY, accompanied by IRS Form W-8ECI, IRS Form W-8BEN or W-8BEN-E,
as applicable, a U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate substantially in the form of Exhibit G-2 or
Exhibit G-3, IRS Form W-9, and/or other certification documents from each beneficial owner,
as applicable; provided that if the Foreign Lender is a partnership and one or more direct or
indirect  partners  of such Foreign  Lender  are claiming  the portfolio  interest  exemption,  such
Foreign Lender may provide a U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate substantially in the form of
Exhibit G-4 on behalf of each such direct and indirect partner.
(C)
any  Foreign  Lender  shall,  to  the  extent  it  is  legally  entitled  to  do  so,  deliver  to  the
Borrower  and  the  Administrative  Agent  (in  such  number  of  copies  as  shall  be  requested  by  the
recipient)  on  or  prior  to  the  date  on  which  such  Foreign  Lender  becomes  a  Lender  under  this
Agreement  (and  from  time  to  time  thereafter  upon  the  reasonable  request  of  the  Borrower  or  the
Administrative Agent), executed copies of any other form prescribed by applicable law as a basis for
claiming exemption from or a reduction in U.S. federal withholding Tax, duly completed, together
with  such  supplementary  documentation  as  may  be  prescribed  by  applicable  law  to  permit  the
Borrower or the Administrative Agent to determine the withholding or deduction required to be made;
and
46    
    

(D)
if a payment made to a Lender under any Loan Document would be subject to U.S.
federal withholding Tax imposed by FATCA if such Lender were to fail to comply with the applicable
reporting  requirements  of FATCA  (including  those  contained  in  Section  1471(b)  or  1472(b)  of  the
Code, as applicable), such Lender shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent at the
time or times prescribed by law and at such time or times reasonably requested by the Borrower or the
Administrative Agent such documentation prescribed by applicable law (including as prescribed by
Section 1471(b)(3) (C)(i) of the Code) and such additional documentation reasonably requested by the
Borrower or the Administrative Agent as may be necessary for the Borrower and the Administrative
Agent to comply with their obligations under FATCA and to determine that such Lender has complied
with such Lender’s obligations under FATCA or to determine the amount to deduct and withhold from
such payment. Solely for purposes of this clause (D), “FATCA” shall include any amendments made
to FATCA after the Effective Date.
Section 20.
Each Lender agrees that if any form or certification it previously delivered pursuant to this Section 2.16 expires or
becomes obsolete or inaccurate in any respect, it shall update such form or certification or promptly notify the Borrower and the
Administrative Agent in writing of its legal inability to do so.
(a) At no time shall the Administrative Agent have any obligation to file for or otherwise pursue on behalf of a
Lender, any refund of Taxes withheld or deducted from funds paid for the account of such Lender, as the case may be. If
any Recipient determines, in its sole discretion exercised in good faith, that it has received a refund of, or credit with
respect to, any Taxes as to which it has been indemnified  pursuant to this Section 2.16 (including by the payment of
additional amounts pursuant to this Section 2.16), it shall pay to the Borrower an amount equal to such refund or credit
(but only to the extent of indemnity payments made under this Section 2.16 with respect to the Taxes giving rise to such
refund or credit), net of all out-of-pocket expenses (including Taxes) of such indemnified party and without interest (other
than any interest paid by the relevant Governmental Authority with respect to such refund or credit). The Borrower, upon
the  request  of  such  indemnified  party,  shall  repay  to  such  indemnified  party  the  amount  paid  over  pursuant  to  this
paragraph (f) (plus any penalties, interest or other charges imposed by the relevant Governmental Authority) in the event
such  indemnified  party  is  required  to  repay  such  refund  or  credit  to  such  Governmental  Authority.  Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this paragraph (f), in no event will the indemnified party be required to pay any amount to the
Borrower pursuant to this paragraph (f) the payment of which would place the indemnified party in a less favorable net
after-Tax position than the indemnified party would have been in if the Tax subject to indemnification and giving rise to
such  refund  or  credit  had  not  been  deducted,  withheld  or  otherwise  imposed  and  the  indemnification  payments  or
additional amounts with respect to such Tax had never been paid. This paragraph (f) shall not be construed to require any
Recipient to make available its tax returns (or any other information relating to its Taxes that it deems confidential) to the
Borrower or any other Person.
47    
    

(b) Each  party’s  obligations  under  this  Section  2.16  shall  survive  for  one  year  after  the  termination  of  this
Agreement and the payment of the Loans and all other amounts payable hereunder.
1.2
Indemnity. The Borrower agrees to indemnify each Lender for, and to hold each Lender harmless from, any
loss (other than the loss of Applicable Margin) or expense that such Lender may sustain or incur as a consequence of (a)
default by the Borrower in making a borrowing of, conversion into or continuation of EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans
after the Borrower has given a notice requesting the same in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement, (b) default by
the Borrower in making any prepayment of or conversion from EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans after the Borrower has
given  a  notice  thereof  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  or  (c)  the  making  of  a  prepayment  of
EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loans on a day that is not the last day of an Interest Period with respect thereto. A certificate
as to any  amounts  payable  pursuant  to this  Section  submitted  to the Borrower  by any Lender  shall be conclusive  in the
absence of manifest error. This covenant shall survive for 90 days after the termination of this Agreement and the payment of
the Loans and all other amounts payable hereunder.
1.3
Change  of  Lending  Office.  Each  Lender  agrees  that,  upon  the  occurrence  of  any  event  giving  rise  to  the
operation of Section 2.15 or 2.16 with respect to such Lender, it will, if requested by the Borrower, use reasonable efforts
(subject to overall policy considerations of such Lender) to designate another lending office for any Loans affected by such
event with the object of avoiding the consequences of such event; provided, that such designation is made on terms that, in
the sole but reasonable  judgment  of such Lender,  cause  such Lender  and its lending  office(s)  to suffer no unreimbursed
economic disadvantage or any legal or regulatory disadvantage, and provided, further, that nothing in this Section shall affect
or postpone any of the obligations of the Borrower or the rights of any Lender pursuant to Section 2.15 or 2.16.
1.4
Replacement of Lenders. The Borrower shall be permitted to replace any Lender that (a) requests (on its behalf
or any of its Participants)  reimbursement  for amounts owing pursuant to Section 2.15 or 2.16, (b) provides notice under
Section 2.21 or (c) becomes a Defaulting Lender, with a replacement financial institution; provided that (i) such replacement
does not conflict with any Requirement of Law, (ii) no Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing at the time of
such  replacement,  (iii)  prior  to any  such  replacement,  such  Lender  shall  have  taken  no  action  under  Section  2.18  which
eliminates the continued need for payment of amounts owing pursuant to Section 2.15 or 2.16, (iv) the replacement financial
institution  shall  purchase,  at  par,  all  Loans  and  other  amounts  owing  to such  replaced  Lender  on  or prior  to  the  date  of
replacement,  (v)  the  Borrower  shall  be  liable  to  such  replaced  Lender  under  Section  2.17  if  any EurodollarTerm
Benchmark Loan owing to such replaced Lender shall be purchased other than on the last day of the Interest Period relating
thereto,  (vi)  the  replacement  financial  institution,  if  not  already  a  Lender,  shall  be  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the
Administrative  Agent,  (vii)  the  replaced  Lender  shall  be  obligated  to  make  such  replacement  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of Section 10.6 (provided that the Borrower shall be obligated to pay the registration and processing fee referred
to therein), (viii) until such time as such replacement shall be consummated, the Borrower shall pay all additional amounts (if
any) required pursuant to Section 2.15 or 2.16, as the case may be, and (ix) any such replacement shall not be deemed to be a
waiver of any rights that the Borrower,
48    
    

the Administrative Agent or any other Lender shall have against the replaced Lender.
1.5
Defaulting Lenders.  Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  in  this  Agreement,  if  any  Lender
becomes a Defaulting Lender, then, until such time as that Lender is no longer a Defaulting Lender, to the extent permitted
by applicable law:
(a) any payment of principal, interest, fees or other amounts received by the Administrative Agent for the account
of that Defaulting Lender (whether voluntary or mandatory, at maturity, pursuant to Section 7 or otherwise, and including
any amounts made available to the Administrative Agent by that Defaulting Lender pursuant to Section 9.7), shall be
applied at such time or times as may be determined by the Administrative Agent as follows: first, to the payment of any
amounts owing by that Defaulting Lender to the Administrative Agent hereunder; second, as the Borrower may request
(so long as no Default or Event of Default exists), to the funding of any Loan in respect of which that Defaulting Lender
has failed to fund its portion thereof as required by this Agreement, as determined by the Administrative Agent; third, if so
determined by the Borrower with the consent of the Administrative Agent, not to be unreasonably withheld, to be held in a
non-interest bearing deposit account and released in order to satisfy obligations of that Defaulting Lender to fund Loans
under this Agreement; fourth, to the payment of any amounts owing to the Lenders as a result of any judgment of a court
of competent jurisdiction obtained by any Lender against that Defaulting Lender as a result of that Defaulting Lender’s
breach of its obligations under this Agreement; fifth, so long as no Default or Event of Default exists, to the payment of
any amounts owing to the Borrower  as a result of any judgment of a court of competent  jurisdiction  obtained by the
Borrower  against  that  Defaulting  Lender  as  a  result  of  that  Defaulting  Lender’s  breach  of  its  obligations  under  this
Agreement; and sixth, to that Defaulting Lender or as otherwise directed by a court of competent jurisdiction; provided
that if such payment is a payment of the principal amount of the Loans in respect of which that Defaulting Lender has not
fully funded its appropriate share such payment shall be applied solely to pay the Loans of all non-Defaulting Lenders on
a pro rata basis prior to being applied to the payment of any Loans of that Defaulting Lender. Any payments, prepayments
or other amounts paid or payable to a Defaulting Lender that are applied (or held) to pay amounts owed by a Defaulting
Lender pursuant to this Section 2.20(a) shall be deemed paid to and redirected by that Defaulting Lender, and each Lender
irrevocably consents hereto;
(b) [Reserved];
(c) [Reserved];
(d) [Reserved]; and
(e) that Defaulting Lender’s right to approve or disapprove any amendment, supplement, modification, waiver or
consent with respect to this Agreement shall be restricted as set forth in the definition of “Required Lenders” and Section
10.1.
49    
    

If the Borrower and the Administrative Agent reasonably determine in writing that a Defaulting Lender should no longer be deemed
to be a Defaulting Lender, the Administrative Agent will so notify the parties hereto, whereupon as of the effective date specified in
such notice and subject to any conditions set forth therein (which may include arrangements with respect to any cash collateral), that
Lender will, to the extent applicable, purchase that portion of outstanding Loans of the other Lenders or take such other actions as
the  Administrative  Agent  may  determine  to  be  necessary  to  cause  the  Loans  to  be  held  on  a  pro  rata  basis  by  the  Lenders  in
accordance with their Percentages, whereupon that Lender will cease to be a Defaulting Lender; provided that no adjustments will be
made  retroactively  with  respect  to  fees  accrued  or  payments  made  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Borrower  while  that  Lender  was  a
Defaulting Lender; and provided, further, that except to the extent otherwise expressly agreed by the affected parties, no change
hereunder from Defaulting Lender to Lender will constitute a waiver or release of any claim of any party hereunder arising from that
Lender’s having been a Defaulting Lender.
2.21 Illegality. If any Lender determines that any Law has made it unlawful, or that any Governmental Authority has
asserted that it is unlawful, for any Lender or its applicable lending office to make, maintain, or fund Loans whose interest is
determined by reference to the Eurodollar Rate, or to determine or charge interest rates based upon the Eurodollar Rate, or
any Governmental Authority has imposed material restrictions on the authority of such Lender to purchase or sell, or to
take  deposits  of,  Dollars  in  the  London  interbank  market,  then,  upon  notice  thereof  by  such  Lender  to  the  Borrower
(through the Administrative Agent), (a) any obligation of such Lender to make or continue Eurodollar Loans or to convert
ABR Loans to Eurodollar Loans shall be suspended, and (b) if such notice asserts the illegality of such Lender making or
maintaining ABR Loans the interest rate on which is determined by reference to the Eurodollar Rate component of the ABR,
the  interest  rate  on  which  ABR  Loans  of  such  Lender  shall,  if  necessary  to  avoid  such  illegality,  be  determined  by  the
Administrative  Agent  without  reference  to  the  Eurodollar  Rate  component  of  the  ABR,  in  each  case  until  such  Lender
notifies the Administrative Agent and the Borrower that the circumstances giving rise to such determination no longer exist.
Upon  receipt  of  such  notice,  (i)  the  Borrower  shall,  upon  demand  from  such  Lender  (with  a  copy  to  the  Administrative
Agent), prepay or, if applicable, convert all Eurodollar Loans of such Lender to ABR Loans (the interest rate on which ABR
Loans  of  such  Lender  shall,  if  necessary  to  avoid  such  illegality,  be  determined  by  the  Administrative  Agent  without
reference  to  the  Eurodollar  Rate  component  of  the  ABR),  either  on  the  last  day  of  the  Interest  Period  therefor,  if  such
Lender  may  lawfully  continue  to  maintain  such  Eurodollar  Loans  to  such  day,  or  immediately,  if  such  Lender  may  not
lawfully continue to maintain such Eurodollar Loans and (ii) if such notice asserts the illegality of such Lender determining
or  charging  interest  rates  based  upon  the  Eurodollar  Rate,  the  Administrative  Agent  shall  during  the  period  of  such
suspension compute the ABR applicable to such Lender without reference to the Eurodollar Rate component thereof until
the Administrative Agent is advised in writing by such Lender that it is no longer illegal for such Lender to determine or
charge interest rates based upon the Eurodollar Rate. Upon any such prepayment or conversion, the Borrower shall also pay
accrued interest on the amount so prepaid or converted, together with any additional amounts required pursuant to Section
2.17.
1.6
[Reserved].
Section 21.
[RESERVED].
50    
    

Section 22.
REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES
To induce the Administrative Agent and the Lenders to enter into this Agreement and to make the Loans, the Borrower hereby
represents and warrants to the Administrative Agent and each Lender, on the Effective Date, that:
1.1
Financial  Condition.  (a)  The  audited  consolidated  balance  sheet  of  the  Borrower  and  its  consolidated
Subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020, and the related consolidated statements of income and cash flows for the fiscal year
ended on such date, reported on by Deloitte & Touche LLP, and (b) the unaudited consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower
and its consolidated Subsidiaries as of March 31, 2021, and the related consolidated statements of income and cash flows for
the portion of the fiscal year ended on such date, each delivered to the Administrative Agent prior to the Amendment No. 1
Effective Date, in each case, (i) were prepared in accordance with GAAP consistently applied throughout the periods covered
thereby, except as otherwise expressly noted therein, and (ii) present fairly in all material respects the consolidated financial
condition of the Borrower and its consolidated Subsidiaries as of such date, and its consolidated income and its consolidated
cash  flows  for  the  respective  fiscal  year  or  portion  of  the  fiscal  year  then  ended,  subject,  in  the  case  of  the  financial
statements referred to in clause (b), to the absence of footnotes and to normal year-end audit adjustments.
1.2
No Change. Since December 31, 2020, no Specified Material Adverse Effect has occurred.
1.3
Existence; Compliance with Law. Each of the Borrower and its Significant Subsidiaries (a) is duly organized,
validly existing and in good standing under the laws of its jurisdiction of organization, (b) has the organizational power and
organizational authority to own and operate its property, to lease the property it operates as lessee and to conduct the business
in which it is currently engaged, (c) is duly qualified as a foreign corporation or other organization and in good standing
under the laws of each jurisdiction where its ownership, lease or operation of property or the conduct of its business requires
such qualification except to the extent that the failure to so qualify could not reasonably be expected to have a Material
Adverse Effect and (d) is in compliance with all Requirements of Law except for any Requirements of Law being contested
in  good  faith  by  appropriate  proceedings  and  except  to  the  extent  that  the  failure  to  comply  therewith  could  not,  in  the
aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect.
1.4
Power;  Authorization;  Enforceable  Obligations.  The  Borrower  has  the  corporate  power  and  corporate
authority to execute and deliver and to perform its obligations under the Loan Documents and to obtain extensions of credit
hereunder.  The  Borrower  has  taken  all  necessary  corporate  action  to  authorize  the  execution  and  delivery  of,  and
performance of its obligations under, the Loan Documents to which it is a party and to authorize the extensions of credit on
the terms and conditions of this Agreement. No consent or authorization of, filing with, notice to or other act by or in respect
of, any Governmental Authority or any other Person is required in connection with the extensions of credit hereunder or with
the execution, delivery, performance, validity or enforceability of this Agreement or any of the Loan Documents, except (i)
consents,  authorizations,  filings  and  notices  which  have  been  obtained  or  made  and  are  in  full  force  and  effect,  (ii)  any
consent, authorization or filing that may be required
51    
    

in the future the failure of which to make or obtain could not reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect and
(iii) applicable Requirements of Law (including the approval of the CPUC) prior to foreclosure or other exercise of remedies
under the Loan Documents. This Agreement has been, and each other Loan Document upon execution and delivery will be,
duly executed and delivered. This Agreement constitutes, and each other Loan Document upon execution will constitute, a
legal, valid and binding obligation of the Borrower, enforceable against the Borrower in accordance with its terms, except as
enforceability may be limited by (x) applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or similar laws affecting
the enforcement of creditors’ rights generally, laws of general application related to the enforceability of securities secured
by real estate and by general equitable principles (whether enforcement is sought by proceedings in equity or at law) and (y)
applicable Requirements of Law (including the approval of the CPUC) prior to foreclosure or other exercise of remedies
hereunder or under the Loan Documents.
1.5
No Legal Bar. The execution and delivery of, and the performance of the obligations under, this Agreement
and the other Loan Documents, the borrowing of the Loans hereunder and the use of the proceeds thereof will not violate in
any  material  respect  any  Requirement  of  Law  or  any  Contractual  Obligation  of  the  Borrower  or  any  of  its  Significant
Subsidiaries and will not result in, or require, the creation or imposition of any Lien on any of their respective properties or
revenues pursuant to any Requirement of Law or any such Contractual Obligation (other than the Liens created by the Loan
Documents and the FMB Indenture).
1.6
Litigation. (a) No litigation, investigation or proceeding of or before any arbitrator or Governmental Authority
is pending or, to the knowledge of the Borrower, threatened in writing by or against the Borrower or any of its Significant
Subsidiaries or against any of their respective material properties or revenues with respect to any of the Loan Documents.
(b) No litigation, investigation or proceeding of or before any arbitrator or Governmental Authority is pending or,
to the knowledge of the Borrower, threatened in writing by or against the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries
or  against  any  of  their  respective  material  properties  or  revenues,  except  as  disclosed  in  the  Specified  Exchange  Act
Filings, that could reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect.
1.7
No Default. No Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing.
1.8
Taxes. The Borrower and each of its Significant Subsidiaries has filed or caused to be filed all Federal and
state returns of income and franchise taxes imposed in lieu of net income taxes and all other material tax returns that are
required to be filed and has paid all taxes shown to be due and payable on said returns or with respect to any claims or
assessments for taxes made against it or any of its property by any Governmental Authority (other than (i) any amounts the
validity of which are currently being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and with respect to which reserves in
conformity with GAAP have been provided on the books of the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries, as applicable,
and (ii) claims which could not reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect). No material tax Liens have been
filed against the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries other than (A) Liens for taxes
52    
    

which are not delinquent or (B) Liens for taxes which are being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and with
respect  to  which  reserves  in  conformity  with  GAAP  have  been  provided  on  the  books  of  the  Borrower  or  any  of  its
Significant Subsidiaries, as applicable.
1.9
Federal Regulations. No part of the proceeds of any Loans hereunder, will be used for “buying” or “carrying”
any “margin stock” within the respective meanings of each of the quoted terms under Regulation U as now and from time to
time hereafter in effect or for any purpose that violates the provisions of the Regulations of the Federal Reserve Board.
1.10
ERISA.  No  Reportable  Event  has  occurred  during  the  five  year  period  prior  to  the  date  on  which  this
representation is made or deemed made with respect to any Plan, and each Plan has complied with the applicable provisions
of ERISA and the Code, except, in each case, to the extent that any such Reportable Event or failure to comply with the
applicable provisions of ERISA or the Code could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect. During
the five year period prior to the date on which this representation is made or deemed made, there has been no (i) failure to
make a required contribution to any Plan that would result in the imposition of a Lien or other encumbrance or the provision
of security under Section 430 of the Code or Section 303 or 4068 of ERISA, or the arising of such a Lien or encumbrance; or
(ii)  “unpaid  minimum  required  contribution”  or  “accumulated  funding  deficiency”  (as  defined  or  otherwise  set  forth  in
Section 4971 of the Code or Part 3 of Subtitle B of Title I of ERISA), whether or not waived, except, in each case, to the
extent that such event could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect. No termination of a Single
Employer Plan has occurred, and no Lien in favor of the PBGC or a Plan has arisen, during such five-year period. The
present value of all accrued benefits under each Single Employer Plan (based on those assumptions used to fund such Plan)
did not, as of the last annual valuation date for which a certified actuarial valuation report is available prior to the date on
which this representation is made or deemed made, exceed the value of the assets of such Plan allocable to such accrued
benefits, except as could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect. Neither the Borrower nor any
Commonly Controlled Entity has had a complete or partial withdrawal from any Multiemployer Plan during the five year
period  prior  to  the  date  on  which  this  representation  is  made  or  deemed  made  that  has  resulted  or  could  reasonably  be
expected to result in a material liability under ERISA, and neither the Borrower nor any Commonly Controlled Entity would
become subject to any liability under ERISA if the Borrower or any such Commonly Controlled Entity were to withdraw
completely  from  all  Multiemployer  Plans  as  of  the  valuation  date  most  closely  preceding  the  date  on  which  this
representation is made or deemed made, except as could not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect.
No  such  Multiemployer  Plan  is  in  endangered  or  critical  status  (within  the  meaning  of  Section  305  of  ERISA)  or  in
Insolvency.
1.11
Investment Company Act; Other Regulations. The Borrower is not an “investment company”, or a company
“controlled” by an “investment company”, within the meaning of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended. On the
Effective Date, the Borrower is not subject to regulation under any Requirement of Law (other than (a) Regulation X of the
Federal Reserve Board and (b) Sections 817-830, and Sections 701 and 851 of the California Public Utilities Code) that
limits its ability to incur Indebtedness under this Agreement.
53    
    

1.12
Use of Proceeds. The proceeds of the Loans shall be used to fund the transactions contemplated under the
Plan of Reorganization.
1.13
Environmental Matters.  Except  as  disclosed  in  the  Specified  Exchange  Act  Filings,  the  Borrower  and  its
Significant Subsidiaries are not subject to any pending violations or liabilities under Environmental Laws or relating to the
disposal, spill or other release of Materials of Environmental Concern that would reasonably be expected to have a Material
Adverse Effect, and, to the knowledge of the Borrower, there are no facts, circumstances or conditions that could reasonably
be expected to give rise to such violations or liabilities.
1.14
Regulatory Matters. Solely by virtue of the execution, delivery and performance of, or the consummation of
the transactions contemplated by this Agreement, no Lender shall be or become subject to regulation (a) under the FPA or (b)
as a “public utility” or “public service corporation” or the equivalent under any Requirement of Law.
1.15
Sanctions;  Anti-Corruption.  None  of  the  Borrower,  any  of  its  Subsidiaries,  nor,  to  the  knowledge  of  the
Borrower, any director, officer, agent, Affiliate or employee of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries is currently (i) the
subject of any U.S. sanctions administered by the Office of Foreign Assets Control of the U.S. Treasury Department or the
U.S.  State  Department  (“Sanctions”)  or  (ii)  located,  organized  or  resident  in  a  country  or  territory  that  is,  or  whose
government is, the subject of any Sanctions. None of the Borrower, any of its Subsidiaries nor, to the knowledge of the
Borrower, any director, officer, agent, Affiliate or employee of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries, has taken any action,
directly or indirectly, that would result in a violation in any material respect by any such Person of the United States Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, as amended (“FCPA”) or of any other anti-bribery or anti-corruption laws, rules, regulations
legally applicable to such Persons (collectively, “Anti-Corruption Laws”). The Borrower will not use the proceeds of the
Loans, or lend, contribute or otherwise make available such proceeds (a) to any Subsidiary, Affiliate, joint venture partner or
other Person or entity, to fund the activities of any Person, or in any country or territory, that, at the time of such funding, is,
or whose government is, the subject of any Sanctions, or (a) directly, or, to the knowledge of the Borrower, indirectly, for
any payments to any governmental official or employee, political party, official of a political party, candidate for political
office,  or  anyone  else  acting  in  an  official  capacity,  in  order  to  obtain,  retain  or  direct  business  or  obtain  any  improper
advantage, in violation of the FCPA or of any Anti-Corruption Laws.
1.16
Affected Financial Institutions. The Borrower is not an Affected Financial Institution.
1.17
Solvency. The Borrower and its Subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis, are Solvent as of the Amendment No. 1
Effective Date.
1.18
Disclosure.
(a) All written information relating to the Borrower, its Subsidiaries and their respective businesses, other than
any projections, estimates and other forward-looking materials and information of a general economic or industry specific
nature, that has been provided by or on behalf of the Borrower to the
54    
    

Administrative Agent or the Lenders in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby does not, when taken as a
whole, contain any untrue  statement  of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary in order to make the
statements contained therein not materially misleading in light of the circumstances under which such statements were
made (giving effect to all supplements and updates thereto). Any projected information, estimates, other forward-looking
materials and pro forma financial information that have been made available to any Lenders or the Administrative Agent
prior to the Effective Date in connection with the transactions contemplated hereby have been prepared in good faith based
upon assumptions believed by the Borrower to be reasonable as of the date such information was furnished to the Lenders
and as of the Effective Date (it being understood that actual results may vary materially from such projections and pro
forma information and such projections and pro forma information are not a guarantee of performance).
(b) As  of  the  Effective  Date,  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Borrower,  the  information  included  in  any  Beneficial
Ownership Certification provided on or prior to the Effective Date to any Lender in connection with this Agreement is true
and correct in all respects.
1.19
Status of Obligations. The issuance to the Administrative Agent of the Senior Bonds provides the Lenders, as
beneficial  holders  of  the  Senior  Bonds  through  the  Administrative  Agent,  the  benefit  of  the  Lien  of  the  FMB  Indenture
equally and ratably with the holders of other First Mortgage Bonds.
1.20
Ownership of Property. As of the Effective Date, each of the Borrower and its Significant Subsidiaries has
good title to, or valid leasehold interests in, all its real and personal property material to its business, subject to no Liens other
than Liens permitted under Section 7.3, except for where the failure would not, individually or in the aggregate, reasonably
be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect.
1.21
Covered Entity. The Borrower is not a Covered Entity.
Section 23.
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT
1.1
Conditions to the Effective Date. The occurrence of the Effective Date and the obligation of each Lender to
make its Loans hereunder on the Effective Date is subject to the satisfaction of the following conditions precedent:
(a) Credit Agreement.  The  Administrative  Agent  shall  have  received  this  Agreement  (including  copies  of  all
schedules attached hereto in a form reasonably satisfactory to the Lenders), executed and delivered by the Administrative
Agent, the Borrower and each Person listed on Schedule 1.1.
(b) Consents and Approvals. All governmental and third party consents and approvals necessary in connection
with  the  execution  and  delivery  of  this  Agreement  and  the  other  Loan  Documents  and  the  consummation  of  the
transactions contemplated hereby shall have been obtained and be in full force and effect; and the Administrative Agent
shall have received a certificate of a Responsible Officer to the foregoing effect.
(c) KYC Information. At least three (3) Business Days prior to the Effective Date, the Administrative Agent and
each Lender shall have received
55    
    

all documentation and information relating to the Borrower as is reasonably requested in writing by the Administrative
Agent and/or any such Lender at least ten (10) Business Days prior to the Effective Date that is required by Governmental
Authorities under applicable “know your customer” and anti-money laundering rules and regulations, including the Patriot
Act and the Beneficial Ownership Regulation. If the Borrower qualifies as a “legal entity customer” under the Beneficial
Ownership Regulation and the Administrative Agent or any Lender so request at least five (5) Business Days prior to the
Effective Date, then at least three (3) Business Days prior to the Effective Date, the Borrower shall have delivered to the
Administrative Agent and/or any such Lender a Beneficial Ownership Certification in relation to the Borrower.
(d) Bond Documents. The Administrative Agent shall have received:
Section 24.
the Bond Delivery Agreement, duly executed and delivered by the Borrower and Administrative Agent;
Section 25.
the Senior Bonds in a face amount equal to the Loans as of the Effective Date, duly issued and authenticated under
the FMB Indenture and in a form reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent;
Section 26.
the Supplemental Indenture, duly executed and delivered by the Borrower and the Indenture Trustee and in a form
reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent;
Section  27.
a  certificate  of  a  duly  authorized  officer  of  the  Indenture  Trustee  certifying  that  each  Senior  Bond  has  been
authenticated and is outstanding under the FMB Indenture;
Section 28.
copies of all legal opinions and other documents delivered to the Indenture Trustee by or on behalf of the Borrower
on or prior to the Effective Date in connection with the issuance of each Senior Bond; and
Section 29.
copies of all title reports and commitments as of the Effective Date with respect to the Mortgaged Property consisting
of real property as to which Liens in favor of the Indenture Trustee, for the benefit of the holders of the First Mortgage Bond, has
been granted.
(a) Fees. The Lenders, the Arrangers and the Administrative Agent shall have received all fees required to be
paid,  and  all  expenses  for  which  invoices  have  been  presented  (including  the  reasonable  fees  and  expenses  of  legal
counsel) on or before the date that is two (2) Business Days prior to the Effective Date.
(b) Closing  Certificate;  Certified  Articles  of  Incorporation;  Good  Standing  Certificates.  The  Administrative
Agent shall have received (i) a certificate of the Borrower, dated the Effective Date, substantially in the form of Exhibit D,
with appropriate insertions and attachments, including the articles of incorporation of the Borrower certified as of a recent
date by the Secretary of State of the State of California, (ii) a good standing certificate for the Borrower dated as of a
recent date from the Secretary of State of the State of California, and (iii) a certificate of a Responsible Officer, dated the
Effective Date, confirming the satisfaction of the conditions precedent set forth in Sections 5.1(h) and (i).
56    
    

(c) Legal Opinion. The Administrative Agent shall have received the legal opinion of (i) Hunton Andrews Kurth
LLP,  counsel  to  the  Borrower,  and  (ii)  Munger,  Tolles  &  Olson  LLP,  special  California  regulatory  counsel  to  the
Borrower, each in a form reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent.
(d) Representations and Warranties. Each of the representations and warranties made by the Borrower in this
Agreement that does not contain a materiality qualification shall be true and correct in all material respects on and as of
the Effective Date, and each of the representations and warranties made by the Borrower in this Agreement that contains a
materiality qualification shall be true and correct on and as of the Effective Date (or, in each case, to the extent such
representations and warranties specifically relate to an earlier date, that such representations and warranties were true and
correct in all material respects, or true and correct, as the case may be, as of such earlier date).
(e) No Default. No Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing on the Effective Date or
would result from the funding of the Loans on the Effective Date.
(f)
Notice of Borrowing. The Administrative Agent shall have received a notice of borrowing in accordance with
the requirements of Section 2.2.
(g) Solvency. The Administrative Agent shall have received a solvency certificate from the chief financial officer
of the Borrower in substantially the form of Exhibit I hereto.
Section 30.
AFFIRMATIVE COVENANTS
The  Borrower  hereby  agrees  that,  so  long  as  any  Loan,  any  interest  on  any  Loan  or  any  fee  payable  to  any  Lender  or  the
Administrative Agent hereunder remains outstanding, or any other amount then due and payable is owing to any Lender or the
Administrative  Agent  hereunder,  the  Borrower  shall  and,  with  respect  to  Sections  6.3  and  6.6(b),  shall  cause  its  Significant
Subsidiaries to:
1.1
Financial  Statements.  Furnish  to  the  Administrative  Agent  with  a  copy  for  each  Lender,  and  the
Administrative Agent shall deliver to each Lender:
(a) as soon as available, but in any event within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of the Borrower, a copy
of the audited consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower and its consolidated Subsidiaries as at the end of such year and
the  related  audited  consolidated  statements  of  income  and  cash  flows  for  such  year,  setting  forth  in  each  case  in
comparative  form  the  figures  for  the  previous  year,  reported  on  without  a  “going  concern”  or  like  qualification  or
exception, or qualification arising out of the scope of the audit, by Deloitte & Touche LLP or other independent certified
public accountants of nationally recognized standing; and
(b) as soon as available, but in any event not later than 60 days after the end of each of the first three quarterly
periods of each fiscal year of the Borrower, the unaudited consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower and its consolidated
Subsidiaries as at the end of such quarter and the related unaudited consolidated statements of income and cash flows for
such quarter and the portion of the fiscal year through the end of such quarter, setting forth
57    
    

in each case in comparative form the figures for the previous year, certified by a Responsible Officer as being fairly stated
in all material respects (subject to the absence of footnotes and normal year-end audit adjustments).
All such financial statements shall (x) be complete and correct in all material respects and (y) shall be prepared in reasonable detail
and in accordance with GAAP applied (except as approved by such accountants or officer, as the case may be, and disclosed in
reasonable detail therein) consistently throughout the periods reflected therein and with prior periods, subject, in each case to the
absence  of  footnotes  and  to  normal  year-end  audit  adjustments.  The  Borrower  shall  be  deemed  to  have  delivered  the  financial
statements required to be delivered pursuant to this Section 6.1 upon the filing of such financial statements by the Borrower through
the SEC’s EDGAR system (or any successor electronic gathering system that is publicly available free of charge) or the publication
by the Borrower of such financial statements on its website.
1.2
Certificates; Other Information. Furnish to the Administrative Agent, for delivery to the Lenders:
(a) within  two  Business  Days  after  the  delivery  of  any  financial  statements  pursuant  to  Section  6.1,  (i)  a
certificate of a Responsible Officer stating that such Responsible Officer has obtained no actual knowledge of any Default
or Event of Default except as specified in such certificate and (ii) a Compliance Certificate, substantially in the form of
Exhibit C, containing all information and calculations reasonably necessary for determining compliance by the Borrower
with  the  provisions  of  this  Agreement  referred  to  therein  as  of  the  last  day  of  the  fiscal  quarter  or  fiscal  year  of  the
Borrower, as the case may be;
(b) within five days after the same are sent, copies of all financial statements and reports that the Borrower sends
to the holders of any class of its debt securities or public equity securities, provided that, such financial statements and
reports shall be deemed to have been delivered upon the filing of such financial statements and reports by the Borrower
through the SEC’s EDGAR system (or any successor electronic gathering system that is publicly available free of charge)
or publication by the Borrower of such financial statements and reports on its website;
(c) promptly, such additional financial and other information (other than any such information the disclosure of
which is prohibited by applicable law or binding agreement or subject to attorney-client privilege or constitutes attorney-
work  product  or  constitutes  non-financial  trade  secrets  or  non-financial  proprietary  information  so  long  as  (x)  such
confidentiality obligation was not entered into in contemplation hereof and (y) the Borrower provides such Lender with
notice that information is being withheld due to the existence of such confidentiality obligation) as any Lender, through
the Administrative Agent, may from time to time reasonably request; and
(d) promptly, such documentation and other information that the Administrative Agent or such Lender reasonably
requests  in  order  to  comply  with  its  ongoing  obligations  under  applicable  “know  your  customer”  and  anti-money
laundering rules and regulations, including the Patriot Act and the Beneficial Ownership Regulation.
58    
    

1.3
Payment of Taxes. Pay all taxes due and payable or any other tax assessments made against the Borrower or
any of its Significant Subsidiaries or any of their respective property by any Governmental Authority (other than (i) any
amounts the validity of which are currently being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and with respect to
which  reserves  in  conformity  with  GAAP  have  been  provided  on  the  books  of  the  Borrower  or  any  of  its  Significant
Subsidiaries,  as  applicable  or  (ii)  where  the  failure  to  effect  such  payment  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to  have  a
Material Adverse Effect).
1.4
Maintenance  of  Existence;  Compliance.  (a)(i)  Preserve,  renew  and  keep  in  full  force  and  effect  its
organizational  existence  and  (ii)  take  all  reasonable  action  to  maintain  all  rights,  privileges  and  franchises  necessary  or
desirable in the normal conduct of its business, except, in each case, as otherwise permitted by Section 7.4 and except, in the
case of clause (ii) above, to the extent that failure to do so could not reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse
Effect; (b) comply with all Contractual Obligations except to the extent that failure to comply therewith could not, in the
aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect and (c) comply with all Requirements of Law except for
any Requirements of Law being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings or except to the extent that failure to
comply therewith could not, in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect.
1.5
Maintenance  of  Property;  Insurance.  (a)  Keep  all  property  useful  and  necessary  in  its  business  in  good
working order and condition, ordinary wear and tear and casualty excepted, except to the extent that failure to do so could
not, in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect, and (b) maintain with financially sound and
reputable insurance companies insurance on all its material property in at least such amounts and against at least such risks as
are usually insured against in the same general area by companies engaged in the same or a similar business of comparable
size and financial strength and owning similar properties in the same general areas in which the Borrower operates, which
may include self-insurance, if determined by the Borrower to be reasonably prudent.
1.6
Inspection of Property; Books and Records; Discussions. (a) Keep proper books of records and account in
which full, true and correct entries in conformity with GAAP and all Requirements of Law shall be made of all dealings and
transactions  in  relation  to  its  business  and  activities  and  (b)  unless  a  Default  or  Event  of  Default  has  occurred  and  is
continuing, not more than once a year and after at least five Business Days’ notice, (i) permit representatives of any Lender
to visit and inspect any of its properties and examine and make abstracts from any of its books and records at any reasonable
time to discuss the business, operations,  properties  and financial  and other condition  of the Borrower  and its Significant
Subsidiaries  with  officers  and  employees  of  the  Borrower  and  its  Significant  Subsidiaries  and  (ii)  use  commercially
reasonable  efforts  to  provide  for  the  Lenders  (in  the  presence  of  representatives  of  the  Borrower)  to  meet  with  the
independent certified public accountants of the Borrower and its Significant Subsidiaries; provided, that any such visits or
inspections shall be subject to such conditions as the Borrower and each of its Significant Subsidiaries shall deem necessary
based on reasonable considerations of safety, security and confidentiality; and provided, further, that neither the Borrower
nor  any  Significant  Subsidiary  shall  be  required  to  disclose  to  any  Person  any  information  the  disclosure  of  which  is
prohibited by applicable law or binding agreement or subject to attorney-client privilege or constitutes attorney-work product
or
59    
    

constitutes non-financial trade secrets or non-financial proprietary information so long as (x) such confidentiality obligation
was not entered into in contemplation hereof and (y) the Borrower provides such Lender with notice that information is being
withheld due to the existence of such confidentiality obligation.
1.7
Notices. Give notice to the Administrative Agent, and the Administrative Agent shall deliver such notice to
each Lender, promptly upon any Responsible Officer obtaining knowledge of:
(a) the occurrence of any Default or Event of Default;
(b) any change in the Rating issued by either S&P or Moody’s; and
(c) the occurrence of an ERISA Event which, individually or in the aggregate, could reasonably be expected to
result in a Material Adverse Effect (provided, that, any judicial proceeding instituted by PBGC that, within 60 days after
the  institution  of such  proceeding,  has  been  withdrawn  or stayed  by  PBGC  or  otherwise,  shall  be  disregarded  for  the
purpose of this Section 6.7(c)).
1.8
Maintenance of Licenses, etc. Maintain in full force and effect any authorization, consent, license or approval
of any Governmental Authority necessary for the conduct of the Borrower’s business as now conducted by it or necessary in
connection with this Agreement, except to the extent the failure to do so could not reasonably be expected to have a Material
Adverse Effect.
1.9
Further Assurances.
(a) (i) Comply with Section 7.08(a) of the FMB Indenture, (ii) deliver to the Administrative Agent within 120
days  after  the  Effective  Date,  a  copy  of  the  Opinion  of  Counsel  (as  defined  in  the  FMB  Indenture)  delivered  to  the
Indenture Trustee under Section 7.08(a)(i) of the FMB Indenture relating the Supplemental Indenture and (iii) deliver to
the Administrative Agent a copy of each Opinion of Counsel delivered to the Indenture Trustee under Section 7.08(a)(ii)
of the FMB Indenture relating to the Supplemental Indenture.
(b) Promptly upon the reasonable request by the Administrative Agent, or by the Required Lenders through the
Administrative  Agent,  (i)  correct  any  material  defect  or  error  that  may  be  discovered  in  any  Loan  Document  or  the
execution, acknowledgment, filing or recordation thereof and (ii) do, execute, acknowledge and deliver any and all such
further certificates, documents, agreements and other instruments as reasonably required from time to time to carry out
more effectively the purposes of the Loan Documents.
1.10
Use of Proceeds. The Borrower shall use the proceeds of the Loans in accordance with Section 4.12.
Section 31.
NEGATIVE COVENANTS
The  Borrower  hereby  agrees  that,  so  long  as  any  Loan,  or  any  interest  on  any  Loan  or  any  fee  payable  to  any  Lender  or  the
Administrative Agent hereunder remains outstanding, or any other amount then due and payable is owing to any Lender or the
Administrative Agent hereunder, the Borrower shall not and shall not permit its Significant Subsidiaries to:
60    
    

1.1
Indebtedness. At all times prior to the Indebtedness Covenant Release Date, create, incur, assume or permit to
exist any Indebtedness, except for:
(a) Indebtedness and other Obligations created hereunder;
(b) Indebtedness  of  the  Borrower  under  the  Utility  Revolving  Credit  Agreement  in  an  aggregate  outstanding
principal amount not to exceed $3,500,000,000 plus any additional amounts permitted to be incurred thereunder pursuant
to Section 2.3 of the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement as in effect on the date hereof and any Permitted Refinancing
thereof;
(c) Indebtedness of the Borrower outstanding on the Effective Date in an aggregate outstanding principal amount
not to exceed, together with any Loans outstanding hereunder on the Effective Date, $33,350,000,000 and any Permitted
Refinancing thereof;
(d) Indebtedness  (i)  pursuant  to  tenders,  statutory  obligations,  bids,  leases,  governmental  contracts,  trade
contracts, surety, stay, customs, appeal, performance and/or return of money bonds or other similar obligations incurred in
the ordinary course of business and (ii) in respect of letters of credit, bank guaranties, surety bonds, performance bonds or
similar instruments and reimbursement obligations to support any of the foregoing items;
(e) (i) Guarantee Obligations with respect to the obligations of suppliers, customers and licensees and other third
parties in the ordinary course of business, (ii) Indebtedness incurred in the ordinary course of business to pay the deferred
purchase  price  of  goods  or  services  or  progress  payments  in  connection  with  such  goods  and  services  and  (iii)
Indebtedness in respect of letters of credit, bankers’ acceptances, bank guaranties or similar instruments supporting trade
payables, warehouse receipts or similar facilities entered into in the ordinary course of business, workers compensation
claims or other employee benefits;
(f)
Guarantee Obligations with respect to Indebtedness otherwise permitted to be incurred pursuant to this Section
7.1 and Guarantee Obligations with respect to the obligations of Subsidiaries and joint ventures of the Borrower; provided
that no such Guarantee Obligations with respect to Indebtedness of the Borrower constituting debt for borrowed money or
evidenced  by  notes,  bonds,  debentures  or  other  similar  instruments  (including,  for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the  First
Mortgage Bonds) shall be permitted except to the extent provided by a Person that is, or concurrently with providing such
Guarantee  Obligations  becomes,  a  guarantor  of  the  Obligations  hereunder  on  terms  and  pursuant  to  documentation
reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent;
(g) Indebtedness  consisting  of  (i)  the  financing  of  insurance  premiums  and/or  (ii)  take-or-pay  obligations
contained in supply arrangements;
(h) Indebtedness with respect to Capital Lease Obligations and purchase money Indebtedness; provided, that the
aggregate  outstanding  principal  amount  of  Indebtedness  with  respect  to  Capital  Lease  Obligations  shall  not  exceed
$500,000,000 at any one time;
61    
    

(i)
(i)  obligations  under  any  Cash  Management  Agreement  and  (ii)  Indebtedness  under  any  Swap  Agreement
permitted under Section 7.6;
(j)
Indebtedness  arising  from  any  agreement  providing  for  indemnification,  adjustment  or  purchase  price  or
similar  obligations  (including  contingent  earn-out  obligations)  incurred  in  connection  with  any  Disposition  or  any
purchase of assets or Capital Stock, and Indebtedness arising from guaranties, letters of credit, bank guaranties, surety
bonds, performance bonds or similar instruments securing the performance of the Borrower or its Subsidiaries pursuant to
any such agreement;
(k) Indebtedness in respect of banking services and incentive, supplier finance or similar programs incurred in the
ordinary course of business;
(l)
customer  deposits  and  advance  payments  received  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  from  customers  for
goods and services purchased in the ordinary course of business;
(m) Indebtedness  representing  deferred  compensation  to  employees,  consultants  or  independent  contractors
incurred in the ordinary course of business;
(n) Indebtedness  arising  from  the  honoring  by  a  bank  or  other  financial  institution  of  a  check,  draft  or  other
similar instrument drawn against insufficient funds in the ordinary course of business;
(o) endorsements for collection or deposit in the ordinary course of business;
(p) Indebtedness issued or incurred to fund rate base growth in an aggregate outstanding principal amount not to
exceed $9,000,000,000 at any time and any Permitted Refinancing thereof; and
(q) other Indebtedness of the Borrower in an aggregate outstanding principal amount not to exceed the excess, if
any, of 10% of Net Tangible Assets of the Borrower over the amount of Indebtedness incurred pursuant to clause (p)
above.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no Guarantee Obligations from any Significant Subsidiary of the Borrower
with respect to Indebtedness of the Borrower constituting debt for borrowed money or evidenced by notes, bonds, debentures
or other similar instruments (including, for the avoidance of doubt, the First Mortgage Bonds) shall be permitted hereunder
except to the extent provided by a Person that is, or concurrently with providing such Guarantee Obligations becomes, a
guarantor of the Obligations hereunder on terms and pursuant to documentation reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative
Agent.
1.2
Consolidated Capitalization Ratio. Permit the Consolidated Capitalization Ratio on the last day of any fiscal
quarter, from and after the last day of the first fiscal quarter ending after the Effective Date, to exceed 0.65 to 1.00.
1.3
Liens. Create, incur, assume or suffer to exist any Lien upon any assets of the Borrower or any Significant
Subsidiary, whether now owned or
62    
    

hereafter acquired, except for (a) Liens securing the Obligations under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents and (b)
Liens permitted under Section 7.06(b) of the FMB Indenture.
1.4
Fundamental  Changes.  Enter  into  any  merger,  consolidation  or  amalgamation,  or  liquidate,  wind  up  or
dissolve  itself  (or  suffer  any  liquidation  or  dissolution),  or  Dispose  of  all  or  substantially  all  of  its  property  or  business
(including,  without  limitation,  rental  equipment  or  leasehold  interests  and  excluding  the  sale  or  transfer  of  any  accounts
receivable or of any amounts that are accrued and recorded in a regulatory account for collections by the Borrower, in each
case,  in  connection  with  a  securitization  transaction  including,  without  limitation,  any  A/R  Securitization  Transaction),
except that the Borrower may be merged, consolidated or amalgamated with another Person or Dispose of all or substantially
all of its property or business so long as, after giving effect to such transaction, (a) no Default or Event of Default shall have
occurred  and  be  continuing,  (b)  either  (i)  the  Borrower  is  the  continuing  or  surviving  corporation  of  such  merger,
consolidation or amalgamation or (ii) the continuing or surviving corporation of such merger, consolidation or amalgamation,
if not the Borrower or the purchaser, (x) shall be an entity organized or existing under the laws of the United States, any state
thereof  or  the  District  of  Columbia,  (y)  shall  have  assumed  all  obligations  of  the  Borrower  under  the  Loan  Documents
pursuant  to  arrangements  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Administrative  Agent  and  (z)  to  the  extent  requested  by  the
Administrative  Agent  or  any  Lender,  shall  have  promptly  provided  to  the  Administrative  Agent  or  such  Lender  all
documentation and other information that may be required by the Administrative Agent or such Lender in order to enable
compliance with applicable “know-your-customer” and anti-money laundering rules and regulations, including information
required  by  the  Patriot  Act  and  the  Beneficial  Ownership  Regulation  and  (c)  the  ratings  by  Moody’s  and  S&P  of  the
continuing  or  surviving  corporation’s  or  purchaser’s  senior,  secured  debt  shall  be  at  least  the  higher  of  (1)  Baa3  from
Moody’s and BBB- from S&P and (2) the ratings by such rating agencies of the Borrower’s senior, secured debt in effect
before the earlier of the occurrence or the public announcement of such event.
1.5
Sale  and  Lease  Back  Transactions.  Enter  into  any  arrangement,  directly  or  indirectly,  with  any  Person
whereby it shall sell or transfer any property having fair market value in excess of $10,000,000, real or personal, used or
useful in its business, whether now owned or hereafter acquired, and thereafter rent or lease such property or other property
that it intends to use for substantially the same purpose or purposes as the property being sold or transferred, except for (a)
those  transactions  described  on  Schedule  7.5  and  (b)  any  other  sale  of  any  fixed  or  capital  assets  that  is  made  for  cash
consideration; provided that, in each case, if such sale and leaseback results in a Capital Lease Obligation, such Capital Lease
Obligation  is  permitted  by  Section  7.1  and  any  Lien  made  the  subject  of  such  Capital  Lease  Obligation  is  permitted  by
Section 7.3.
1.6
Swap  Agreements.  Enter  into  any  Swap  Agreement,  other  than  Swap  Agreements  entered  into  not  for
speculative purposes (a) to hedge or mitigate risks to which the Borrower and its Subsidiaries are exposed in the conduct of
its business or the management of its liabilities (including, without limitation, raw material, commodities, fuel, electricity or
other supply costs and currency risks), (b) to effectively cap, collar or exchange interest rates (from fixed to floating rates,
from one floating rate to another floating rate or fixed rate or otherwise) with respect to any interest bearing Indebtedness of
the Borrower and
63    
    

its Subsidiaries permitted by this Agreement, (c) to swap currency in connection with funding the business of the Borrower
and  its  Subsidiaries  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  or  (d)  entered  into  in  connection  with  any  A/R  Securitization
Transaction.
1.7
Amendments to FMB Indenture. Amend, supplement, modify or waive the FMB Indenture in any manner that
is  materially  adverse  to  the  Lenders  hereunder;  provided  that  the  foregoing  shall  not  prohibit  the  Borrower  from
supplementing the FMB Indenture in order to provide for the issuance of additional First Mortgage Bonds in accordance with
the FMB Indenture or to add property to the Lien of the FMB Indenture.
Section 32.
EVENTS OF DEFAULT
If any of the following events shall occur and be continuing on or after the Effective Date:
(a) the Borrower shall fail to pay any principal of the Loans when due in accordance with the terms hereof; or the
Borrower shall fail to pay any interest on the Loans, or any other amount payable hereunder or under any other Loan
Document, within five Business Days after any such interest or other amount becomes due in accordance with the terms
hereof; or
(b) any representation or warranty made or deemed made by the Borrower herein or in any other Loan Document
or that is contained in any certificate, document or financial or other statement furnished by it at any time under or in
connection with this Agreement or any such other Loan Document shall prove to have been inaccurate in any material
respect on or as of the date made or deemed made, unless, as of any date of determination, the facts or circumstances to
which such representation or warranty relates have changed with the result that such representation or warranty is true and
correct in all material respects on such date; or
(c) the Borrower shall default in the observance or performance of any agreement contained in Section 6.4(a)(i),
Section 6.7(a), Section 6.10, Section 7.1, Section 7.2, Section 7.3 or Section 7.4 of this Agreement; or
(d) the  Borrower  shall  default  in  the  observance  or  performance  of  any  other  agreement  contained  in  this
Agreement or any other Loan Document (other than as provided in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this Section), and such
default shall continue unremedied for a period of 30 days after notice to the Borrower from the Administrative Agent at
the request of the Required Lenders; or
(e) the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries shall (i) default in making any payment of any principal of
any  Indebtedness  (including  any  Guarantee  Obligation,  but  excluding  the  Loans)  on  the  due  date  with  respect  thereto
(after giving effect to any period of grace, if any, provided in the instrument or agreement under which such Indebtedness
was created); or (ii) default in making any payment of any interest on any such Indebtedness beyond the period of grace, if
any, provided in the instrument or agreement under which such Indebtedness was created; or (iii) default in the observance
or performance of any other agreement or condition relating to any such Indebtedness or contained in any instrument or
agreement evidencing, securing
64    
    

or relating thereto, or any other event shall occur or condition exist, the effect of which default or other event or condition
is to cause, or (in the case of all Indebtedness other than Indebtedness under any Swap Agreement) to permit the holder or
beneficiary of such Indebtedness (or a trustee or agent on behalf of such holder or beneficiary) to cause, with the giving of
notice if required, such Indebtedness to become due prior to its stated maturity or (in the case of any such Indebtedness
constituting a Guarantee Obligation) to become payable; provided, that a default, event or condition described in clause
(i), (ii) or (iii) of this paragraph (e) shall not at any time constitute an Event of Default unless, at such time, one or more
defaults, events or conditions of the type described in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of this paragraph (e) shall have occurred and
be  continuing  with  respect  to  Indebtedness  the  outstanding  principal  amount  of  which  exceeds  in  the  aggregate
$200,000,000; provided, further, that unless payment of the Loans hereunder has already been accelerated, if such default
shall be cured by the Borrower or such Significant Subsidiary or waived by the holders of such Indebtedness and any
acceleration of maturity having resulted from such default shall be rescinded or annulled, in each case, in accordance with
the  terms  of  such  agreement  or  instrument,  without  any  modification  of  the  terms  of  such  Indebtedness  requiring  the
Borrower or such Significant Subsidiary to furnish security or additional security therefor, reducing the average life to
maturity  thereof  or  increasing  the  principal  amount  thereof,  or  any  agreement  by  the  Borrower  or  such  Significant
Subsidiary to furnish security or additional security therefor or to issue in lieu thereof Indebtedness secured by additional
or other collateral or with a shorter average life to maturity or in a greater principal amount, then any Default hereunder by
reason thereof shall be deemed likewise to have been thereupon cured or waived; or
(f)
(i) the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries shall commence any case, proceeding or other action
(A)  under  any  existing  or  future  law  of  any  jurisdiction,  domestic  or  foreign,  relating  to  bankruptcy,  insolvency,
reorganization or relief of debtors, seeking to have an order for relief entered with respect to it, or seeking to adjudicate it
as  bankrupt  or  insolvent,  or  seeking  reorganization,  arrangement,  adjustment,  winding  up,  liquidation,  dissolution,
composition or other relief with respect to it or its debts, or (B) seeking appointment of a receiver, trustee, custodian,
conservator or other similar official for it or for all or any substantial part of its assets, or the Borrower or any of its
Significant Subsidiaries shall make a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors; or (ii) there shall be commenced
against the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries any case, proceeding or other action of a nature referred to in
clause (i) above that (A) results in the entry of an order for relief or any such adjudication or appointment or (B) remains
undismissed, undischarged or unbonded for a period of 60 days; or (iii) there shall be commenced against the Borrower or
any  of  its  Significant  Subsidiaries  any  case,  proceeding  or  other  action  seeking  issuance  of  a  warrant  of  attachment,
execution, distraint or similar process against all or any substantial part of its assets that results in the entry of an order for
any such relief that shall not have been vacated, discharged, or stayed or bonded pending appeal within 60 days from the
entry thereof; or (iv) the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries shall generally not, or shall be unable to, or shall
admit in writing its inability to, pay its debts as they become due; or
65    
    

(g) there occurs any ERISA Event that, individually or in the aggregate, would reasonably be expected to result in
a Material Adverse Effect; or
(h) one or more judgments or decrees shall be entered against the Borrower or any of its Significant Subsidiaries
by a court of competent jurisdiction involving in the aggregate a liability (not paid or, subject to customary deductibles,
fully covered by insurance as to which the relevant insurance company has not denied coverage) of $200,000,000 or more,
and all such judgments or decrees shall not have been vacated, discharged, stayed or bonded pending appeal within 45
days from the entry thereof unless, in the case of a discharge, such judgment or decree is due at a later date in one or more
payments and the Borrower or such Significant Subsidiary satisfies the obligation to make such payment or payments on
or prior to the date such payment or payments become due in accordance with such judgment or decree; or
(i)
there shall have occurred a Change of Control; or
(j)
any Loan Document, at any time after its execution and delivery and for any reason other than as expressly
permitted hereunder or thereunder or satisfaction in full of all the Obligations, ceases to be in full force and effect; or the
Borrower contests in any manner in writing the validity or enforceability of any Loan Document; or the Borrower denies
in writing that it has any or further liability or obligation under any Loan Document, or purports in writing to revoke,
terminate or rescind any Loan Document; or
(k) at any time (i) any Senior Bond shall cease to be outstanding for any reason other than (A) the payment in full
of  the  applicable  Tranche  relating  to  such  Senior  Bond  and  other  obligations  then  due  and  owing  under  the  Loan
Documents with respect thereto or (B) the payment in full of such Senior Bond, (ii) the Administrative Agent, on behalf of
the Lenders, shall cease at any time to be the holder of any Senior Bond for all purposes of the FMB Indenture (unless
such Senior Bond is transferred by the Administrative Agent other than in connection with the payment in full of the
obligations with respect to such Senior Bond) or (iii) the Lien of the FMB Indenture shall cease to constitute a valid and
enforceable Lien on the Mortgaged Property;
then, and in any such event, (A) if such event is an Event of Default specified in clause (i) or (ii) of paragraph (f) above with respect
to the Borrower, the Loans (with accrued interest thereon) and all other amounts owing under this Agreement and the other Loan
Documents shall immediately become due and payable, and (B) if such event is any other Event of Default, either or both of the
following actions may be taken: with the consent of the Required Lenders, the Administrative Agent may, or upon the request of the
Required Lenders, the Administrative Agent shall, by notice to the Borrower, declare the Loans (with accrued interest thereon) and
all other amounts owing under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents to be due and payable forthwith, whereupon the same
shall immediately become due and payable. Except as expressly provided above in this Section, presentment, demand, protest and all
other notices of any kind are hereby expressly waived by the Borrower.
Section 33.
THE AGENTS
66    
    

1.1
Appointment and Authority. Each of the Lenders hereby irrevocably appoints JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. to
act  on  its  behalf  as  the  Administrative  Agent  hereunder  and  under  the  other  Loan  Documents  and  authorizes  the
Administrative Agent to take such actions on its behalf and to exercise such powers as are delegated to the Administrative
Agent  by  the  terms  hereof  or  thereof,  together  with  such  actions  and  powers  as  are  reasonably  incidental  thereto.  The
provisions of this Section 9 are solely for the benefit of the Agents, the Lenders and the Borrower shall not have rights as a
third-party beneficiary of any of such provisions (other than with respect to the Borrower’s rights under Sections 9.9(a) and
(b)). It is understood and agreed that the use of the term “agent” herein or in any other Loan Documents (or any other similar
term) with reference to any Agent is not intended to connote any fiduciary or other implied (or express) obligations arising
under agency doctrine of any applicable law. Instead such term is used as a matter of market custom, and is intended to create
or reflect only an administrative relationship between contracting parties.
1.2
Delegation of Duties. The Administrative Agent may perform any and all of its duties and exercise its rights
and powers hereunder or under any other Loan Document by or through any one or more sub-agents appointed by it. The
Administrative Agent, and any such sub-agent may each perform any and all of its duties and exercise its rights and powers
by or through their respective Related Parties. The exculpatory provisions of this Section shall apply to any such sub-agent
and to the Related Parties of the Administrative Agent, and any such sub-agent, and shall apply to their respective activities
in connection with the syndication of the credit facilities provided for herein as well as activities as Administrative Agent.
The Administrative Agent shall not be responsible for the negligence or misconduct of any sub-agents except to the extent
that a court of competent jurisdiction determines in a final and nonappealable judgment that the Administrative Agent acted
with gross negligence or willful misconduct in the selection of such sub-agents.
1.3
Exculpatory Provisions.
(a) No Agent shall have any duties or obligations except those expressly set forth herein and in the other Loan
Documents, and its duties hereunder shall be administrative in nature. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, no
Agent:
Section  34.
shall  be  subject  to  any  fiduciary  or  other  implied  duties,  regardless  of  whether  a  Default  has  occurred  and  is
continuing;
Section 35.
shall have any duty to take any discretionary action or exercise any discretionary powers, except discretionary rights
and powers expressly contemplated hereby or by the other Loan Documents that an Agent is required to exercise as directed in
writing by the Required Lenders (or such other number or percentage of the Lenders as shall be expressly provided for herein or in
the other Loan Documents); provided that no Agent shall be required to take any action that, in its opinion or the opinion of its
counsel, may expose such Agent to liability or that is contrary to any Loan Document or applicable law, including for the avoidance
of doubt any action that may be in violation of the automatic stay under any Debtor Relief Law or that may effect a forfeiture,
modification or termination of property of a Defaulting Lender in violation of any Debtor Relief Law; and
67    
    

Section 36.
shall, except as expressly set forth herein and in the other Loan Documents, have any duty to disclose, and shall not
be liable for the failure to disclose, any information relating to the Borrower or any of its Affiliates that is communicated to or
obtained by the Person serving as an Agent or any of its Affiliates in any capacity.
(a) No Agent shall be liable for any action taken or not taken by it (i) with the consent or at the request of the
Required Lenders (or such other number or percentage of the Lenders as shall be necessary, or as such Agent shall believe
in good faith shall be necessary, under the circumstances as provided in Sections 10.1 and 8), or (ii) in the absence of its
own gross negligence or willful misconduct as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction by final and nonappealable
judgment.
(b) No Agent shall be responsible for or have any duty to ascertain or inquire into (i) any statement, warranty or
representation  made  in  or  in  connection  with  this  Agreement  or  any  other  Loan  Document,  (ii)  the  contents  of  any
certificate, report or other document delivered hereunder or thereunder or in connection herewith or therewith, (iii) the
performance or observance of any of the covenants, agreements or other terms or conditions set forth herein or therein or
the occurrence of any Default or Event of Default, (iv) the validity, enforceability, effectiveness or genuineness of this
Agreement,  any other Loan Document or any other agreement, instrument or document, or (v) the satisfaction of any
condition  set  forth  in  Section  5  or  elsewhere  herein,  other  than  to  confirm  receipt  of  items  expressly  required  to  be
delivered to such Agent.
1.2
Reliance by Administrative Agent. The Administrative Agent shall be entitled to rely upon, and shall not incur
any  liability  for  relying  upon,  any  notice,  request,  certificate,  consent,  statement,  instrument,  document  or  other  writing
(including any electronic message, Internet or intranet website posting or other distribution) believed by it to be genuine and
to have been signed, sent or otherwise authenticated by the proper Person. The Administrative Agent also may rely upon any
statement made to it orally or by telephone and believed by it to have been made by the proper Person, and shall not incur
any liability for relying thereon. In determining compliance with any condition hereunder to the making of a Loan, that by its
terms  must  be  fulfilled  to  the  satisfaction  of  a  Lender,  the  Administrative  Agent  may  presume  that  such  condition  is
satisfactory to such Lender unless the Administrative Agent shall have received notice to the contrary from such Lender prior
to  the  making  of  such  Loan.  The  Administrative  Agent  may  consult  with  legal  counsel  (who  may  be  counsel  for  the
Borrower), independent accountants and other experts selected by it, and shall not be liable for any action taken or not taken
by it in accordance with the advice of any such counsel, accountants or experts.
1.3
Notice  of  Default.  The  Administrative  Agent  shall  not  be  deemed  to  have  knowledge  or  notice  of  the
occurrence of any Default or Event of Default unless the Administrative Agent has received notice from a Lender or the
Borrower referring to this Agreement, describing such Default or Event of Default and stating that such notice is a “notice of
default”. In the event that the Administrative Agent receives such a notice, the Administrative Agent shall give notice thereof
to the Lenders. The Administrative Agent shall take such action with respect to such Default or Event of Default as shall be
reasonably directed by the Required Lenders (or, if so specified by this Agreement, all Lenders); provided that unless and
until such Agent shall have received such directions,
68    
    

such Agent may (but shall not be obligated to) take such action, or refrain from taking such action, with respect to such
Default or Event of Default as it shall deem advisable in the best interests of the Lenders.
1.4
Non-Reliance on Agents and Other Lenders. Each Lender acknowledges that it has, independently and without
reliance upon the Administrative Agent, or any other Lender or any of their Related Parties and based on such documents and
information  as  it  has  deemed  appropriate,  made  its  own  credit  analysis  and  decision  to  enter  into  this  Agreement.  Each
Lender  also  acknowledges  that  it  will,  independently  and  without  reliance  upon  the  Administrative  Agent,  or  any  other
Lender or any of their Related Parties and based on such documents and information as it shall from time to time deem
appropriate, continue to make its own decisions in taking or not taking action under or based upon this Agreement, any other
Loan Document or any related agreement or any document furnished hereunder or thereunder. Except for notices, reports and
other  documents  expressly  required  to  be  furnished  to  the  Lenders  by  the  Administrative  Agent  hereunder,  the
Administrative Agent shall not have any duty or responsibility to provide any Lender with any credit or other information
concerning  the  business,  operations,  property,  condition  (financial  or  otherwise),  prospects  or  creditworthiness  of  the
Borrower or any of its Affiliates that may come into the possession of such Agent or any of its officers, directors, employees,
agents, attorneys in fact or Affiliates.
1.5
Indemnification.  The  Lenders  agree  to  indemnify  each  Agent  in  its  capacity  as  such  (to  the  extent  not
reimbursed  by  the  Borrower  and  without  limiting  the  obligation  of  the  Borrower  to  do  so),  ratably  according  to  their
respective Percentages in effect on the date on which indemnification is sought under this Section (or, if indemnification is
sought after the date upon which the Commitments shall have terminated and the Loans shall have been paid in full, ratably
in accordance with such Percentages immediately prior to such date), from and against any and all liabilities, obligations,
losses, damages, penalties, actions, judgments, suits, costs, expenses or disbursements of any kind whatsoever that may at
any time (whether before or after the payment of the Loans) be imposed on, incurred by or asserted against such Agent in any
way relating to or arising out of, the Commitments, this Agreement, any of the other Loan Documents or any documents
contemplated by or referred to herein or therein or the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby or any action taken or
omitted by such Agent under or in connection with any of the foregoing; provided that no Lender shall be liable for the
payment of any portion of such liabilities, obligations, losses, damages, penalties, actions, judgments, suits, costs, expenses
or disbursements that are found by a final and nonappealable decision of a court of competent jurisdiction to have resulted
from such Agent’s gross negligence or willful misconduct.
1.6
Agent in Its Individual Capacity. Each Person serving as an Agent hereunder shall have the same rights and
powers in its capacity as a Lender as any other Lender and may exercise the same as though it were not an Agent, and the
terms “Lender” or “Lenders” shall, unless otherwise expressly indicated or unless the context otherwise requires, include
such Person serving as an Agent hereunder in its individual capacity. Such Person and its Affiliates may accept deposits
from,  lend  money  to, own securities  of, act  as the financial  advisor  or in any other  advisory  capacity  for, and generally
engage in any kind of business with, the Borrower or any Subsidiary or other Affiliate thereof as if such Person were not an
Agent hereunder and without any duty to account therefor to the Lenders.
69    
    

1.7
Successor Agents.
(a) The  Administrative  Agent  may  resign  upon  10  days’  notice  to  the  Lenders  and  the  Borrower.  If  the
Administrative Agent shall so resign under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents, then the Required Lenders
shall appoint from among the Lenders a successor agent for the Lenders, which successor agent shall (unless an Event of
Default under Section 8(f) with respect to the Borrower shall have occurred and be continuing) be subject to approval by
the Borrower (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed), whereupon such successor
agent shall succeed to the rights, powers and duties of the Administrative Agent and the term “Administrative Agent”
shall mean such successor agent effective upon such appointment and approval, and the former Agent’s rights, powers and
duties as Administrative Agent shall be terminated, without any other or further act or deed on the part of such former
Agent or any of the parties to this Agreement or any holders of the Loans. If no successor agent has accepted appointment
as Administrative Agent by the date that is 10 days following a retiring Agent’s notice of resignation (the “Resignation
Effective Date”), the retiring Agent’s resignation shall nevertheless thereupon become effective, and the Lenders shall
assume  and  perform  all  of  the  duties  of  the  Administrative  Agent  hereunder  until  such  time,  if  any,  as  the  Required
Lenders appoint a successor agent as provided for above. After any retiring Agent’s resignation as Administrative Agent
the provisions of Section 9.7 shall inure to its benefit as to any actions taken or omitted to be taken by it while it was an
Agent under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents.
(b) If the Person serving as Administrative Agent is a Defaulting Lender pursuant to clause (e) of the definition
thereof, the Required Lenders may, to the extent permitted by applicable law, by notice in writing to the Borrower and
such Person remove such Person as Administrative Agent and, shall appoint a successor, subject to the approval of the
Borrower  (unless  an  Event  of  Default  under  Section  8(f)  with  respect  to  the  Borrower  shall  have  occurred  and  be
continuing), which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed. If no such successor shall have
been so appointed by the Required Lenders and shall have accepted such appointment within 30 days (or such earlier day
as shall be agreed by the Required Lenders) (the “Removal Effective Date”), then such removal shall nonetheless become
effective in accordance with such notice on the Removal Effective Date.
(c) With effect from the Resignation Effective Date or the Removal Effective Date (as applicable) (i) the retiring
or removed Agent shall be discharged from its duties and obligations hereunder and under the other Loan Documents
(except that in the case of any Senior Bond held by the Administrative Agent on behalf of the Lenders, the retiring or
removed  Administrative  Agent  shall  continue  to  hold  such  Senior  Bond  in  its  name  until  such  time  as  a  successor
Administrative Agent is appointed) and (ii) except for any indemnity payments or other amounts then owed to the retiring
or  removed  Administrative  Agent,  all  payments,  communications  and  determinations  provided  to  be  made  by,  to  or
through the Administrative Agent shall instead be made by or to each Lender directly, until such time, if any, as the
Required Lenders appoint a successor Administrative Agent as provided for above. Upon the acceptance of a successor’s
appointment as Administrative Agent hereunder, such successor shall succeed to and become vested with all of the rights,
powers, privileges and duties of the retiring or removed Agent (other
70    
    

than any rights to indemnity payments or other amounts owed to the retiring or removed Agent as of the Resignation
Effective Date or the Removal Effective Date (as applicable)), and the retiring or removed Agent shall be discharged from
all of its duties and obligations hereunder or under the other Loan Documents. The fees payable by the Borrower to a
successor Agent shall be the same as those payable to its predecessor unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and
such  successor.  After  the  retiring  or  removed  Agent’s  resignation  or  removal  hereunder  and  under  the  other  Loan
Documents,  the  provisions  of  this  Section  and  Sections  2.17  and  10.5  shall  continue  in  effect  for  the  benefit  of  such
retiring or removed Agent, its sub-agents and their respective Related Parties in respect of any actions taken or omitted to
be taken by any of them while the retiring or removed Agent was acting as Agent.
1.8
Documentation Agents and Syndication Agents. None of the Documentation Agents or the Syndication Agents
shall have any duties or responsibilities hereunder in its capacity as such.
1.9
Administrative Agent May File Proofs of Claim. In case of the pendency of any proceeding under any Debtor
Relief Law, the Administrative Agent (irrespective of whether the principal of any Loan shall then be due and payable as
herein expressed or by declaration or otherwise and irrespective of whether the Administrative Agent shall have made any
demand  on  the  Borrower)  shall  be  entitled  and  empowered  (but  not  obligated)  by  intervention  in  such  proceeding  or
otherwise:
(a) to file and prove a claim for the whole amount of the principal and interest owing and unpaid in respect of the
Loans  and  all  other  Obligations  that  are  owing  and  unpaid  and  to  file  such  other  documents  as  may  be  necessary  or
advisable in order to have the claims of the Lenders and the Administrative Agent (including any claim for the reasonable
compensation, expenses, disbursements and advances of the Lenders and the Administrative Agent and their respective
agents and counsel and all other amounts due the Lenders and the Administrative Agent under Sections 2.6, 2.17 and 10.5)
allowed in such judicial proceeding; and
(b) to collect and receive any monies or other property payable or deliverable on any such claims and to distribute
the same;
and any custodian, receiver, assignee, trustee, liquidator,  sequestrator or other similar official in any such judicial proceeding is
hereby authorized by each Lender to make such payments to the Administrative Agent and, in the event that the Administrative
Agent shall consent to the making of such payments directly to the Lenders, to pay to the Administrative Agent any amount due for
the reasonable compensation, expenses, disbursements and advances of the Administrative Agent and its agents and counsel, and any
other amounts due the Administrative Agent under Sections 2.6, 2.17 and 10.5.
1.10
Certain ERISA Matters.
(a) Each Lender (x) represents and warrants, as of the date such Person became a Lender party hereto, to, and (y)
covenants, from the date such Person became a Lender party hereto to the date such Person ceases being a Lender party
hereto,  for  the  benefit  of,  the  Administrative  Agent,  and  not,  for  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  to  or  for  the  benefit  of  the
Borrower, that at least one of the following is and will be true:
71    
    

Section 37.
such Lender is not using “plan assets” (within the meaning of Section 3(42) of ERISA or otherwise) of one or more
Benefit Plans with respect to such Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance of the Loans, the
Commitments or this Agreement,
Section  38.
the  transaction  exemption  set  forth  in  one  or  more  PTEs,  such  as  PTE  84-14  (a  class  exemption  for  certain
transactions  determined  by  independent  qualified  professional  asset  managers),  PTE  95-60  (a  class  exemption  for  certain
transactions  involving  insurance  company  general  accounts),  PTE  90-1  (a  class  exemption  for  certain  transactions  involving
insurance  company  pooled  separate  accounts),  PTE  91-38  (a  class  exemption  for  certain  transactions  involving  bank  collective
investment funds) or PTE 96-23 (a class exemption for certain transactions determined by in-house asset managers), is applicable
with respect to such Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance of the Loans, the Commitments and
this Agreement,
Section 39.
(A) such Lender is an investment fund managed by a “Qualified Professional Asset Manager” (within the meaning of
Part VI of PTE 84-14), (B) such Qualified Professional Asset Manager made the investment decision on behalf of such Lender to
enter  into,  participate  in,  administer  and  perform  the  Loans,  the  Commitments  and  this  Agreement,  (C)  the  entrance  into,
participation in, administration of and performance of the Loans, the Commitments and this Agreement satisfies the requirements of
sub-sections (b) through (g) of Part I of PTE 84-14 and (D) to the best knowledge of such Lender, the requirements of subsection (a)
of Part I of PTE 84-14 are satisfied with respect to such Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance
of the Loans, the Commitments and this Agreement, or
Section 40.
such other representation, warranty and covenant as may be agreed in writing between the Administrative Agent, in
its sole discretion, and such Lender.
(a) In addition, unless either (1) sub-clause (i) in the immediately preceding clause (a) is true with respect to a
Lender or (2) a Lender has provided another representation, warranty and covenant in accordance with sub-clause (iv) in
the immediately preceding clause (a), such Lender further (x) represents and warrants, as of the date such Person became a
Lender  party hereto,  to, and (y) covenants,  from the date such Person became  a Lender  party hereto to the date such
Person ceases being a Lender party hereto, for the benefit of, the Administrative Agent, and not, for the avoidance of
doubt, to or for the benefit of the Borrower, that the Administrative Agent is not a fiduciary with respect to the assets of
such Lender involved in such Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance of the Loans, the
Commitments  and  this  Agreement  (including  in  connection  with  the  reservation  or  exercise  of  any  rights  by  the
Administrative Agent under this Agreement, any Loan Document or any documents related hereto or thereto).
1.2
Erroneous Payment.
(a)
If the Administrative Agent notifies a Lender or any Person who has received funds on behalf of a Lender, such
Lender  (any  such  Lender  or  other  recipient,  a  “Payment Recipient”)  that  the  Administrative  Agent  has  determined  in  its  sole
discretion (whether or not after receipt of any notice under immediately succeeding clause (b)) that any funds received by such
Payment Recipient from the Administrative Agent or any of its Affiliates were erroneously transmitted to, or otherwise erroneously
or mistakenly received by, such Payment Recipient (whether or not known to such Lender or other Payment Recipient on its behalf)
(any such funds, whether received as a
72    
    

payment,  prepayment  or  repayment  of  principal,  interest,  fees,  distribution  or  otherwise,  individually  and  collectively,  an
“Erroneous Payment”) and demands the return of such Erroneous Payment (or a portion thereof), such Erroneous Payment shall at
all times remain the property of the Administrative Agent and shall be segregated by the Payment Recipient and held in trust for the
benefit of the Administrative Agent, and such Lender shall (or, with respect to any Payment Recipient who received such funds on
its behalf, shall cause such Payment Recipient to) promptly, but in no event later than one Business Day thereafter, return to the
Administrative Agent the amount of any such Erroneous Payment (or portion thereof) as to which such a demand was made, in same
day funds (in the currency  so received),  together  with interest  thereon  in respect  of each  day from and including  the date such
Erroneous  Payment  (or  portion  thereof)  was  received  by  such  Payment  Recipient  to  the  date  such  amount  is  repaid  to  the
Administrative Agent in same day funds at the greater of the Federal Funds EffectiveNYFRB Rate and a rate determined by the
Administrative Agent in accordance with banking industry rules on interbank compensation from time to time in effect. A notice of
the Administrative Agent to any Payment Recipient under this clause (a) shall be conclusive, absent manifest error.
(b)
Without limiting immediately preceding clause (a), each Lender, or any Person who has received funds on behalf of a
Lender, such Lender, hereby further agrees that if it receives a payment, prepayment or repayment (whether received as a payment,
prepayment  or  repayment  of  principal,  interest,  fees,  distribution  or  otherwise)  from  the  Administrative  Agent  (or  any  of  its
Affiliates) (x) that is in a different amount than, or on a different date from, that specified in a notice of payment, prepayment or
repayment sent by the Administrative Agent (or any of its Affiliates) with respect to such payment, prepayment or repayment, (y)
that was not preceded or accompanied by a notice of payment, prepayment or repayment sent by the Administrative Agent (or any of
its Affiliates), or (z) that such Lender, or other such recipient, otherwise becomes aware was transmitted, or received, in error or by
mistake (in whole or in part) in each case:
(i)
(A) in the case of immediately preceding clauses (x) or (y), an error shall be presumed to have been made
(absent written confirmation from the Administrative Agent to the contrary) or (B) an error has been made (in the case of
immediately preceding clause (z)), in each case, with respect to such payment, prepayment or repayment; and
(ii)
such Lender shall (and shall cause any other recipient that receives funds on its respective behalf to) promptly
(and, in all events, within one Business Day of its knowledge of such error) notify the Administrative Agent of its receipt of
such  payment,  prepayment  or  repayment,  the  details  thereof  (in  reasonable  detail)  and  that  it  is  so  notifying  the
Administrative Agent pursuant to this Section 9.13(b), and upon demand from the Administrative Agent, it shall promptly,
but in no event later than one Business Day thereafter, return to the Administrative Agent the amount of any such payment,
prepayment or repayment as to which such a demand was made in same day funds, together with interest thereon in respect
of each day from and including the date such payment, prepayment or repayment was received by such Lender to the date
such  amount  is  repaid  to  the  Administrative  Agent  at  the  greater  of  the  NYFRB  Rate  and  a  rate  determined  by  the
Administrative Agent in accordance with banking industry rules on interbank compensation from time to time in effect.
(c)
Each Lender hereby authorizes the Administrative Agent to set off, net and apply any and all amounts at any time
owing to such Lender under any Loan Document, or otherwise payable or distributable by the Administrative Agent to such Lender
from any source, against any amount due to the Administrative Agent under
73    
    

immediately preceding clause (a) or under the indemnification provisions of this Agreement.
(d)
The Borrower hereby agrees that in the event an Erroneous Payment (or portion thereof) are not recovered from any
Lender that has received such Erroneous Payment (or portion thereof) for any reason, the Administrative Agent shall be subrogated
to all the rights of such Lender with respect to such amount.
(e)
The parties hereto agree that an Erroneous Payment shall not pay, prepay, repay, discharge or otherwise satisfy any
Obligations owed by the Borrower, except, in each case, to the extent such Erroneous Payment is, and solely with respect to the
amount of such Erroneous Payment that is, comprised of funds received by the Administrative Agent from the Borrower for the
purpose of making such Erroneous Payment.
(f)
To  the  extent  permitted  by applicable  law,  no  Payment  Recipient  shall  assert  any  right  or  claim  to  an Erroneous
Payment,  and  hereby  waives,  and  is  deemed  to  waive,  any  claim,  counterclaim,  defense  or  right  of  set-off  or  recoupment  with
respect  to  any  demand,  claim  or  counterclaim  by  the  Administrative  Agent  for  the  return  of  any  Erroneous  Payment  received,
including without limitation waiver of any defense based on “discharge for value” or any similar doctrine.
(g)
Each party’s obligations, agreements and waivers under this Section 9.13 shall survive the resignation or replacement
of  the  Administrative  Agent,  any  transfer  of  rights  or  obligations  by,  or  the  replacement  of  a  Lender,  the  termination  of  the
Commitments and/or the repayment, satisfaction or discharge of all Obligations (or any portion thereof) under any Loan Document.
Section 41.
MISCELLANEOUS
1.1
Amendments  and  Waivers.  Subject  to  Section  2.13(b)  and  (c),  neither  this  Agreement,  any  other  Loan
Document,  nor  any  terms  hereof  or  thereof  may  be  amended,  supplemented  or  modified  except  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of this Section 10.1. The Required Lenders and the Borrower may, or, with the written consent of the Required
Lenders, the Administrative Agent and the Borrower may, from time to time, (a) enter into written amendments, supplements
or modifications hereto and to the other Loan Documents for the purpose of adding any provisions to this Agreement or the
other Loan Documents or changing in any manner the rights of the Lenders or of the Borrower hereunder or thereunder or (b)
waive, on such terms and conditions as the Required Lenders or the Administrative Agent, as the case may be, may specify in
such instrument, any of the requirements of this Agreement or the other Loan Documents or any Default or Event of Default
and its consequences; provided, however, that no such waiver and no such amendment, supplement or modification shall:
Section 42.
forgive the principal amount or extend the final scheduled date of maturity of any Loan, reduce the stated rate of any
interest or fee payable hereunder (except in connection with the waiver of applicability of any post-default increase in interest rates
(which waiver shall be effective with the consent of the Required Lenders)) or extend the scheduled date of any payment thereof, in
each case without the written consent of each Lender directly affected thereby;
Section 43.
eliminate or reduce the voting rights of any Lender under this Section 10.1 or Section 10.6(a)(i) without the written
consent of such Lender;
74    
    

Section 44.
reduce any percentage specified in the definition of Required Lenders without the written consent of all Lenders;
Section 45.
amend, modify or waive any provision of Section 2.14, Section 10.07 (Application of Money Collected) of the FMB
Indenture or any similar provision in the Loan Documents related to pro rata treatment without the consent of each Lender directly
affected thereby;
Section 46.
amend, modify or waive any provision of Section 9 without the written consent of the Administrative Agent;
Section 47.
[reserved];
Section 48.
amend, modify or waive any provision of Section 5.1 without the written consent of all the Lenders;
Section 49.
amend, modify or waive any provision of Section 2.8(b) without the written consent of each Lender affected thereby;
Section 50.
amend or modify any provision in any Loan Document in a manner that by its terms affects the rights or duties under
this Agreement of the Lenders of one Tranche (but not the other Tranche), without the prior written consent of the requisite number
or percentage in interest of each affected Tranche of Lenders that would be required to consent thereto under this Section if such
Tranche of Lenders were the only Tranche of Lenders hereunder at the time; or
Section 51.
instruct the Administrative Agent to vote the Senior Bonds in favor of the release of all or substantially all of the
Mortgaged Property without the written consent of all the Lenders.
Any such waiver and any such amendment, supplement or modification shall apply equally to each of the Lenders and shall be
binding upon the Borrower, the Lenders, the Administrative Agent and all future holders of the Loans. In the case of any waiver, the
Borrower, the Lenders and the Administrative Agent shall be restored to their former position and rights hereunder and under the
other Loan Documents, and any Default or Event of Default waived shall be deemed to be cured and not continuing; but no such
waiver shall extend to any subsequent or other Default or Event of Default, or impair any right consequent thereon.
Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  in  this  Section  10.1,  if  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  Borrower  acting
together identify any ambiguity, omission, mistake, typographical error or other defect in any provision of this Agreement or any
other Loan Document, then the Administrative Agent and the Borrower shall be permitted to amend, modify or supplement such
provision to cure such ambiguity, omission, mistake, typographical error or other defect, and any such amendment, modification or
supplement shall become effective without any further action or consent of any other party to this Agreement.
If the Required Lenders shall have approved any amendment which requires the consent of all of the Lenders, the Borrower shall be
permitted  to  replace  any  non-consenting  Lender  with  another  financial  institution, provided that,  (i)  the  replacement  financial
institution shall purchase at par, all Loans and other amounts owing to such replaced Lender on or prior to the date of replacement,
(ii) the Borrower shall be liable to such replaced Lender under Section 2.17 if any EurodollarTerm Benchmark Loan owing to
75    
    

such  replaced  Lender  shall  be  purchased  other  than  on  the  last  day  of  the  Interest  Period  relating  thereto  (as  if  such  purchase
constituted a prepayment of such Loans), (iii) such replacement financial institution, if not already a Lender, shall be reasonably
satisfactory to the Administrative Agent, (iv) the replaced Lender shall be obligated to make such replacement in accordance with
the provisions of Section 10.6 (provided that the Borrower shall be obligated to pay the registration and processing fee referred to
therein) (for the avoidance of doubt, such replacement shall be effective subject to the conditions in the other clauses set forth
in this proviso, regardless of whether such replaced Lender enters into an Assignment and Assumption) and (v) any such
replacement shall not be deemed to be a waiver of any rights the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, or any other Lender shall have
against the replaced Lender.
Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  herein,  no  Defaulting  Lender  shall  have  any  right  to  approve  or  disapprove  any
amendment,  supplement,  modification,  waiver  or  consent  hereunder  (and  any  amendment,  supplement,  modification,  waiver  or
consent which by its terms requires the consent of all Lenders or each affected Lender may be effected with the consent of the
applicable Lenders other than Defaulting Lenders), except that (i) any reduction of the amount of principal or interest owed to such
Defaulting Lender shall, in each case, require the consent of such Defaulting Lender, and (ii) a Defaulting Lender’s Percentage shall
be taken into consideration along with the Percentage of non-Defaulting Lenders when voting to approve or disapprove any waiver,
amendment or modification that by its terms affects any Defaulting Lender more adversely than other affected Lenders.
1.1
Notices.
(a) All notices, requests and demands to or upon the respective parties hereto to be effective shall be in writing
(including  by telecopy), and, unless otherwise expressly provided herein, shall be deemed to have been duly given or
made when delivered during the recipient’s normal business hours, or three Business Days after being deposited in the
mail,  postage  prepaid,  or,  in  the  case  of  telecopy  notice,  when  received  during  the  recipient’s  normal  business  hours,
addressed as  follows in  the  case  of the  Borrower  and  the Administrative  Agent, and  as set  forth  in  an administrative
questionnaire  delivered  to  the  Administrative  Agent  in  the  case  of  the  Lenders,  or  to  such  other  address  as  may  be
hereafter notified by the respective parties hereto:
Borrower:    Pacific Gas and Electric Company 
c/o PG&E Corporation 
P.O. Box 770000 
San Francisco, California 94177 
Attention: Treasurer 
Telecopy: (415) 973-8968 
Telephone: (415) 973-8956
with a copy to:    Pacific Gas and Electric Company 
c/o PG&E Corporation 
P.O. Box 770000 
San Francisco, California 94177 
Attention: General Counsel 
Telecopy: (415) 973-5520
Administrative Agent:    JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. 
500 Stanton Christiana Road
76    
    

NCC 5, 1st Floor 
Newark, DE 19713-2107 
Attention: Mary Crews 
Telecopy: (302) 634-5758 
Telephone: (302) 634-1417 
Email: mary.crews@jpmorgan.com
provided that any notice, request or demand to or upon the Administrative Agent or any Lender shall not be effective until received.
(b) Notices and other communications to the Administrative Agent or the Lenders hereunder may be delivered or
furnished by electronic communications pursuant to procedures approved by the Administrative Agent; provided that the
foregoing shall not apply to notices pursuant to Section 2 unless otherwise agreed by the Administrative Agent and each
Lender.  The  Administrative  Agent  or  the  Borrower  may,  in  its  discretion,  agree  to  accept  notices  and  other
communications  to  it  hereunder  by  electronic  communications  pursuant  to  procedures  approved  by  it; provided that
approval of such procedures may be limited to particular notices or communications.
(c) Unless the Administrative Agent otherwise prescribes, (i) notices and other communications sent to an e-mail
address shall be deemed received upon the sender’s receipt of an acknowledgement from the intended recipient (such as
by the “return receipt requested” function, as available, return e-mail or other written acknowledgement), and (ii) notices
or communications posted to an Internet or intranet website shall be deemed received upon the deemed receipt by the
intended  recipient,  at  its  e-mail  address  as  described  in  the  foregoing  clause  (i),  of  notification  that  such  notice  or
communication is available and identifying the website address therefor; provided that, for both clauses (i) and (ii) above,
if such notice, email or other communication is not sent during the normal business hours of the recipient, such notice or
communication shall be deemed to have been sent at the opening of business on the next Business Day for the recipient.
(d) (i)  The  Borrower  agrees  that  the  Administrative  Agent  may,  but  shall  not  be  obligated  to,  make  the
Communications (as defined below) available to the Lenders by posting the Communications on Debt Domain, Intralinks,
Syndtrak or a substantially similar electronic transmission system (the “Platform”).
Section  52.
The  Platform  is  provided  “as  is”  and  “as  available.”  The  Agent  Parties  (as  defined  below)  do  not  warrant  the
adequacy of the Platform and expressly disclaim liability for errors or omissions in the Communications. No warranty of any kind,
express, implied or statutory, including, without limitation, any warranty of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non-
infringement of third-party rights or freedom from viruses or other code defects, is made by any Agent Party in connection with the
Communications or the Platform. In no event shall the Administrative Agent or any of its Related Parties (collectively, the “Agent
Parties”) have any liability to the Borrower, any Lender or any other Person or entity for damages of any kind, including, without
limitation, direct or indirect, special, incidental or consequential damages, losses or expenses (whether in tort, contract or otherwise)
arising out of the Borrower’s or the Administrative Agent’s transmission of Communications through the Platform, except to the
extent such liability resulted from the gross negligence or willful misconduct of the Administrative Agent or any of its Related
Parties as determined by a court of competent
77    
    

jurisdiction  in  a  final  non-appealable  judgment.  “Communications”  means,  collectively,  any  notice,  demand,  communication,
information,  document  or  other  material  provided  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Borrower  pursuant  to  any  Loan  Document  or  the
transactions  contemplated  therein  which  is  distributed  to  the  Administrative  Agent  or  any  Lender  by  means  of  electronic
communications pursuant to this Section, including through the Platform.
1.1
No  Waiver;  Cumulative  Remedies.  No  failure  to  exercise  and  no  delay  in  exercising,  on  the  part  of  the
Administrative Agent or any Lender, any right, remedy, power or privilege hereunder or under the other Loan Documents
shall operate as a waiver thereof; nor shall any single or partial exercise of any right, remedy, power or privilege hereunder
preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right, remedy, power or privilege.  The rights,
remedies,  powers  and  privileges  herein  provided  are  cumulative  and  not  exclusive  of  any  rights,  remedies,  powers  and
privileges provided by law.
1.2
Survival of Representations and Warranties. All representations and warranties made hereunder, in the other
Loan Documents and in any document, certificate or statement delivered pursuant hereto or in connection herewith shall
survive the execution and delivery of this Agreement and the making of the Loans hereunder.
1.3
Payment of Expenses and Taxes. The Borrower agrees (a) to pay or reimburse the Administrative Agent and
the Lenders for all their respective reasonable out of pocket costs and expenses incurred in connection with the development,
preparation  and  execution  of,  and  any  amendment,  supplement  or  modification  to,  this  Agreement  and  the  other  Loan
Documents and any other documents prepared in connection herewith or therewith, and the consummation of the transactions
contemplated hereby and thereby, including the reasonable fees and disbursements of only one joint counsel and one joint
special California counsel and, if necessary, one joint local counsel in each other relevant jurisdiction to the Administrative
Agent  and  the  Lenders  (and  in  the  case  of  an  actual  or  perceived  conflict  of  interest,  one  additional  counsel  for  each
applicable jurisdiction to each group of similarly situated affected persons) and filing and recording fees and expenses, with
statements with respect to the foregoing to be submitted to the Borrower prior to the Effective Date (in the case of amounts to
be  paid  on  the  Effective  Date)  and  from  time  to  time  thereafter  on  a  quarterly  basis  or  such  other  periodic  basis  as  the
Administrative Agent shall deem appropriate, (b) to pay or reimburse each Lender and the Administrative Agent for all its
costs and expenses incurred in connection with the enforcement or preservation of its rights under this Agreement, the other
Loan Documents and any such other documents, including the reasonable fees and disbursements of only one joint counsel,
one  joint  special  California  counsel  and,  if  necessary,  one  local  counsel  in  each  other  relevant  jurisdiction  to  the
Administrative Agent and the Lenders (and in the case of an actual or perceived conflict of interest, one additional counsel
for each applicable jurisdiction to each group of similarly situated affected persons), and (c) to pay, indemnify, and hold each
Lender, the Administrative Agent and their respective Affiliates and their respective officers, directors, employees and agents
(each,  an  “Indemnitee”)  harmless  from  and  against  any  and  all  other  liabilities,  obligations,  losses,  damages,  penalties,
actions,  judgments,  suits,  costs,  expenses  or  disbursements  of  any  kind  or  nature  whatsoever  whether  brought  by  the
Borrower or any other Person, with respect to the execution, delivery, enforcement and performance of, or arising out of or in
connection with, this Agreement, the other Loan Documents and any such other documents, including
78    
    

any of the foregoing relating to the use of proceeds of the Loans or the violation of, noncompliance with or liability under,
any Environmental Law directly or indirectly relating to the Borrower, its Significant Subsidiaries or any of the facilities and
properties owned, leased or operated by the Borrower or its Significant Subsidiaries and the reasonable, documented and
invoiced fees and expenses of one joint counsel and one joint special California counsel and, if necessary, one joint local
counsel in each other relevant jurisdiction to the applicable Indemnitee (and in the case of an actual or perceived conflict of
interest,  one  additional  counsel  for  each  applicable  jurisdiction  to  each  group  of  similarly  situated  affected  persons),  in
connection with claims, actions or proceedings by any Indemnitee against the Borrower under any Loan Document (all the
foregoing in this clause (c), collectively, the “Indemnified Liabilities”), provided, that the Borrower shall have no obligation
hereunder to any Indemnitee with respect to Indemnified Liabilities to the extent such Indemnified Liabilities resulted from,
as determined in a final non-appealable judgment by a court of competent jurisdiction, (x) the gross negligence, bad faith or
willful misconduct of such Indemnitee or its Affiliates, (y) the material breach of such Indemnitee’s  funding obligations
hereunder or (z) a dispute amongst one or more Lenders not arising from the Borrower’s breach of its obligations under the
Loan Documents (other than a dispute involving a claim against an Indemnitee for its acts or omissions in its capacity as an
arranger, bookrunner, agent or similar role in respect of the Loan Agreement, except, to the extent such acts or omissions are
determined  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  by  a  final  and  non-appealable  judgment  to  have  constituted  the  gross
negligence, bad faith or willful misconduct of such Indemnitee in such capacity). Without limiting the foregoing, and to the
extent permitted by applicable law, the Borrower agrees not to assert and to cause its Significant Subsidiaries not to assert,
and hereby waives and agrees to cause its Significant Subsidiaries to waive, all rights for contribution or any other rights of
recovery  with  respect  to  all  claims,  demands,  penalties,  fines,  liabilities,  settlements,  damages,  costs  and  expenses  of
whatever kind or nature, under or related to Environmental Laws, that any of them might have by statute or otherwise against
any  Indemnitee.  All  amounts  due  under  this  Section  10.5  shall  be  payable  not  later  than  30  days  after  written  demand
therefor, subject to the Borrower’s receipt of reasonably detailed invoices. Statements payable by the Borrower pursuant to
this Section 10.5 shall be submitted to Treasurer (Telephone No. (415) 817-8199/(415) 267-7000) (Telecopy No. (415) 267-
7265/7268), at the address of the Borrower set forth in Section 10.2(a) with a copy to Chief Counsel, Corporate (Telephone
No. (415) 817-8200) (Telecopy No. (415) 817-8225), at the address of the Borrower set forth in Section 10.2(a), or to such
other Person or address as may be hereafter designated by the Borrower in a written notice to the Administrative Agent. The
agreements  in  this  Section  10.5  shall  survive  for  two  years  after  repayment  of  the  Loans  and  all  other  amounts  payable
hereunder. This Section 10.5 shall not apply with respect to Taxes, other than Taxes that represent claims, damages, losses,
liabilities, costs or expenses arising from non-Tax claims.
1.4
Successors and Assigns; Participations and Assignments.
(a) The provisions of this Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties hereto and their
respective successors and assigns permitted hereby, except that (i) the Borrower may not assign or otherwise transfer any
of its rights or obligations hereunder without the prior written consent of each Lender (and any attempted assignment or
transfer by the Borrower without such consent shall be null and void) and (ii) no Lender may
79    
    

assign or otherwise transfer its rights or obligations hereunder except in accordance with this Section 10.6.
(b) (i)  Subject  to  the  conditions  set  forth  in  paragraph  (b)(ii)  below,  any  Lender  may  assign  to  one  or  more
assignees (each, an “Assignee”) other than a Defaulting Lender, any Subsidiary of a Defaulting Lender, any natural person
(or holding company, investment vehicle or trust for, or owned or operated by or for the primary benefit of, one or more
natural  persons),  the  Borrower  or  any  of  the  Borrower’s  Affiliates  or  Subsidiaries,  all  or  a  portion  of  its  rights  and
obligations under this Agreement (including all or a portion of the Loans at the time owing to it) with the prior written
consent (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed) of:
(A)
the  Borrower, provided that  no  consent  of  the  Borrower  shall  be  required  for  an
assignment to a Lender (or an Affiliate of any Lender) or an Approved Fund or, if an Event of Default
under Section 8(a), (e) or (f) has occurred and is continuing, any other Person, and provided further,
that the Borrower shall be deemed to have consented to any such assignment unless it shall object
thereto  by  written  notice  to  the  Administrative  Agent  within  ten  (10)  Business  Days  after  having
received notice thereof from the assigning Lender (with a copy to the Administrative Agent); and
(B)
the Administrative Agent, provided that no consent of the Administrative Agent shall be
required for an assignment of any Loans to an Assignee that is a Lender (or an Affiliate of a Lender)
immediately prior to giving effect to such assignment.
Section 53.
Assignments shall be subject to the following additional conditions:
(A)
except in the case of an assignment to a Lender, an Eligible Assignee that is an Affiliate
of any Lender or an assignment of the entire remaining amount of the assigning Lender’s Loans, the
amount of the Loans of the assigning Lender subject to each such assignment (determined as of the
date  the  Assignment  and  Assumption  with  respect  to  such  assignment  is  delivered  to  the
Administrative Agent) shall not be less than $10,000,000 (or, if such Assignee is an Eligible Assignee
that is an Affiliate of a Lender, $5,000,000) unless each of the Borrower and the Administrative Agent
otherwise consent, provided that (1) no such consent of the Borrower shall be required if an Event of
Default has occurred and is continuing and (2) with respect to any Lender party to this Agreement on
the Effective Date, such amounts shall be aggregated in respect of such Lender and any Affiliate of
such Lender that is an Eligible Assignee;
(B)
the parties to each assignment shall execute and deliver to the Administrative Agent an
Assignment and
80    
    

Assumption, together with a processing and recordation fee of $3,500; and
(C)
the Assignee, if it shall not be a Lender, shall deliver to the Administrative Agent an
administrative questionnaire.
In  connection  with  any  assignment  of  rights  and  obligations  of  any  Defaulting  Lender  hereunder,  no  such  assignment  shall  be
effective unless and until, in addition to the other conditions thereto set forth herein, the parties to the assignment shall make such
additional payments to the Administrative Agent in an aggregate amount sufficient, upon distribution thereof as appropriate (which
may be outright payment, purchases by the Assignee of participations or subparticipations, or other compensating actions, including
funding, with the consent of the Borrower and the Administrative Agent, the applicable pro rata share of Loans previously requested
but not funded by the Defaulting Lender, to each of which the applicable Assignee and assignor hereby irrevocably consent), to (x)
pay  and  satisfy  in  full  all  payment  liabilities  then  owed  by  such  Defaulting  Lender  to  the  Administrative  Agent  or  any  Lender
hereunder (and interest accrued thereon) and (y) acquire (and fund as appropriate) its full pro rata share of all Loans in accordance
with its Percentage. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that any assignment of rights and obligations of any Defaulting
Lender hereunder shall become effective under applicable law without compliance with the provisions of this paragraph, then the
Assignee of such interest shall be deemed to be a Defaulting Lender for all purposes of this Agreement until such compliance occurs.
Section 54.
Subject to acceptance and recording thereof pursuant to paragraph (b)(iv) below, from and after the effective date
specified  in each Assignment  and Assumption  the Assignee thereunder  shall be a party hereto and, to the extent of the interest
assigned by such Assignment and Assumption, shall have the rights and obligations of a Lender under this Agreement, and the
assigning Lender thereunder shall, to the extent of the interest assigned by such Assignment and Assumption, be released from its
obligations under this Agreement (and, in the case of an Assignment and Assumption covering all of the assigning Lender’s rights
and obligations under this Agreement, such Lender shall cease to be a party hereto but shall continue to be entitled to the benefits of
Sections  2.15,  2.16,  2.17  and  10.5  but  shall  be  subject  to  the  limitations  set  forth  therein); provided,  that  except  to  the  extent
otherwise expressly agreed by the affected parties, no assignment by a Defaulting Lender will constitute a waiver or release of any
claim of any party hereunder arising from the Lender’s having been a Defaulting Lender. Any assignment or transfer by a Lender of
rights  or  obligations  under  this  Agreement  that  does  not  comply  with  this  Section  10.6  shall  be  treated  for  purposes  of  this
Agreement as a sale by such Lender of a participation in such rights and obligations in accordance with paragraph (c) of this Section.
Section 55.
The Administrative Agent, acting for this purpose as a non-fiduciary agent of the Borrower (and such agency being
solely  to  establish  that  the  relevant  obligation  is  in  registered  form  under  Section  5f.103-1(c)  of  the  United  States  Treasury
Regulations), shall maintain at one of its offices a copy of each Assignment and Assumption delivered to it and a register for the
recordation of the names and addresses of the Lenders, and the principal amount of the Loans owing to, each Lender pursuant to the
terms hereof from time to time (the “Register”). The entries in the Register shall be conclusive, in the absence of manifest error, and
the Borrower, the Administrative Agent and the Lenders shall treat each Person whose name is recorded in the Register pursuant to
the terms hereof as a Lender hereunder for all purposes of this Agreement, notwithstanding notice
81    
    

to the contrary. The Register shall be available for inspection by the Borrower and any Lender, at any reasonable time and from time
to time upon reasonable prior notice.
Section 56.
Upon its receipt of a duly completed Assignment and Assumption executed by an assigning Lender and an Assignee,
the Assignee’s completed administrative questionnaire (unless the Assignee shall already be a Lender hereunder), the processing and
recordation fee referred to in paragraph (b) of this Section and any written consent to such assignment required by paragraph (b) of
this Section, the Administrative Agent shall accept such Assignment and Assumption and record the information contained therein in
the Register. No assignment shall be effective for purposes of this Agreement unless it has been recorded in the Register as provided
in this paragraph.
(a) (i) Any Lender may, without the consent of the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, sell participations to
one or more banks or other entities (other than a Defaulting Lender or the Borrower or any of the Borrower’s Affiliates or
Subsidiaries) (a “Participant”) in all or a portion of such Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement (including
all or a portion of the Loans owing to it); provided that (A) such Lender’s obligations under this Agreement shall remain
unchanged,  (B)  such  Lender  shall  remain  solely  responsible  to  the  other  parties  hereto  for  the  performance  of  such
obligations  and  (C)  the  Borrower,  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the  other  Lenders  shall  continue  to  deal  solely  and
directly with such Lender in connection with such Lender’s rights and obligations under this Agreement. Any agreement
pursuant to which a Lender sells such a participation shall provide that such Lender shall retain the sole right to enforce
this Agreement and to approve any amendment, modification or waiver of any provision of this Agreement; provided that
such agreement may provide that such Lender will not, without the consent of the Participant, agree to any amendment,
modification or waiver that (1) requires the consent of each Lender directly affected thereby pursuant to the proviso to the
second sentence of Section 10.1 and (2) directly affects such Participant. Subject to paragraph (c)(ii) of this Section, the
Borrower agrees that each Participant shall be entitled to the benefits of Sections 2.15, 2.16 and 2.17 to the same extent as
if it were a Lender and had acquired its interest by assignment pursuant to paragraph (b) of this Section.
Section 57.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, a Participant shall not be entitled to receive any greater payment
under Section 2.15 or 2.16 than the applicable Lender would have been entitled to receive with respect to the participation sold to
such Participant, unless the sale of the participation to such Participant is made with the Borrower’s prior written consent to such
greater payments. Any Participant that is a Foreign Lender shall not be entitled to the benefits of Section 2.16 unless such Participant
complies with Section 2.16(e).
Section 58.
Each Lender that sells a participation shall, acting solely for this purpose as a non-fiduciary agent of the Borrower,
maintain a register on which it enters the name and address of each Participant and the principal amounts (and stated interest) of each
Participant’s interest in the Loans or other obligations under the Loan Documents (the “Participant Register”); provided that no
Lender shall have any obligation to disclose all or any portion of the Participant Register (including the identity of any Participant or
any information relating to a Participant’s interest in any loans or its other obligations under any Loan Document) to any Person
except  to  the  extent  that  such  disclosure  is  necessary  to  establish  that  such  loan  or  other  obligation  is  in  registered  form  under
Section 5f.103-1(c) of the United States Treasury Regulations. The entries in the
82    
    

Participant Register shall be conclusive absent manifest error, and such Lender shall treat each Person whose name is recorded in the
Participant Register as the owner of such participation for all purposes of this Agreement notwithstanding any notice to the contrary.
For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the  Administrative  Agent  (in  its  capacity  as  Administrative  Agent)  shall  have  no  responsibility for
maintaining a Participant Register.
(a) Any Lender may at any time pledge or assign a security interest in all or any portion of its rights under this
Agreement to secure obligations of such Lender, including any pledge or assignment to secure obligations to a Federal
Reserve Bank or other central bank having jurisdiction over such Lender, and this Section shall not apply to any such
pledge or assignment of a security interest; provided that no such pledge or assignment of a security interest shall release a
Lender from any of its obligations hereunder or substitute any such pledgee or Assignee for such Lender as a party hereto.
(b) The Borrower, upon receipt of written notice from the relevant Lender, agrees to issue Notes to any Lender
requiring Notes to facilitate transactions of the type described in paragraph (d) above.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, any Conduit Lender may assign any or all of the Loans it may have funded
hereunder to its designating Lender without the consent of the Borrower or the Administrative Agent and without regard
to the limitations set forth in Section 10.6(b). Each of the Borrower, each Lender and the Administrative Agent hereby
confirms that it will not institute against a Conduit Lender or join any other Person in instituting against a Conduit Lender
any bankruptcy, reorganization, arrangement, insolvency or liquidation proceeding under any state bankruptcy or similar
law,  for  one  year  and  one  day  after  the  payment  in full  of the  latest  maturing  commercial  paper  note  issued  by such
Conduit Lender; provided, however, that each Lender designating any Conduit Lender hereby agrees to indemnify, save
and hold harmless each other party hereto for any loss, cost, damage, expense, obligations, penalties, actions, judgments,
suits or any kind whatsoever arising out of its inability to institute such a proceeding against such Conduit Lender during
such period of forbearance.
(d) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section, none of the Agents, in their capacity as Lenders, will
assign without the consent of the Borrower, prior to the Effective Date, any of the Commitments held by them on the
Effective Date.
(e) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Section 10.6, for the avoidance of doubt, Goldman Sachs
Bank  USA  may  assign  any  amount  of  its  Loans  hereunder  to  Goldman  Sachs  Lending  Partners  LLC  (or  vice  versa)
without the prior written consent of any other Person.
1.2
Adjustments; Set off.
(a) Except  to  the  extent  that  this  Agreement  expressly  provides  for  payments  to  be  allocated  to  a  particular
Lender, if any Lender (a “Benefitted Lender”) shall receive any payment of all or part of the Obligations owing to it
hereunder, or receive any collateral in respect thereof (whether voluntarily or involuntarily, by set off, pursuant to events
or proceedings of the nature referred to in Section 8(f), or otherwise), in a greater proportion than any such payment to or
collateral received by any other Lender, if any, in respect of the
83    
    

Obligations owing to such other Lender hereunder, such Benefitted Lender shall purchase for cash from the other Lenders
a participating interest in such portion of the Obligations owing to each such other Lender hereunder, or shall provide such
other Lenders with the benefits of any such collateral, as shall be necessary to cause such Benefitted Lender to share the
excess payment or benefits of such collateral ratably with each of the Lenders; provided, however, that if all or any portion
of such excess payment or benefits is thereafter recovered from such Benefitted Lender, such purchase shall be rescinded,
and the purchase price and benefits returned, to the extent of such recovery, but without interest.
(b) In addition to any rights and remedies of the Lenders provided by law, including other rights of set-off, each
Lender shall have the right, without prior notice to the Borrower, any such notice being expressly waived by the Borrower
to  the  extent  permitted  by  applicable  law,  upon  any  amount  becoming  due  and  payable  by  the  Borrower  hereunder
(whether at the stated maturity, by acceleration or otherwise), after any applicable grace period, to set off and appropriate
and  apply  against  such  amount  any  and  all deposits  (general  or special,  time  or demand,  provisional  or final),  in any
currency, and any other credits, indebtedness or claims, in any currency, in each case whether direct or indirect, absolute
or contingent, matured or unmatured, at any time held or owing by such Lender or any branch, Affiliate or agency thereof
to or for the credit or the account of the Borrower; provided, that in the event that any Defaulting Lender shall exercise
any such right of setoff, (x) all amounts so set off shall be paid over immediately to the Administrative Agent for further
application in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.20 and, pending such payment, shall be segregated by such
Defaulting  Lender  from  its  other  funds  and  deemed  held  in  trust  for  the  benefit  of  the  Administrative  Agent  and  the
Lenders,  and  (y)  the  Defaulting  Lender  shall  provide  promptly  to  the  Administrative  Agent  a  statement  describing  in
reasonable  detail the Obligations  owing to such Defaulting  Lender  as to which  it exercised  such right  of setoff.  Each
Lender agrees promptly to notify the Borrower and the Administrative Agent after any such setoff and application made
by such Lender, provided that the failure to give such notice shall not affect the validity of such setoff and application.
1.3
Counterparts; Electronic Execution; Binding Effect. This Agreement may be executed by one or more of the
parties to this Agreement on any number of separate counterparts, and all of said counterparts taken together shall be deemed
to  constitute  one  and  the  same  instrument.  Delivery  of  an  executed  signature  page  of  this  Agreement  by  facsimile
transmission, emailed pdf. or any other electronic means that reproduces an image of the actual executed signature page shall
be effective as delivery of an original executed counterpart hereof. The words “execution,” “signed,” “signature,” “delivery,”
and words of like import in or relating to any document to be signed in connection with this Agreement and the transactions
contemplated hereby shall be deemed to include an electronic sound, symbol, or process attached to, or associated with, a
contract  or  other  record  and  adopted  by  a Person  with  the  intent  to sign,  authenticate  or  accept  such  contract  or  record,
deliveries  or  the  keeping  of  records  in  electronic  form,  each  of  which  shall  be  of  the  same  legal  effect,  validity  or
enforceability as a manually executed signature, physical delivery thereof or the use of a paper-based recordkeeping system,
as the case may be, to the extent and as provided for in any applicable law, including the Federal Electronic Signatures in
Global and National Commerce Act, the New York State Electronic Signatures and Records
84    
    

Act, or any other similar state laws based on the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act; provided that nothing herein shall
require the Administrative Agent to accept electronic signatures in any form or format without its prior written consent.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Borrower hereby (i) agrees that, for all purposes, including without
limitation,  in  connection  with  any  workout,  restructuring,  enforcement  of  remedies,  bankruptcy  proceedings  or  litigation
among the Administrative Agent and the Lenders, electronic images of this Agreement or any other Loan Documents (in
each case, including with respect to any signature pages thereto) shall have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability
as any paper original, and (ii) waives any argument, defense or right to contest the validity or enforceability of the Loan
Documents based solely on the lack of paper original copies of any Loan Documents, including with respect to any signature
pages  thereto.  This  Agreement  shall  become  binding  on  the  parties  hereto  when  it  shall  have  been  executed  by  the
Administrative Agent and the Administrative Agent shall have received counterparts hereof which, when taken together, bear
the signatures of each of the other parties hereto, and thereafter shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties
hereto and their respective successors and assigns.
1.4
Severability. Any provision of this Agreement that is prohibited or unenforceable in any jurisdiction shall, as
to such jurisdiction, be ineffective to the extent of such prohibition or unenforceability without invalidating the remaining
provisions  hereof,  and  any  such  prohibition  or  unenforceability  in  any  jurisdiction  shall  not  invalidate  or  render
unenforceable such provision in any other jurisdiction. Without limiting the foregoing provisions of this Section 10.9, if and
to the extent that the enforceability of any provisions in this Agreement relating to Defaulting Lenders shall be limited by
Debtor Relief Laws, as determined in good faith by the Administrative Agent, as applicable, then such provisions shall be
deemed to be in effect only to the extent not so limited.
1.5
Integration. This Agreement and the other Loan Documents represent the entire agreement of the Borrower,
the Administrative Agent, and the Lenders with respect to the subject matter hereof and thereof, and there are no promises,
undertakings, representations or warranties by the Administrative Agent, or any Lender relative to the subject matter hereof
not expressly set forth or referred to herein or in the other Loan Documents.
1.6
GOVERNING LAW. THIS AGREEMENT AND THE RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE PARTIES
UNDER  THIS  AGREEMENT  SHALL  BE  GOVERNED  BY,  AND  CONSTRUED  AND  INTERPRETED  IN
ACCORDANCE WITH, THE LAW OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK.
1.7
Submission To Jurisdiction; Waivers. The Borrower hereby irrevocably and unconditionally:
(a) submits for itself and its property in any legal action or proceeding relating to this Agreement and the other
Loan Documents to which it is a party, or for recognition and enforcement of any judgment in respect thereof, to the non-
exclusive jurisdiction of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York sitting in the Borough of
Manhattan (or if such court lacks subject matter jurisdiction, the Supreme Court of the State of New York sitting in the
Borough of Manhattan), and any appellate court from any thereof;
85    
    

(b) consents that any such action or proceeding may be brought in such courts and waives any objection that it
may  now  or  hereafter  have  to  the  venue  of  any  such  action  or  proceeding  in  any  such  court  or  that  such  action  or
proceeding was brought in an inconvenient court and agrees not to plead or claim the same;
(c) agrees that service of process in any such action or proceeding may be effected by mailing a copy thereof by
registered or certified mail (or any substantially similar form of mail), postage prepaid, to the Borrower at its address set
forth in Section 10.2(a) or at such other address of which the Administrative Agent shall have been notified pursuant
thereto;
(d) agrees that nothing herein shall affect the right to effect service of process in any other manner permitted by
law or shall limit the right to sue in any other jurisdiction; and
(e) waives, to the maximum extent not prohibited by law, and agrees not to assert any right it may have to claim
or  recover  in  any  legal  action  or  proceeding  relating  to  this  Agreement  or  any  other  Loan  Document  any  special,
exemplary, punitive or consequential damages.
NOTHING IN THIS AGREEMENT OR IN ANY OTHER LOAN DOCUMENT SHALL AFFECT ANY RIGHT THAT
THE  ADMINISTRATIVE  AGENT  OR  ANY  LENDER  MAY  OTHERWISE  HAVE  TO  BRING  ANY  ACTION  OR
PROCEEDING  RELATING  TO  THIS  AGREEMENT  OR  ANY  OTHER  LOAN  DOCUMENT  AGAINST  THE
BORROWER OR ITS PROPERTIES IN THE COURTS OF ANY JURISDICTION.
1.8
Acknowledgments. The Borrower hereby acknowledges that:
(a) it has been advised by counsel in the negotiation, execution and delivery of this Agreement and the other Loan
Documents;
(b) none of the Administrative Agent or any Lender has any fiduciary relationship with or duty to the Borrower
arising out of or in connection with this Agreement or any of the other Loan Documents, and the relationship between
Administrative Agent and Lenders, on one hand, and the Borrower, on the other hand, in connection herewith or therewith
is solely that of debtor and creditor; and
(c) no  joint  venture  is  created  hereby  or  by  the  other  Loan  Documents  or  otherwise  exists  by  virtue  of  the
transactions contemplated hereby among the Lenders or among the Borrower and the Lenders.
1.9
Confidentiality. Each of the Administrative Agent and each Lender agrees to keep confidential in accordance
with such party’s customary practices (and in any event in compliance with applicable law regarding material non-public
information) all non-public information provided to it by the Borrower, the Administrative Agent or any Lender pursuant to
or in connection with this Agreement that is designated by the provider thereof as confidential; provided that nothing herein
shall prevent the Administrative Agent or any Lender from disclosing any such information (a) to the Administrative Agent,
any  other  Lender  or  any  Affiliate  thereof,  (b)  subject  to  an  agreement  to  comply  with  the  provisions  of  this  Section  or
substantially equivalent provisions, to any actual
86    
    

or prospective Transferee, any direct or indirect counterparty to any Swap Agreement (or any professional advisor to such
counterparty)  or  any  credit  insurance  providers,  (c)  to  its  employees,  directors,  agents,  attorneys,  service  providers,
accountants and other professional advisors or those of any of its Affiliates (as long as such attorneys, service providers,
accountants and other professional advisors are directed to comply with confidentiality requirements substantially equivalent
to this Section), (d) upon the request or demand of any Governmental Authority, (e) in response to any order of any court or
other  Governmental  Authority  or as may otherwise  be required  pursuant  to any Requirement  of Law,  (f) if requested  or
required to do so in connection with any litigation or similar proceeding, (g) that has been publicly disclosed, (h) to the
National Association of Insurance Commissioners or any similar organization or any nationally recognized rating agency that
requires access to information about a Lender’s investment portfolio in connection with ratings issued with respect to such
Lender,  (i)  in  connection  with  the  exercise  of  any  remedy  hereunder  or  under  any  other  Loan  Document,  (j)  any  rating
agency in connection with rating of the Borrower or its Subsidiaries or the credit facilities provided hereunder or (k) to the
extent such information (i) becomes available to the Administrative Agent, any Lender or any of their respective Affiliates on
a  nonconfidential  basis  from  a  source  other  than  the  Borrower  or  its  Subsidiaries  or  (ii)  is  independently  discovered  or
developed by a party hereto without utilizing any information received from the Borrower or its Subsidiaries or violating the
terms of this Section 10.14, provided that, in the case of clauses (d), (e) and (f) of this Section 10.14, with the exception of
disclosure to bank regulatory authorities, the Borrower (to the extent legally permissible) shall be given prompt prior notice
so that it may seek a protective order or other appropriate remedy.
1.10
WAIVERS OF JURY TRIAL. TO THE FULLEST  EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, THE BORROWER,
THE  ADMINISTRATIVE  AGENT  AND  THE  LENDERS  HEREBY  IRREVOCABLY  AND  UNCONDITIONALLY
WAIVE TRIAL BY JURY IN ANY LEGAL ACTION OR PROCEEDING RELATING TO THIS AGREEMENT OR ANY
OTHER LOAN DOCUMENT AND FOR ANY COUNTERCLAIM THEREIN.
1.11
USA Patriot Act; Beneficial Ownership Regulation. Each Lender hereby notifies the Borrower that pursuant to
the requirements of the USA Patriot Act (Title III of Pub. L. 107-56 (signed into law October 26, 2001)) (the “Patriot Act”),
it is required to obtain, verify and record information that identifies the Borrower, which information includes the name and
address of the Borrower and other information that will allow such Lender to identify the Borrower in accordance with the
Patriot Act.
1.12
Judicial Reference. If any action or proceeding is filed in a court of the State of California by or against any
party hereto in connection with any of the transactions contemplated by this Agreement or any other Loan Document, (i) the
court shall, and is hereby directed to, make a general reference pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 638 to
a referee (who shall be a single active or retired judge) to hear and determine all of the issues in such action or proceeding
(whether of fact or of law) and to report a statement of decision, provided that at the option of any party to such proceeding,
any such issues pertaining to a “provisional remedy” as defined in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1281.8 shall be
heard and determined by the court, and (ii) without limiting the generality of Section 10.5, the Borrower shall be solely
87    
    

responsible to pay all fees and expenses of any referee appointed in such action or proceeding.
1.13
No Advisory or Fiduciary Responsibility. In connection  with all aspects  of each transactions  contemplated
hereby (including in connection with any amendment, waiver or other modification hereof or of any other Loan Document),
the Borrower acknowledges and agrees that: (i) (A) the arranging and other services regarding this Agreement provided by
the Agents, the Arrangers and the Lenders are arm’s-length commercial transactions between the Borrower, on the one hand,
and the Agents, the Arrangers and the Lenders, on the other hand, (B) the Borrower has consulted its own legal, accounting,
regulatory  and  tax  advisors  to  the  extent  it  has  deemed  appropriate,  and  (C)  the  Borrower  is  capable  of  evaluating,  and
understands  and  accepts,  the  terms,  risks  and  conditions  of  the  transactions  contemplated  hereby  and  by  the  other  Loan
Documents; (ii) (A) each Agent, Arranger and Lender is and has been acting solely as a principal and, except as expressly
agreed in writing by the relevant parties, has not been, is not, and will not be acting as an advisor, agent or fiduciary for the
Borrower or any other Person and (B) none of the Agents, Arrangers or Lenders has any obligation to the Borrower or any of
its Affiliates with respect to the transactions contemplated hereby except those obligations expressly set forth herein and in
the  other  Loan  Documents;  and  (iii)  the  Agents,  the  Arrangers  and  the  Lenders  and  their  respective  Affiliates  may  be
engaged in a broad range of transactions that involve interests that differ from those of the Borrower and its Affiliates, and
none of the Agents, Arrangers or Lenders has any obligation to disclose any of such interests to the Borrower or its Affiliates.
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the Borrower hereby waives and releases any claims that it may have against the
Agents, the Arrangers and the Lenders with respect to any breach or alleged breach of agency or fiduciary duty in connection
with any aspect of any transaction contemplated hereby other than a breach of the confidentiality provisions set forth in
Section 10.14.
1.14
Acknowledgement Regarding Any Supported QFCs.
(a) To  the  extent  that  the  Loan  Documents  provide  support,  through  a  guarantee  or  otherwise,  for  Swap
Agreements or any other agreement or instrument that is a QFC (such support “QFC Credit Support” and each such
QFC a “Supported QFC”), the parties acknowledge and agree as follows with respect to the resolution power of the
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  under  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Act  and  Title  II  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Wall
Street Reform  and Consumer Protection  Act (together  with the regulations  promulgated  thereunder,  the “U.S. Special
Resolution Regimes”) in respect of such Supported QFC and QFC Credit Support (with the provisions below applicable
notwithstanding that the Loan Documents and any Supported QFC may in fact be stated to be governed by the laws of the
State of New York and/or of the United States or any other state of the United States):
(b) In the event a Covered Entity that is party to a Supported QFC (each, a “Covered Party”) becomes subject to
a proceeding under a U.S. Special Resolution Regime, the transfer of such Supported QFC and the benefit of such QFC
Credit Support (and any interest and obligation in or under such Supported QFC and such QFC Credit Support, and any
rights in property securing such Supported QFC or such QFC Credit Support) from such Covered Party will be effective to
the same extent as the transfer would be effective under the U.S. Special Resolution Regime if the Supported QFC and
such QFC
88    
    

Credit Support (and any such interest, obligation and rights in property) were governed by the laws of the United States or
a state of the United States. In the event a Covered Party or a BHC Act Affiliate of a Covered Party becomes subject to a
proceeding  under  a  U.S.  Special  Resolution  Regime,  Default  Rights  under  the  Loan  Documents  that  might  otherwise
apply to such Supported QFC or any QFC Credit Support that may be exercised against such Covered Party are permitted
to be exercised to no greater extent than such Default Rights could be exercised under the U.S. Special Resolution Regime
if the Supported QFC and the Loan Documents were governed by the laws of the United States or a state of the United
States. Without limitation of the foregoing, it is understood and agreed that rights and remedies of the parties with respect
to a Defaulting Lender shall in no event affect the rights of any Covered Party with respect to a Supported QFC or any
QFC Credit Support..
1.15
Acknowledgement and Consent to Bail-In of Affected Financial Institutions. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in any Loan Document or in any other agreement, arrangement or understanding among any such parties, each party
hereto acknowledges that any liability of any Affected Financial Institution arising under any Loan Document, to the extent
such liability is unsecured, may be subject to the Write-Down and Conversion Powers of the applicable Resolution Authority
and agrees and consents to, and acknowledges and agrees to be bound by:
(a) the application  of any  Write-Down  and  Conversion  Powers  by  the applicable  Resolution  Authority  to any
such liabilities arising hereunder which may be payable to it by any party hereto that is an Affected Financial Institution;
and
(b) the effects of any Bail-In Action on any such liability, including, if applicable:
Section 59.
a reduction in full or in part or cancellation of any such liability;
Section 60.
a conversion of all, or a portion of, such liability into shares or other instruments of ownership in such Affected
Financial Institution, its parent undertaking, or a bridge institution that may be issued to it or otherwise conferred on it, and that such
shares or other instruments of ownership will be accepted by it in lieu of any rights with respect to any such liability under this
Agreement or any other Loan Document; or
Section 61.
the variation of the terms of such liability in connection with the exercise of the Write-Down and Conversion Powers
of the applicable Resolution Authority.
[Remainder of page intentionally left blank. Signature pages follow.]
89    
    

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly executed and delivered by their proper and duly
authorized officers as of the day and year first above written.
PACIFIC GAS AND ELECTRIC
COMPANY
By:
Name:
Title:
1    
    

JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A. 
as Administrative Agent and as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
2    
    

BANK OF AMERICA, N.A. 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
3    
    

BARCLAYS BANK PLC 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
4    
    

CITIBANK, N.A. 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
5    
    

GOLDMAN SACHS BANK USA 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
6    
    

BNP PARIBAS 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
By:
Name:
Title:
7    
    

CREDIT SUISSE AG, NEW YORK
BRANCH 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
By:
Name:
Title:
8    
    

MIZUHO BANK, LTD. 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
9    
    

MUFG UNION BANK, N.A. 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
10    
    

WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
11    
    

BANK OF MONTREAL, CHICAGO
BRANCH 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
12    
    

THE BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
13    
    

BANK OF CHINA, LOS ANGELES
BRANCH 
as a Lender
By:
Name:
Title:
14    
    

Execution Version

EXHIBIT 10.82
Human Resources
Executive Recruiting
245 Market Street
MAILCODE N2F
San Francisco, CA 94105
July 29, 2020
Ajay Waghray
535 Belada Blvd.
Atlanta, Georgia 30342
Dear Ajay:
We are thrilled to extend a contingent offer of employment for the position of Senior Vice President and Chief Information Officer
reporting to the PG&E Corporation Chief Executive Officer (currently Bill Smith, Interim Chief Executive Officer and President,
PG&E Corporation). This offer is subject to board-level approval of your election to Senior Vice President.
Your total annual compensation package will consist of the following:
1. An annual base salary of $600,000 ($50,000 month) subject to ordinary withholdings.
2. A one-time cash sign-on bonus of $100,000, to be paid on your second payroll check, subject to supplemental
withholdings. In addition, a one-time sign-on bonus of $400,000 in Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), with vesting of 40% on
the first anniversary of the grant date and 60% on the second anniversary of the grant date.
Should you voluntarily resign from PG&E Corporation (the Company), or, if applicable, its subsidiaries, within two years
of your start date, other than your resignation for “Good Reason” as defined in Section 3(a)(9) of the PG&E Corporation
2012 Officer Severance Policy (without regard to the requirement that such “Good Reason” event occur during a
“Covered Period” and assuming that you are an “Executive Officer” for purposes of the definition of “Good Reason”), you
will repay to the Company the value of both the cash sign-on bonus and the vested RSU sign-on bonus in full, and you
will forfeit the value of the unvested RSU sign-on bonus, in each case determined as of the effective date of your
resignation.
3. Participation in the Company's Short-Term Incentive Plan (STIP) with a target participation rate of 60% of your eligible
earnings (i.e., base salary) received during each plan year. You must be on the Company’s (or Pacific Gas and Electric
Company’s (the Utility’s)) active payroll as of September 30 of each year to be eligible for a payout for that year. The
STIP is an at-risk component of pay that rewards employees annually and is tied to company and individual performance.
The STIP for 2020 has been proposed and is awaiting final approval. STIP awards are completely discretionary and not
guaranteed. The PG&E Corporation Compensation Committee retains full discretion with respect to awarding STIP
payments. For an employment period that does not span the entire calendar year, the STIP will be pro-rated for the
period in which you were on the Company’s or the Utility’s active payroll.
4. Participation in the Company’s Long-Term Incentive Plan (LTIP) with a target annual award of $650,000. LTIP awards
typically are granted in March of each year. LTIP
        

Ajay Waghray
July 29, 2020
Page 2
awards may consist of RSUs, performance shares, stock options, or a combination of these. RSUs and stock options are
subject to time-based vesting. The value of performance shares typically is determined after the end of a three-year
performance period, at which time the performance shares vest in the applicable percentage. The LTIP for 2020 has
been proposed and is awaiting final approval. The Compensation Committee retains full discretion with respect to the
approval of LTIP award form, amounts and terms.
The proposed 2020 LTIP design consists entirely of performance shares.
5. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Retirement Savings Plan (RSP), a 401(k) savings plan. You will be eligible to
contribute as much as 50% of your salary on either a pre-tax or after-tax basis. We will match contributions up to 8% of
your salary at 75 cents on each dollar contributed. All of the above contributions are subject to the applicable legal limits
and the overall terms of the plan.
6. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan (SRSP), a non-qualified, deferred
compensation plan. You may elect to defer payment of some of your compensation on a pre-tax basis, subject to IRS
and other legal restrictions and the overall terms of the plan. Additionally, we will provide you with the full matching
contributions that cannot be provided through the RSP due to legal limitations imposed on highly-compensated
employees.
7. Conditioned upon meeting plan requirements, you also will be eligible for retirement benefits under the Company’s and
the Utility’s retirement—qualified cash balance pension and supplemental Defined-Contribution Supplemental Executive
Retirement Plan (DC-ESRP)—post-retirement life insurance and retiree medical plans.
The cash balance pension is subject to income limitations set by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) each year—your
base pay up to that limit will be used to determine your qualified pension benefit. Your compensation over the IRS limit
will be used to determine your benefit under the DC-ESRP, which is the supplemental pension plan for officers and
includes both base pay and STIP earnings. You will not participate in the Pacific Gas and Electric Company Retirement
Excess Plan, which is the supplemental pension plan for non-officer employees and uses a different methodology to
calculate supplemental pension benefits (including only base pay, not STIP earnings).
8. An annual Paid Time Off (PTO) allotment of four weeks, subject to future increases based on length of service as
determined by the overall terms of the PTO program. For your first year, the PTO allotment will be prorated based on
your date of hire. In addition, the Company recognizes ten paid company holidays and provides three floating holidays
immediately upon hire.
9. An annual perquisite allowance of $20,000, subject to ordinary withholdings, normally included on your March paycheck.
For 2020, because your start date is after June 30, you will receive 50% of the annual perquisite allowance ($10,000) on
your second regular monthly paycheck.
10. Participation in the Company’s and certain Utility health benefits programs, which permit you to select coverage tailored
to your personal needs and circumstances. Information and instructions on how to enroll in health plan benefits will be
provided to you within your first ten days of employment. The benefits options you choose will be effective on your date of
hire. You have 31 days from your start date to make health and welfare benefit choices that best fit your needs.
11. Our employment offer also includes a comprehensive relocation package. The major components include reimbursement
of home sale and home purchase closing costs, the

Ajay Waghray
July 29, 2020
Page 3
move of your household goods, one house hunting trip, temporary corporate housing, a $7,000 move allowance and a
final trip to your new location.
Altair, our relocation vendor partner, will contact you no later than 30 days before your start date to thoroughly review the
relocation program with you. They will provide you with the details of the program and partner with you throughout the
entire relocation process. If you receive no call from Altair, please email Relocation Services at
RelocationServices@pge.com. Should you decide to resign from the Company within two years of your start date, you
will be obligated to repay a pro-rated amount of the cost of the relocation package based on your resignation date. You
will also be required to sign an additional agreement, detailing the terms and conditions of the relocation program.
The general overall terms of the Company’s and the Utility’s compensation and benefit programs (including but not limited to
STIP, LTIP, perquisite allowance, qualified and supplemental pension, time off, and healthcare offerings) are subject to change
over time. No portion of this letter is intended to indicate a guarantee of the terms and conditions of such programs existing at
the time of this offer. The Company may not amend the initial terms of your annual compensation package, position, reporting
structure or eligibility for severance benefits as described in this letter without your written consent.
You will be an employee at will, meaning the Company can terminate your employment at any time, with or without cause and
with or without notice. In the event you are terminated without cause, you will be eligible for benefits under the PG&E
Corporation Officer Severance Policy, attached. In addition, if you resign within two years of your start date for “Good Reason”
as defined in section 3(a)(9) of the PG&E Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy (Policy)—without regard to the requirement
that such “Good Reason” event occur during a “Covered Period” (as defined in the Policy) and assuming that you are an
“Executive Officer” (for purposes of the definition of “Good Reason”)—then you will receive a payment equivalent to that
calculated under section 2(a)(1) of the Policy (assuming a Severance Multiple of 12), payable in accordance with section 2(a)(1),
and subject to sections 2(d), 3(b) (as applicable),12, 13, and 14 of the Policy as applicable to this potential payment.
The offer is contingent on your passing comprehensive background verification and a standard drug analysis test. We will also
verify your eligibility to work in the United States based on applicable immigration laws.

Ajay Waghray
July 29, 2020
Page 4
We look forward to you joining our executive team.
Sincerely,
Dinyar Mistry
Senior Vice President, Human Resources
PG&E Corporation & Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Att: PG&E Corporation Officer Severance Policy
Please acknowledge your acceptance of this offer and the terms of this letter by signing the original and returning it to Executive
Recruiting.
Signature
Date

EXHIBIT 10.83
Human Resources
Executive Recruiting
77 Beale Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
January 8, 2021
Julius Cox
4023 Redford Court
New Albany, OH 43054
Dear Julius:
We are thrilled to extend a contingent offer of employment for the position of Executive Vice President, People and Shared
Services reporting to Patti Poppe, PG&E Corporation Chief Executive Officer. This offer is subject to board approval of your
election to Executive Vice President.
Your total annual compensation package will consist of the following:
1. An annual base salary of $610,000 ($50,833.33 month) subject to ordinary withholdings.
2. A one-time cash sign-on bonus of $400,000, to be paid on your second payroll check, subject to supplemental
withholdings. Should you voluntarily resign within two years of your start date, you will be obligated to repay the cash
bonus in full.
3. A one-time new hire award of $450,000 in Restricted Stock Units (RSUs) that vest pro rata, one-half per year on each of
the first two anniversaries of the grant date. The grant date of your RSU award will be the later of your hire date or the
date the award is approved by the Compensation Committee of the PG&E Corporation board, or, if your grant date
otherwise would occur during a “trading blackout” period, the first business day after the trading blackout ends. The initial
value of your award is used to determine the number of RSUs you receive on the grant date. The ultimate value that you
realize will depend on your employment status and the performance of PG&E Corporation common stock. You will
receive additional details on the award when it is granted.
4. Participation in the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (the Company) Short-Term Incentive Plan (STIP) with an initial
target participation rate of 60% of your eligible earnings (i.e., base salary) received during each plan year. The STIP is an
at-risk component of pay that rewards employees annually and is tied to company and individual performance. The STIP
design for 2021 has been proposed and is awaiting final approval. STIP awards are completely discretionary and not
guaranteed. The PG&E Corporation Compensation Committee retains full discretion with respect to awarding STIP
payments.
5. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Long-Term Incentive Plan (LTIP) with an initial target annual award of $650,000.
LTIP awards typically are granted in March of each year. LTIP awards may consist of RSUs, performance shares, stock
options, or a combination of these. RSUs and stock options are subject to time-based vesting. The value of performance
shares is determined after the end of a three-year performance period, at which time the performance shares vest in the
applicable percentage. The LTIP design for 2021 has been proposed and is awaiting final approval. The Compensation
Committee retains full discretion with respect to the approval of LTIP award form, amounts and terms.

Julius Cox
December 30, 2020
Page 2
6. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Retirement Savings Plan (RSP), a 401(k) savings plan. You will be eligible to
contribute as much as 50% of your salary on either a pre-tax or after-tax basis. We will match contributions up to 8% of
your salary at 75 cents on each dollar contributed. All RSP contributions are subject to applicable legal limits.
7. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan (SRSP), a non-qualified, deferred
compensation plan. You may elect to defer payment of some of your compensation on a pre-tax basis, subject to IRS
and other legal restrictions. Additionally, we will provide you with the full matching contributions that cannot be provided
through the RSP due to legal limitations imposed on highly-compensated employees.
8. Conditioned upon meeting plan requirements, retirement benefits under the Company’s qualified and non-qualified
pension, post-retirement life insurance, and retiree medical plans.
The qualified pension is subject to income limitations set by the IRS each year—your base pay up to that limit will be
used to determine your qualified pension benefit. Your compensation over the IRS limit will be used to determine your
benefit under the supplemental pension plan for officers, the Defined-Contribution Supplemental Executive Retirement
Plan (DC-ESRP) , which includes both base pay and STIP earnings. You will not participate in the supplemental pension
plan for non-officer employees, the Retirement Excess Plan, which uses a different methodology to calculate
supplemental pension benefits (including only base pay, not STIP earnings).
9. An initial annual vacation allotment of four weeks, subject to future increases based on length of service. For your first
year, the vacation allotment will be pro-rated based on your date of hire. In addition, the Company recognizes ten paid
company holidays and provides three floating holidays and two weeks of sick leave immediately upon hire.
10. An initial annual perquisite allowance of $20,000, subject to ordinary withholdings, normally included on your March
paycheck.
11. Participation in the Company’s health benefits program, which permits you to select coverage tailored to your personal
needs and circumstances.  Information and instructions on how to enroll in health plan benefits will be provided to you
within your first ten days of employment. The benefits options you choose will be effective retroactively to your date of
hire. You will have 31 days from your start date to make health and welfare benefit choices that best fit your needs. 
12. A comprehensive relocation package, the major components of which include reimbursement of home sale and home
purchase closing costs, the move of your household goods, one house-hunting trip, temporary corporate housing, a
$7,000 move allowance, and a final trip to your new location.
Altair, our relocation vendor partner, will contact you no later than 30 days before your start date to thoroughly review the
relocation program with you. They will provide you with the details of the program and partner with you throughout the
entire relocation process.  If you receive no call from Altair, please email Relocation Services at
RelocationServices@pge.com. Should you voluntarily resign from the Company within two years of your start date, you
will be obligated to repay a pro-rated amount of the cost of the relocation package, based on your resignation date.  You
will be required to sign an agreement detailing the terms and conditions of the relocation program.
The general overall terms of PG&E’s compensation and benefit programs (including but not limited to STIP, LTIP, perquisite
allowance, qualified and supplemental pension, time off, and

Julius Cox
December 30, 2020
Page 3
healthcare offerings) are subject to change over time. No portion of this letter is intended to indicate a guarantee of the terms
and conditions of such programs existing at the time of this offer.
You will be an employee at will, meaning the Company can terminate your employment at any time, with or without cause and
with or without notice. In the event you are terminated without cause, you will be eligible for benefits under the PG&E
Corporation Officer Severance Policy.
The offer is contingent on your passing a comprehensive background verification and a standard drug analysis test. We will also
verify your eligibility to work in the United States based on applicable immigration laws.
We look forward to you joining our executive team.
Sincerely,
Mary King
Vice President, Talent & Chief Diversity Officer
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Please acknowledge your acceptance of this offer and the terms of this letter by signing the original and returning it to Executive
Recruiting.
Signature
Date

EXHIBIT 10.84
Human Resources
Executive Recruiting
77 Beale Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
April 15, 2021
Carla J. Peterman
628 Balboa Drive
Seal Beach, CA 90740
Dear Carla:
We are thrilled to extend a contingent offer of employment for the position of Executive Vice President, Corporate Affairs of
PG&E Corporation reporting to the Chief Executive Officer, PG&E Corporation. This offer is subject to board approval of your
election to Executive Vice President.
Your total annual compensation package will consist of the following:
1. An annual base salary of $560,000 ($46,666.66 month) subject to ordinary withholdings, payable monthly on the 23  of
the month or prior business day in accordance with PG&E’s  standard payroll practice.
2. One-time cash sign-on bonus of $290,000 to be paid on your second payroll check, subject to supplemental withholdings.
Should you voluntarily resign within two years of your start date, you will be obligated to repay the cash bonus in full.
3. A one-time new hire award of $270,000 in Restricted Stock Units (RSUs) that vest pro rata, one-half per year on each of
the first two anniversaries of the grant date. The grant date of your RSU award will be the later of your hire date or the
date the award is approved by the Compensation Committee of the PG&E Corporation board, or, if your grant date
otherwise would occur during a “trading blackout” period, the first business day after the trading blackout ends. The initial
value of your award is used to determine the number of RSUs you receive on the grant date. The ultimate value that you
realize will depend on your employment status and the performance of PG&E Corporation common stock. You will
receive additional details on the award when it is granted.
4. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Short-Term Incentive Plan (STIP) with an initial target participation rate of 60% of
your eligible earnings (i.e., base salary) received during each plan year. The STIP is an at-risk component of pay that
rewards employees annually and is tied to company and individual performance. STIP awards are completely
discretionary and not guaranteed. The PG&E Corporation Compensation Committee retains full discretion with respect to
awarding STIP payments.
5. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Long-Term Incentive Plan (LTIP) with an initial target award of $1,120,000 for
2021. LTIP awards typically are granted in March of each year; if your start date is after the regular annual awards are
granted, the grant date of your 2021 award will be the later of your start date or the first business day
     For purposes of this document, “PG&E” refers to Pacific Gas and Electric Company and PG&E Corporation collectively.
rd
1
1

Carla J. Peterman
April 15, 2021
Page 2
after any then-effective trading blackout ends. The Compensation Committee retains full discretion with respect to the
approval of LTIP award form, amounts and terms.
6. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Retirement Savings Plan (RSP), a 401(k) savings plan. You will be eligible to
contribute as much as 50% of your salary on either a pre-tax or after-tax basis. We will match contributions up to 8% of
your salary at 75 cents on each dollar contributed. All RSP contributions are subject to applicable legal limits.
7. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan (SRSP), a non-qualified, deferred
compensation plan. You may elect to defer payment of some of your compensation on a pre-tax basis, subject to IRS
and other legal restrictions. Additionally, we will provide you with the full matching contributions that cannot be provided
through the RSP due to legal limitations imposed on highly-compensated employees.
8. Subsidized financial planning services through AYCO, a Goldman Sachs company, including financial planning, asset
management, and tax services. The PG&E subsidy is equal to 40% of your total cost.
9. Conditioned upon meeting plan requirements, retirement benefits under PG&E’s qualified and non-qualified pension,
post-retirement life insurance, and retiree medical plans.
The qualified pension is subject to income limitations set by the IRS each year—your base pay up to that limit will be
used to determine your qualified pension benefit. Your total compensation, irrespective of the IRS limit, will be used to
determine your benefit under the supplemental pension plan for officers, the Defined-Contribution Supplemental
Executive Retirement Plan (DC-ESRP), which includes both base pay and STIP earnings. You will not participate in the
supplemental pension plan for non-officer employees, the Retirement Excess Plan, which uses a different methodology
to calculate supplemental pension benefits (including only base pay, not STIP earnings).
10. An initial annual Paid Time Off allotment of four weeks, subject to future increases based on length of service. For your
first year, the PTO allotment will be pro-rated based on your date of hire. In addition, PG&E recognizes ten paid company
holidays and three floating holidays immediately upon hire.
11. An initial annual perquisite allowance of $25,000, subject to ordinary withholdings, normally included on your March
paycheck. Since your start date will be after March 1 , the allowance will be provided on your second payroll check.
12. Participation in the Company’s health benefits program, which permits you to select coverage tailored to your personal
needs and circumstances.  Information and instructions on how to enroll in health plan benefits will be provided to you
within your first ten days of employment. The benefits options you choose will be effective retroactively to your date of
hire. You will have 31 days from your start date to make health and welfare benefit choices that best fit your needs. 
13. A health and fitness assessment program designed to promote a healthy lifestyle. The program focuses on early
detection through annual comprehensive health assessments, and lifestyle enhancement for optimum health and
longevity.
14. A comprehensive relocation package, the major components of which include reimbursement of home purchase closing
costs, the move of your household goods, temporary corporate housing, and a $7,000 relocation expense allowance.
st

Carla J. Peterman
April 15, 2021
Page 3
Altair, our relocation vendor partner, will contact you no later than 30 days before your start date to thoroughly review the
relocation program with you. They will provide you with the details of the program and partner with you throughout the
entire relocation process. If you receive no call from Altair, please email Relocation Services at
RelocationServices@pge.com. Should you voluntarily resign from PG&E within two years of your start date, you will be
obligated to repay a pro-rated amount of the cost of the relocation package, based on your resignation date. You will be
required to sign an agreement detailing the terms and conditions of the relocation program.
The general overall terms of PG&E’s compensation and benefit programs (including but not limited to STIP, LTIP, perquisite
allowance, qualified and supplemental pension, time off, and healthcare offerings) are subject to change over time. No portion of
this letter is intended to indicate a guarantee of the terms and conditions of such programs existing at the time of this offer.
You will be an employee at will, meaning PG&E can terminate your employment at any time, with or without cause and with or
without notice. In the event you are terminated without cause, you will be eligible for benefits under the PG&E Corporation
Officer Severance Policy, including pro-rata STIP for partial-year service over six months as noted in such policy.
The offer is contingent on your passing a comprehensive background verification and a standard drug analysis test. We will also
verify your eligibility to work in the United States based on applicable immigration laws.
We look forward to you joining our executive team.
Sincerely,
Mary King
Vice President, Talent & Chief Diversity Officer
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Please acknowledge your acceptance of this offer and the terms of this letter by signing the original and returning it to Executive
Recruiting.
Signature
Date

EXHIBIT 10.85
Human Resources, Executive
Recruiting
245 Market Street San Francisco,
CA 94177
June 30, 2020
Sumeet Singh
6116 Alpine Blue Drive
San Ramon, CA 94582
Dear Sumeet:
On behalf of PG&E Corporation, I am pleased to offer you the position of Senior Vice President and Chief Risk Officer, reporting
to Bill Smith, Interim Chief Executive Officer, PG&E Corporation, with an expected start date of August 1, 2020 or at your earliest
availability. This offer is subject to board approval of your election to Senior Vice President.
Your total annual compensation package will consist of the following:
1. An annual base salary of $475,000 ($39,583.33 month) subject to ordinary withholdings.
2. A sign-on bonus of $75,000, subject to ordinary withholdings, that will be paid within 10 days of the first day of your
employment.
3. Participation in the Company's Short-Term Incentive Plan (STIP) with a target participation rate of 60% of your eligible
earnings (i.e., base salary) received during each plan year. You must be on PG&E’s active payroll as of September 30 of
each year to be eligible for a payout for that year. The STIP is an at-risk component of pay that rewards employees
annually and is tied to company and individual performance. The STIP for 2020 has been proposed and is awaiting final
approval. STIP awards are completely discretionary and not guaranteed. The PG&E Corporation Compensation
Committee retains full discretion with respect to awarding STIP payments. For an employment period that does not span
the entire calendar year, the STIP will be pro-rated for the period in which you were on PG&E’s active payroll.
4. Participation in PG&E’s Long-Term Incentive Plan (LTIP) with a target annual award of $650,000. LTIP awards typically
are granted in March of each year. LTIP awards may consist of Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), performance shares,
stock options, or a combination of these. RSUs and stock options are subject to time-based vesting. The value of
performance shares is determined after the end of a three-year performance period, at which time the performance
shares vest in the applicable percentage. The LTIP for 2020 has been proposed and is awaiting final approval. The
Compensation Committee retains full discretion with respect to the approval of LTIP award form, amounts and terms.
The proposed 2020 LTIP design consists entirely of performance shares.
5. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Retirement Savings Plan (RSP), a 401(k) savings plan. You will be eligible to
contribute as much as 50% of your salary on either a pre-tax
1

or after-tax basis. We will match contributions up to 6% of your salary at 75 cents on each dollar contributed. All of the
above contributions are subject to the applicable legal limits.
6. Participation in the PG&E Corporation Supplemental Retirement Savings Plan (SRSP), a non-qualified, deferred
compensation plan. You may elect to defer payment of some of your compensation on a pre-tax basis, subject to IRS
and other legal restrictions. Additionally, we will provide you with the full matching contributions that cannot be provided
through the RSP due to legal limitations imposed on highly-compensated employees.
7. Conditioned upon meeting plan requirements, you also will be eligible for retirement benefits under the Company’s
retirement (final average pay pension and Defined-Contribution Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan), post-
retirement life insurance and retiree medical plans.
Since your break in service was less than twelve months, your service for purposes of the final average pay pension will
be bridged; that is, it will be treated as if you had had no break. The Defined-Contribution Supplemental Executive
Retirement Plan requires three years of cumulative service with either PG&E Corporation or Pacific Gas and Electric
Company, so you will be immediately vested in this benefit due to your prior service.
8. Participation in the PG&E Corporation paid time off (PTO) program and Short-Term and Long-Term Disability programs.
You will receive an annual PTO allotment of 160 hours, subject to future increases based on length of service. In
addition, PG&E Corporation recognizes ten paid company holidays and provides three floating holidays immediately
upon hire.
9. An annual perquisite allowance of $20,000, subject to ordinary withholdings, normally included on your March paycheck.
For 2020, because your start date is after June 30, you will receive 50% of the annual perquisite allowance ($10,000) on
your second regular monthly paycheck.
10. Participation in the Company’s health benefits program, which permits you to select coverage tailored to your personal
needs and circumstances.  Information and instructions on how to enroll in health plan benefits will be provided to you
within your first ten days of employment. The benefits options you choose will be effective on your date of hire. You have
31 days from your start date to make health and welfare benefit choices that best fit your needs. 
The general overall terms of PG&E’s compensation and benefit programs (including but not limited to STIP, LTIP, perquisite
allowance, qualified and non-qualified pension, time off, and healthcare offerings) are subject to change over time. No portion of
this letter is intended to indicate a guarantee of the terms and conditions of such programs existing at the time of this offer.
2

You will be an employee at will, meaning the Company can terminate your employment at any time, with or without cause and
with or without notice. In the event you are terminated without cause, you will be eligible for benefits under the PG&E
Corporation Officer Severance Policy adjusted to 18 months.
The offer is contingent on your passing comprehensive background verification and a standard drug analysis test. We will also
verify your eligibility to work in the United States based on applicable immigration laws.
We look forward to you re-joining our executive team.
Sincerely,
Dinyar Mistry
Senior Vice President, Human Resources
PG&E Corporation & Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Please acknowledge your acceptance of this offer and the terms of this letter by signing the original and returning it to Executive
Recruiting.
Signature
Date
3

EXHIBIT 10.92
PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AWARD
PG&E CORPORATION, a California corporation, hereby grants Restricted Stock Units to the Recipient named
below (sometimes referred to as “you”). The Restricted Stock Units have been granted under the PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-
Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the “LTIP”). The terms and conditions of the Restricted Stock Units are set forth in this cover
sheet and in the attached Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (the “Agreement”).
Date of Grant:     March 1, 2021    
Name of Recipient:     Julius Cox    
Recipient’s Participant ID:     XXXXXXX    
Number of Restricted Stock Units:     41,021    
By  accepting  this  award,  you  agree  to  all  of  the  terms  and  conditions  described  in  the  attached
Agreement. You and PG&E Corporation agree to execute such further instruments and to take such
further action as may reasonably be necessary to carry out the intent of the attached Agreement. You
are also acknowledging receipt of this award, the attached Agreement, and a copy of the prospectus
describing the LTIP and the Restricted Stock Units dated March 2021.
If, for any reason, you wish to not accept this award, please notify PG&E Corporation  in writing
within 30 calendar days of the date of this award at ATTN: LTIP Administrator,  Pacific Gas and
Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco, 94105.
Attachment

PG&E CORPORATION 
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
NON-ANNUAL RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AGREEMENT
The LTIP and Other
Agreements
This Agreement and the above cover sheet constitute the entire understanding between you and
PG&E Corporation regarding the Restricted Stock Units, subject to the terms of the LTIP. Any
prior agreements, commitments, or negotiations are superseded. In the event of any conflict or
inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement or the above cover sheet and the LTIP,
the LTIP will govern. Capitalized terms that are not defined in this Agreement or the above cover
sheet  are  defined  in  the  LTIP.  In  the  event  of  any  conflict  between  the  provisions  of  this
Agreement or the above cover sheet and the PG&E Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy,
this  Agreement  or  the  above  cover  sheet  will  govern,  as  applicable.  For  purposes  of  this
Agreement, employment with PG&E Corporation means employment with any member of the
Participating Company Group.
Grant of Restricted Stock
Units
PG&E Corporation grants you the number of Restricted Stock Units shown on the cover sheet of
this  Agreement.  The  Restricted  Stock  Units  are  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this
Agreement and the LTIP.
Vesting of Restricted Stock
Units
As long as you remain employed with PG&E Corporation, the total number of Restricted Stock
Units originally subject to this Agreement, as shown on the cover sheet, will vest in accordance
with the below vesting schedule (the “Normal Vesting Schedule”).
       20,510 on March 01, 2022
       20,511 on March 01, 2023
The  amounts  payable  upon  each  vesting  date  are  hereby  designated  separate  payments  for
purposes of Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (“Code”). Except as
described below, all Restricted Stock Units subject to this Agreement which have not vested upon
termination of your employment will then be cancelled. As set forth below, the Restricted Stock
Units may vest earlier upon the occurrence of certain events.

Dividends
Restricted Stock Units will accrue Dividend Equivalents in the event that cash dividends are paid
with respect to PG&E Corporation common stock having a record date prior to the date on which
the RSUs are settled. Such Dividend Equivalents will be converted into cash and paid, if at all,
upon settlement of the underlying Restricted Stock Units.
Settlement
Vested Restricted Stock Units will be settled in an equal number of shares of PG&E Corporation
common  stock,  subject  to  the  satisfaction  of  Withholding  Taxes,  as  described  below.  PG&E
Corporation  will  issue  shares  as  soon  as  practicable  after  the  Restricted  Stock  Units  vest  in
accordance  with  the  Normal  Vesting  Schedule  (but  not  later  than  sixty  (60)  days  after  the
applicable  vesting  date);  provided,  however,  that  such  issuance  will,  if  earlier,  be  made  with
respect to all of your outstanding vested Restricted Stock Units (after giving effect to the vesting
provisions described below) as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after)
the earliest to occur of your (1) Disability (as defined under Code Section 409A), (2) death, or (3)
“separation from service,” within the meaning of Code Section 409A within 2 years following a
Change in Control.
Voluntary Termination
In the event of your voluntary termination (other than Retirement), all unvested Restricted Stock
Units will be cancelled on the date of termination.
Retirement
[In  the  event  of  your  Retirement,  any  unvested  Restricted  Stock  Units  that  would  have  vested
within the 12 months following such Retirement had your employment continued will continue to
vest and be settled pursuant to the Normal Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement
that you be employed), subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement; provided,
however, that in the event of your Retirement within 2 years following a Change in Control, those
Restricted Stock Units that would have vested within 12 months following such Retirement will
be vested and settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than 60 days after) the date of such
Retirement.  All  other  unvested  Restricted  Stock  Units  will  be  cancelled.  Your  voluntary
termination of employment will be considered Retirement if you are age 55 or older on the date of
termination (other than termination for cause) and if you were employed by PG&E Corporation
for at least eight consecutive years ending on the date of termination of your employment.
    A-2    

Termination for Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated at any time by PG&E Corporation
for cause, all unvested Restricted Stock Units will be cancelled on the date of termination. In
general, termination for “cause” means termination of employment because of dishonesty, a
criminal  offense,  or  violation  of  a  work  rule,  and  will  be  determined  by  and  in  the  sole
discretion of PG&E Corporation. For the avoidance of doubt, you will not be eligible to retire
if your employment is being or is terminated for cause.
Termination other than for
Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for
cause or Retirement, any unvested Restricted Stock Units that would have vested within the 12
months following such termination had your employment continued will continue to vest and be
settled pursuant to the Normal Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement that you be
employed), subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement. All other unvested
Restricted  Stock  Units  will  be  cancelled  unless  your  termination  of  employment  was  in
connection with a Change in Control as provided below.
Death/Disability
In  the  event  of  your  death  or  Disability  (as  defined  in  Code  Section  409A)  while  you  are
employed, all of your Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled as soon as practicable
after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of such event. If your death or Disability
occurs following the termination of your employment and your Restricted Stock Units are then
outstanding  under the terms hereof, then all of your vested Restricted  Stock Units plus any
Restricted Stock Units that would have otherwise vested during any continued vesting period
hereunder will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after)
the date of your death or Disability.
Termination Due to Disposition
of Subsidiary
If your employment is terminated (other than for cause, your voluntary termination, or your
Retirement)  (1)  by  reason  of  a  divestiture  or  change  in  control  of  a  subsidiary  of  PG&E
Corporation,  which  divestiture  or  change  in  control  results  in  such  subsidiary  no  longer
qualifying as a subsidiary corporation under Code Section 424(f), or (2) coincident with the
sale of all or substantially all of the assets of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, then your
Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled in the same manner as for a “Termination other
than for Cause” described above.
    A-3    

Change in Control
In  the  event  of  a  Change  in  Control,  the  surviving,  continuing,  successor,  or  purchasing
corporation or other business entity or parent thereof, as the case may be (the “Acquiror”), may,
without  your  consent,  either  assume  or  continue  PG&E  Corporation’s  rights  and  obligations
under  this  Agreement  or  provide  a  substantially  equivalent  award  in  substitution  for  the
Restricted Stock Units subject to this Agreement.
If the Restricted Stock Units are neither so assumed nor so continued by the Acquiror, and the
Acquiror  does  not  provide  a  substantially  equivalent  award  in  substitution  for  the  Restricted
Stock Units, all of your unvested  Restricted  Stock Units will vest immediately  preceding  and
contingent  on,  the  Change  in  Control  and  be  settled  in  accordance  with  the  Normal  Vesting
Schedule, subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement.
Termination In Connection
with a Change in Control
If you  separate  from  service  (other  than  termination  for  cause,  your  voluntary  termination,  or
your Retirement) in connection with a Change in Control within three months before the Change
in  Control  occurs,  all  of  your  outstanding  Restricted  Stock  Units  (including  Restricted  Stock
Units that you would have otherwise forfeited after the end of the continued vesting period) will
vest  on  the  date  of  the  Change  in  Control  and  will  be  settled  in  accordance  with  the  Normal
Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement that you be employed) subject to the earlier
settlement provisions of this Agreement.
In  the  event  of  such  a  separation  in  connection  with  a  Change  in  Control  within  two  years
following  the  Change  in  Control,  your  Restricted  Stock  Units  (to  the  extent  they  did  not
previously vest upon, for example, failure of the Acquiror to assume or continue this award) will
vest on the date of such separation and will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later
than sixty (60) days after) the date of such separation. PG&E Corporation has the sole discretion
to determine whether termination of your employment was made in connection with a Change in
Control.
Delay
PG&E  Corporation  will  delay  the  issuance  of  any  shares  of  common  stock  to  the  extent  it  is
necessary to comply with Code Section 409A(a)(2)(B)(i) (relating to payments made to certain
“key  employees”  of  certain  publicly-traded  companies);  in  such  event,  any  shares  of  common
stock to which you would otherwise be entitled during the six (6) month period following the date
of your “separation from service” under Section 409A (or shorter period ending on the date of
your death following such separation) will instead be issued on the first business day following
the expiration of the applicable delay period.
    A-4    

Withholding Taxes
The number of shares of PG&E Corporation  common stock that you are otherwise entitled to
receive upon settlement of Restricted Stock Units will be reduced by a number of shares having
an aggregate Fair Market Value, as determined by PG&E Corporation, equal to the amount of any
Federal, state, or local taxes of any kind required by law to be withheld by PG&E Corporation in
connection with the Restricted Stock Units determined using the applicable minimum statutory
withholding rates, including social security and Medicare taxes due under the Federal Insurance
Contributions Act and the California State Disability Insurance tax (“Withholding Taxes”). If the
withheld  shares  were  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  your  minimum  Withholding  Taxes,  you  will  be
required  to  pay,  as  soon  as  practicable,  including  through  additional  payroll  withholding,  any
amount  of  the  Withholding  Taxes  that  is  not  satisfied  by  the  withholding  of  shares  described
above.
Leaves of Absence
For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  if  you  are  on  an  approved  leave  of  absence  from  PG&E
Corporation, or a recipient of PG&E Corporation sponsored disability benefits, you will continue
to be considered as employed. If you do not return to active employment upon the expiration of
your leave of absence or the expiration of your PG&E Corporation sponsored disability benefits,
you  will  be  considered  to  have  voluntarily  terminated  your  employment.  See  above  under
“Voluntary Termination.”
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the leave of absence exceeds six (6) months, and a return to
service upon expiration of such leave is not guaranteed by statute or contract, then you will be
deemed to have had a “separation from service” for purposes of any Restricted Stock Units that
are settled hereunder upon such separation. To the extent an authorized leave of absence is due to
a medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or
to last for a continuous period of at least six (6) months and such impairment causes you to be
unable to perform the duties of your position of employment or any substantially similar position
of employment, the six (6) month period in the prior sentence will be twenty-nine (29) months.
PG&E Corporation reserves the right to determine which leaves of absence will be considered as
continuing  employment  and  when  your  employment  terminates  for  all  purposes  under  this
Agreement.
    A-5    

Voting and Other Rights
You  will  not  have  voting  rights  with  respect  to  the  Restricted  Stock  Units  until  the  date  the
underlying  shares  are  issued  (as  evidenced  by  appropriate  entry  on  the  books  of  PG&E
Corporation  or  its  duly  authorized  transfer  agent).  No  Restricted  Stock  Units  and  no  shares  of
Stock  that  have  not  been  issued  hereunder  may  be  sold,  assigned,  transferred,  pledged,  or
otherwise encumbered, other than by will or the laws of decent and distribution, and the Restricted
Stock  Units  may  be  exercised  during  the  life  of  the  Recipient  only  by  the  Recipient  or  the
Recipient’s guardian or legal representative.
No Retention Rights
This Agreement is not an employment agreement and does not give you the right to be retained by
PG&E Corporation. Except as otherwise provided in an applicable employment agreement, PG&E
Corporation reserves the right to terminate your employment at any time and for any reason.
Recoupment of Awards
Awards  are  subject  to  recoupment  in  accordance  with  any  applicable  law  and  any  recoupment
policy  adopted  by  the  Corporation  from  time  to  time,  including  provisions  of  the  Officer
Severance Policy, and provisions of the PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Executive Incentive Compensation Recoupment Policy, as last revised on February 19, 2019 and
available  on  the  PG&E@Work  internet  site  for  the  Long-Term  Incentive  Plan  (the  policy  and
location may be changed from time to time by PG&E Corporation).
Applicable Law
This Agreement will be interpreted and enforced under the laws of the State of California.
    A-6    

PG&E CORPORATION
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
A total of 47,000,000 shares of PG&E Corporation common stock (“Shares”), no par value, are available for issuance under the
PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as may be amended (LTIP), less the number of Shares covered by awards granted under
the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan after December 31, 2013, but prior to the effective date of the LTIP, and determined
in accordance with Section 4.1 of the LTIP. The Shares will come from PG&E Corporation’s authorized, but unissued, shares of common
stock  and/or  Shares  reacquired  by  PG&E  Corporation  on  the  open  market  for  this  purpose.  The  purpose  of  the  LTIP  is  to  advance  the
interests of PG&E Corporation and its shareholders by providing officers, key management employees, and other eligible participants with
financial incentives tied directly to PG&E Corporation's long-term business objectives. Awards granted under the LTIP can include stock
options,  stock  appreciation  rights  (SARs),  restricted  stock,  restricted  stock  units,  performance  shares,  performance  units,  deferred
compensation awards, and other stock-based awards.
This  summary describes  the stock  options, SARs, restricted stock, performance awards, and restricted stock units  which may be
granted under the LTIP. This summary does not purport to be complete, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the LTIP and your
award agreement evidencing an award. The terms of the LTIP will govern in case there is any conflict with any part of this summary or your
individual award agreement. Certain terms of stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards differ
from those described in this summary and such terms will be set forth in your award agreement governing such award. You may obtain a
copy of the LTIP by calling or writing the LTIP Administrator, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco,
CA 94105, (415) 266-8644.
______________________________
THIS DOCUMENT CONSTITUTES PART OF A PROSPECTUS COVERING SECURITIES THAT HAVE BEEN REGISTERED
UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933.
March 2021

Contents
Information about the LTIP
iv
Administration of the LTIP.
iv
Eligibility.
iv
Duration of the LTIP.
iv
Adjustment Upon Changes in Number or Value of Shares of Common Stock.
iv
Award Agreements.
iv
Amendment and Termination of the LTIP and Incentive Awards.
iv
Withholding Taxes.
v
Recoupment of Awards.
v
Miscellaneous.
v
Stock Options
v
What is a stock option?
v
Will I be required to pay for a grant of a stock option?
v
When may I exercise my stock options?
v
How do I exercise my stock options?
v
What happens if my service with PG&E Corporation ends before my stock option is fully vested and exercisable?
vi
When do my stock options expire?
vi
Do I have any shareholder rights?
vi
How do I pay for shares and taxes upon exercise of my stock options?
vi
How is an incentive stock option different than a nonqualified stock option?
vi
Stock Appreciation Rights
vi
What is a stock appreciation right?
vi
Will I be required to pay for a grant of stock appreciation rights?
vii
When may I exercise my SARs?
vii
How do I exercise my SARs?
vii
What happens if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before my stock appreciation right vests?
vii
When do my SARs expire?
vii
Do I have any shareholder rights?
vii
Restricted Stock
vii
What is a restricted stock award?
vii
Will I be required to pay for a grant of restricted stock?
vii
When will restricted stock awards vest?
vii
What happens to restricted stock awards if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before my Award vests?
viii
When will restricted stock awards be settled?
viii
Do I have any shareholder rights?
viii
Restricted Stock Units
viii
What are restricted stock units?
viii
i

Will I be required to pay for a grant of restricted stock units?
viii
When will restricted stock units vest?
viii
What happens to restricted stock unit awards if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before the scheduled
vesting date?
viii
Will I receive dividends on restricted stock units?
viii
How soon will I receive the shares after the restricted stock units have vested?
ix
Do I have the same rights as other shareholders?
ix
Performance Awards
ix
What are performance awards?
ix
What are the performance measures and how do they work?
ix
When will performance awards vest?
ix
Termination of Service
ix
What happens to stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards if my service is
terminated?
ix
What happens to my stock options, SARS, restricted stock, performance awards, and restricted stock units if I retire?
x
Change in Control
x
What happens to stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards if there is a
“change in control” of PG&E Corporation?
x
What happens to my award if my service is terminated other than for cause in connection with a “change in control” of
PG&E Corporation?
x
What would be considered a “change in control” of PG&E Corporation?
x
What happens to my award if I am terminated from my position with a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation as a result of the
divestiture or change in control of the subsidiary?
xi
Transferability: Resale Restrictions
xi
May I transfer my stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards to someone else?
xi
Are there any restrictions on my ability to sell common stock received when my awards are settled in shares of common
stock or when I exercise my stock options?
xi
What if I am an executive officer of PG&E Corporation?
xi
Tax Consequences
xii
Are there any tax consequences when I am granted a nonqualified stock option or SARs?
xii
What are the tax consequences when I exercise my stock options or SARs?
xii
Will my exercise of a stock option or SAR be subject to tax withholding?
xii
What are the tax consequences if I sell the shares purchased upon exercise of a stock option?
xii
Are there any tax consequences when I am granted an incentive stock option?
xiii
What are the tax consequences when I exercise my incentive stock options?
xiii
What are the tax consequences if I sell the shares purchased upon exercise of an incentive stock option?
xiii
What if I make a qualifying disposition?
xiii
What if I make a disqualifying disposition?
xiii
ii

What are the tax consequences relating to restricted stock (including any Performance Share awards)?
xiii
What is a Section 83(b) election?
xiii
How are dividends and dividend equivalents related to my restricted stock awards taxed?
xiv
What are the tax consequences relating to restricted stock units (including Performance Units)?
xiv
How can I satisfy the amount of California SDI and FICA taxes that may be due before my restricted stock units are
settled?
xiv
How can I satisfy the withholding taxes that arise when my restricted stock units vest?
xiv
What are the tax consequences if I sell shares I acquire upon vesting of restricted stock unit awards or settlement of my
restricted stock units?
xiv
What is the impact of Section 409A of the Code on my awards?
xv
Additional Information about PG&E Corporation
xv
iii

Information about the LTIP
Administration of the LTIP.
The LTIP is administered by the Compensation Committee (the “Committee”) of the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation (the
“Company”).  The  Committee  is  composed  entirely  of  directors  who  satisfy  the  definition  of  “independent  director”  set  forth  in  PG&E
Corporation’s Corporate Governance Guidelines and also meet the enhanced independence standards established by the New York Stock
Exchange or any other applicable stock exchanges.
Generally, the Committee approves LTIP awards made to officers of PG&E Corporation and to officers of Pacific Gas and Electric
Company and approves guidelines for LTIP awards to be made to certain other eligible participants during a particular year, including the
amount and type of award, the terms and conditions of awards, and the aggregate value of awards. The Chief Executive Officer of PG&E
Corporation has authority to implement the award guidelines approved by the Committee. The Committee may also (i) amend or modify
awards in accordance with the terms of the LTIP, (ii) prescribe, amend or rescind rules relating to the LTIP, (iii) construe, interpret and
reconcile any inconsistency regarding the LTIP and (iv) make all other determinations with respect to the LTIP, to the extent permitted by
applicable law and subject to certain restrictions specified in the LTIP.
Eligibility.
Awards  may  be  granted  to  employees,  directors  (including  non-employee  directors)  and  consultants  of  PG&E  Corporation  and
certain subsidiaries, at the discretion of the Committee. Nothing in the LTIP or in any award agreement is intended to provide you with the
right to remain in the service of the PG&E Corporation or any of its subsidiaries for any specific period.
Duration of the LTIP.
The LTIP will terminate on May 11, 2024, unless terminated sooner according to the terms of the LTIP.
Adjustment Upon Changes in Number or Value of Shares of Common Stock.
In the event of certain changes in PG&E Corporation common stock without receipt of consideration, such as stock dividends, stock
splits,  recapitalizations,  mergers,  consolidations  and  similar  changes,  or  in  the  event  of  payment  of  certain  non-stock  dividends  or
distributions that have a material effect on the value of PG&E Corporation common stock, appropriate adjustments shall be made to the
number and kind of shares subject to the LTIP and to any outstanding awards, the award limitations and in the exercise or purchase price per
share  under  any  outstanding  awards  in  order  to  prevent  dilution  or  enlargement  of  a  participant’s  right  under  the  LTIP, subject  to  the
provisions of Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”).
Award Agreements.
    Awards granted under the LTIP will be evidenced by award agreements in a written or electronic form that will provide additional terms
and conditions associated with such awards, as determined by the Committee.
Amendment and Termination of the LTIP and Incentive Awards.
The Board of Directors or the Committee may at any time suspend, terminate, modify, or amend the LTIP in any respect. However,
shareholder approval of amendments shall be obtained in the manner and to the degree required by applicable laws or regulations, or the
terms of the LTIP. The Committee also may amend or modify the terms and conditions of any incentive award granted under the LTIP, or
extend, cancel or renew any grant of an award; provided that no such amendment, modification, cancellation, extension or renewal may,
without your consent, adversely affect your rights under awards previously granted to you.
Withholding Taxes.
    You will be responsible for payment of any taxes or similar charges required by law to be paid or withheld with respect to any award,
including with respect to the vesting, settlement and exercise of any award. Any required withholdings must be paid by you on or prior to the
payment or other event that results in taxable income with respect to an award. The award agreement may specify the manner in
iv

which the withholding obligation shall be satisfied with respect to the particular type of award, which may include permitting you to elect to
satisfy the withholding obligation by tendering shares of PG&E Corporation common stock to the PG&E Corporation or having the PG&E
Corporation withhold a number of shares of common stock having a value equal to the minimum statutory tax or similar charge required to be
paid or withheld.
Recoupment of Awards.
Awards are subject to recoupment in accordance with any applicable law and any recoupment policies, procedures, or requirements
adopted by or applicable to the Corporation from time to time.
Miscellaneous.
The LTIP is generally not subject to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) and it is not qualified under
Section 401(a) of the Code.
Stock Options
What is a stock option?
A stock option allows you to buy a certain number of shares of PG&E Corporation common stock at a fixed price. The per share
purchase price (or exercise price) generally will be equal to the closing price of PG&E Corporation common stock on the date on which the
option is granted, unless otherwise specified in your award agreement.
Will I be required to pay for a grant of a stock option?
    Generally, no. It is anticipated that the grant of stock options would be made in recognition of your service to PG&E Corporation (or any
of its subsidiaries) and would not require any cash payment. To purchase PG&E Corporation common stock underlying a stock option,
however, you must exercise the stock option and pay the exercise price as described below and set forth in your award agreement.
When may I exercise my stock options?
You may not exercise your stock options until your right to do so has vested in accordance with the vesting terms that are determined
when the stock options are granted and set forth in your award agreement governing your stock options. Vesting is generally contingent on
your  continued  service  to  PG&E  Corporation  or  its  affiliates  through  the  applicable  vesting  date.  Stock  options  may  also  be  subject  to
performance-based vesting measures that affect the number of options that you ultimately may be permitted to exercise. Please consult your
award agreement for details regarding the vesting terms of your stock options.
How do I exercise my stock options?
You must deliver a completed electronic exercise election form to the record-keeper for the LTIP, which is currently Charles Schwab.
Instructions for completing and submitting the form are available from the recordkeeper.
What happens if my service with PG&E Corporation ends before my stock option is fully vested and exercisable?
The award agreement describes what happens to the stock option if your service terminates before the stock option is fully vested and
exercisable. In general, upon termination of service with PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries), you will forfeit all unvested stock
options.
When do my stock options expire?
Although the term of an option may vary, in general, the term of each stock option is 10 years, unless otherwise specified in your
award agreement. The options generally will expire earlier upon or within a specified period following your termination of service.
Do I have any shareholder rights?
You will not have any rights of a shareholder with respect to the shares subject to the options unless an option is exercised and shares
are issued to you.
v

How do I pay for shares and taxes upon exercise of my stock options?
Unless your award agreement provides otherwise, you may pay the option exercise price and applicable tax withholdings using (1)
cash, check or cash equivalent; (2) shares of PG&E Corporation common stock; (3) a "cashless exercise" procedure (whereby a broker sells a
number of shares purchased upon exercise, with a value equal to the aggregate exercise price and applicable tax withholdings and remits the
sale proceeds to PG&E Corporation to pay for the aggregate exercise price and applicable tax withholdings); (4) by surrendering a number of
shares of PG&E Corporation common stock that otherwise would have been issued to you in connection with the stock option exercise, with
an aggregate fair market value (as determined as of the business day before the date of exercise) equal to the aggregate exercise price and
applicable tax withholdings, (5) by another method that pay be approved by the Committee or (6) any combination of the foregoing. If shares
are used to pay all or part of the exercise price, the cash and any shares surrendered must have a fair market value (determined as of the
business day before the date of exercise) that is not less than the applicable exercise price.
How is an incentive stock option different than a nonqualified stock option?    
An incentive stock option and a nonqualified stock option have different U.S. federal tax consequences, which are explained in more
detail in the “Tax Consequences” section below. Each stock option will be designated by the Committee as either an incentive stock option or
a nonqualified stock option and set forth in the Award Agreement evidencing the grant. If an option granted as an incentive stock option fails
to qualify as an incentive stock option under the Code, it will be treated as a nonqualified stock option.
Stock Appreciation Rights
What is a stock appreciation right?
    A stock appreciation right (SAR) gives you the right to receive an amount equal to the excess of the fair market value of a share of
common stock of PG&E Corporation on the date of exercise over a fixed value (the “Base Price”) of the SAR. A SAR may be settled in
[shares of common stock, cash, or any combination thereof] as specified by the Committee. The Base Price of a SAR granted under the LTIP
will not be less than the fair market value of the shares of common stock subject to the SAR on the date the SAR is granted.
Will I be required to pay for a grant of stock appreciation rights?
    Generally, no. It is anticipated that SARs would be granted in recognition of your service to PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries)
and would not require any cash payment.
When may I exercise my SARs?
You may not exercise your SARs until your right to do so has vested in accordance with the vesting terms that are determined when
the SARs are granted and set forth in your award agreement governing your SARs. Vesting is generally contingent on your continued service
to PG&E Corporation or its affiliates through the applicable vesting date. SARs may also be subject to performance-based vesting measures
that affect the number of SARs that you ultimately may be permitted to exercise. Please consult your award agreement for details regarding
the vesting terms of your SARs.
How do I exercise my SARs?
    You must deliver a completed electronic exercise election form to the record-keeper for the LTIP, currently Charles Schwab. Instructions
for completing and submitting the form are available from the recordkeeper
What happens if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before my stock appreciation right vests?
    The award agreement describes what happens to the SARs if your service terminates before the SARs are fully vested and exercisable. In
general upon termination of service with PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries), you will forfeit all unvested SARs.
vi

When do my SARs expire?
    Although the term of an SAR may vary, in general, the term of each SAR is 10 years, unless otherwise specified in your award agreement.
The SARs generally will expire earlier upon or within a specified period following termination of service.
Do I have any shareholder rights?
You  will  not  have  any  rights  of  a  shareholder  with  respect  to  the  SARs  unless  shares  subject  to  the  SARs  are  issued  to  you  in
settlement of the SARs. However, if the SARs are settled in cash, you will not become a shareholder, even if the amount of cash payable is
determined by reference to the value of shares of common stock.
Restricted Stock
What is a restricted stock award?
    A restricted stock award is a grant of shares of PG&E Corporation common stock that is subject to vesting.
Will I be required to pay for a grant of restricted stock?
    Generally, no. It is anticipated that restricted stock awards would be granted in recognition of your service to the PG&E Corporation (or
any of its subsidiaries) and would not require any cash payment. However, in setting the terms of the grant, the Committee has the discretion
to require payment.
When will restricted stock awards vest?
    In order for your restricted stock awards to vest, you must generally remain in the service of PG&E Corporation during the vesting period.
Vesting may also be contingent upon the achievement of specified performance conditions and/or such other terms and conditions determined
by the Committee. Restricted stock awards that are subject to performance-based vesting terms are referred to as Performance Shares in the
LTIP,  and  also  may  be  called  performance  share  units.  The  vesting  terms  of  a  restricted  stock  award  will  be  set  forth  in  your  award
agreement.
What happens to restricted stock awards if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before my Award vests?
    The award agreement describes what happens to the restricted stock award if your service terminates before the restricted stock award is
fully vested and transferable. In general upon termination of service with the PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries), you will forfeit
all unvested restricted stock awards.
When will restricted stock awards be settled?
    When restrictions on the restricted stock award lapse (i.e., you vest) and you satisfy any other conditions imposed by the Committee
pursuant to the LTIP or your award agreement, you will become the owner of unrestricted shares of common stock of PG&E Corporation.
Do I have any shareholder rights?
     Unless otherwise provided in your award agreement, you will have all of the rights of a shareholder with respect to restricted stock during
the applicable restricted period, including the right to receive payment of dividends and distributions with respect to the underlying shares of
PG&E Corporation common stock (which will be subject to the same vesting terms as the underlying shares of common stock).
Restricted Stock Units
What are restricted stock units?
A restricted stock unit is a right to receive shares of PG&E Corporation common stock when the restricted stock units are settled
following vesting. PG&E Corporation common stock is not issued at the time of grant of a restricted stock unit award.
vii

Will I be required to pay for a grant of restricted stock units?
Generally,  no.  It  is  anticipated  that  restricted  stock  unit  awards  would  be  granted  in  recognition  of  your  service  to  the  PG&E
Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries) and would not require any cash payment. However, in setting the terms of the grant, the Committee
has the discretion to require payment.
When will restricted stock units vest?
In order for your restricted stock awards to vest, you must generally remain in the service of PG&E Corporation during the vesting
period. Vesting may also be contingent upon the achievement of specified performance conditions and/or such other terms and conditions
determined  by  the  Committee.  Restricted  stock  unit  awards  that  are  subject  to  performance-based  vesting  terms  are  referred  to  as
Performance Shares in the LTIP. The vesting terms of a restricted stock award will be set forth in your award agreement.
What happens to restricted stock unit awards if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before the scheduled vesting date?
    Your award agreement describes what happens to the restricted stock unit if your service terminates before the scheduled vesting date. In
general, upon termination of service with the PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries), you will forfeit all unvested restricted stock
units.
Will I receive dividends on restricted stock units?
The Committee may provide in an award agreement that you will be entitled to receive dividend equivalents with respect to the
payment of cash dividends, which, unless otherwise provided in an award agreement, will be credited to you in the form of additional whole
restricted stock units as of the date of payment of such cash dividends on PG&E Corporation common stock. The number of additional
restricted stock units (rounded to the nearest whole number) to be credited shall be determined by dividing the amount of cash dividends paid
on such date with respect to the number of shares of common stock represented by the restricted stock units previously granted to you, by the
fair market value of a share of common stock on such date. Settlement of dividend equivalents will be made in the same manner as the
restricted stock units, which may include cash, shares of common stock of PG&E Corporation or a combination thereof.
How soon will I receive the shares after the restricted stock units have vested?     
PG&E Corporation will generally issue shares of PG&E Corporation common stock in respect of your restricted stock units within 60
days after the restricted stock units vest but no later than March 15 of the year following the year in which any applicable performance period
ends or at such other times as set forth in your award agreement. However, the Committee may also settle restricted stock units in cash or a
combination of cash and shares of common stock.
PG&E  Corporation  will  delay  the  issuance  of  any  shares  of  common  stock  to  the  extent  it  is  necessary  to  comply  with  Section
409A(a)(2)(B)(i) (relating to payments made to certain “key employees” of certain publicly-traded companies). In such event, any shares of
common stock to which you would otherwise be entitled during the six-month period following the date of your “separation from service”
under Section 409A (or shorter period ending on the date of your death following such separation) will instead be issued on the first business
day following the expiration of the applicable delay period.
Do I have the same rights as other shareholders?
You will not have voting rights with respect to the restricted stock units until the date the underlying shares are issued (as evidenced
by appropriate entry on the books of PG&E Corporation or its duly authorized transfer agent).
Performance Awards
What are performance awards?
Performance awards may be in the form of Performance Shares or Performance Units (each as may be described above) and are
awards  that  are  eligible  to  vest  based  on  the  achievement  of  performance  measures  at  the  end  of  a  pre-established  performance  period
(“Performance Period”), as set forth in your
viii

award  agreement.  Participants  may  receive  one  or  more  grants  of  performance  awards,  and  each  grant  may  reference  one  or  more
performance measures.
What are the performance measures and how do they work?
    A description of the applicable performance measures and how they work can be found in your award agreement.
When will performance awards vest?
Except as otherwise set forth in your ward agreement, vesting will occur following the Committee’s certification of the extent to
which the performance goals applicable to each type of performance measure are achieved. Certification will occur after the completion of
the relevant Performance Period.
Termination of Service
What happens to stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards if my service is terminated?
In  general,  and  unless  otherwise  specified  in  your  award  agreement,  upon  your  voluntary  termination  of  service  with  PG&E
Corporation (other than retirement, if provided for in your award agreement), your termination of service with or without cause, or your death
or disability, you will forfeit (1) any awards that have not yet vested and (2) any associated accrued dividends. Vested options generally must
be exercised within 30 days or the remaining term of the stock options, whichever is shorter.
What happens to my stock options, SARS, restricted stock, performance awards, and restricted stock units if I retire?
If applicable, your award agreement will provide for the treatment of awards in the case of retirement.
Change in Control
What happens to stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards if there is a “change in
control” of PG&E Corporation?
In general, and unless otherwise specified in your award agreement, in the event of a “change in control” (as defined in the LTIP), the
surviving, continuing, successor, or purchasing corporation or other business entity or parent thereof, as the case may be (“Acquiror”), may,
without your consent, either assume or continue your outstanding award or the Acquiror may provide substantially equivalent awards in
substitution for those awards.
In general, and unless otherwise specified in your award agreement, if the Acquiror does not assume or continue your outstanding
award or if the Acquiror does not provide substantially equivalent awards, then your awards will become fully vested, and your options and
SARs become exercisable immediately prior to the “change in control.”
What happens to my award if my service is terminated other than for cause in connection with a “change in control” of PG&E
Corporation?
Your award agreement describes what happens to your award upon termination of your service by PG&E Corporation other than for
cause in connection with a “change in control.”
What would be considered a “change in control” of PG&E Corporation?
The LTIP defines the term “change in control.” A change in control of PG&E Corporation occurs when:
•
Any person becomes the beneficial owner of securities of PG&E Corporation representing 30% or more of the combined voting power of
PG&E Corporation’s then outstanding securities;
ix

•
If during any two consecutive years the directors at the beginning of the two-year period cease to be a majority of the Board of
Directors at the end of the period, unless the election, or the nomination for election by the shareholders, of each new director was
approved by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the directors then still in office who were either (a) directors at the beginning of the
two-year  period  or  (b)  were  previously  elected  or  nominated  by  at  least  two-thirds  of  the  directors  in  office  at  the  time  of  the
individual director’s election or nomination;
•
A consolidation or merger of PG&E Corporation is consummated and results in the former PG&E Corporation shareholders owning
less than 70% of the voting power in the surviving entity (or parent of the surviving entity);
•
Any sale, lease, exchange or other transfer (in one transaction or a series of related transactions) of all or substantially all of the assets
of PG&E Corporation is consummated; or
•
The shareholders of PG&E Corporation approve a plan of liquidation or dissolution of PG&E Corporation.
What  happens  to  my  award  if  I  am  terminated  from  my  position  with  a  subsidiary  of  PG&E  Corporation  as  a  result  of  the
divestiture or change in control of the subsidiary?
Your  award  agreement  describes  what  happens  to  your  award  upon  termination  of  your  position  by  a  subsidiary  of  PG&E
Corporation as a result of a divestiture or “change in control” of the subsidiary.
Transferability: Resale Restrictions
May I transfer my stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards to someone else?
Unless otherwise specified in your award agreement in accordance with the terms of the LTIP, you may not transfer your stock
options, SARS, restricted stock, performance awards, or restricted stock units during your lifetime other than pursuant to a qualified domestic
relations  order  (QDRO)  or  similar  court  order. After  your  death,  your  awards  may  be  transferred  in  accordance  with your  will  or  in
accordance with the laws of descent and distribution. Except for options that may have been transferred as described above, your options may
be exercised during your lifetime only by you, your duly appointed legal representative, or the person named in a QDRO.
Are there any restrictions on my ability to sell common stock received when my awards are settled in shares of common stock or
when I exercise my stock options?
You are free to sell your stock at any time, except when you are subject to a trading blackout or while you are in possession of
nonpublic material information about PG&E Corporation or any of its subsidiaries. Confidential, nonpublic information should be considered
material if there is substantial likelihood that a reasonable investor would consider the information important. You are prohibited by securities
laws  and  by  PG&E  Corporation’s  and  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric  Company’s  Insider  Trading  Policy  from  trading  in  securities  of  PG&E
Corporation or Pacific Gas and Electric Company until the information has been disclosed and widely disseminated to the investing public,
typically  two  full  trading  days  following  such  disclosure.  Also,  if  as  determined  by  PG&E  Corporation,  your  position  exposes  you  to
nonpublic material information, you may be temporarily prohibited from trading shares. You will be notified if this “blackout” period applies
to you.
What if I am an executive officer of PG&E Corporation?
If you are an executive officer of PG&E Corporation or Pacific Gas and Electric Company, you will be prohibited from engaging in
transactions involving securities of PG&E Corporation or Pacific Gas and Electric Company during quarterly blackout periods and you will
be subject to the other conditions of PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Insider Trading Policy (in particular,
requiring 10b5-1 plans for your transactions in PG&E shares subject to this prospectus). Executive officers of PG&E Corporation will be
considered “affiliates” of PG&E Corporation (along with their spouses and other relatives sharing the same household). In general, if you are
an affiliate of PG&E Corporation, your sales of shares must comply with SEC Rule 144. In addition, executive officers of PG&E Corporation
and Pacific Gas and Electric Company are subject to the reporting and short-swing profit liability provisions of Section 16 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 Act with respect to their
x

transactions  in  PG&E  Corporation  common  stock  and  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric  Company  preferred  securities,  respectively.  Information
regarding Rule 144 and Section 16 is available from the Corporate Secretary.
In addition, you will not be able to buy or sell your shares if you are subject to the trading restrictions imposed by the Sarbanes Oxley
Act of 2002 in connection with a blackout period under a PG&E Corporation sponsored retirement plan.
Tax Consequences
    The following is a general description of the United States federal income tax consequences relating to your awards under the Code as
currently in effect and is not intended to be a complete description of all the possible tax consequences. Federal tax treatment may change
should the Code be amended. The consequences may differ based on your personal situation. PG&E Corporation cannot assure you of any
particular tax result and is not providing you with tax advice. If you have any questions regarding the tax consequences of receiving a grant of
stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards you should contact your tax advisor. PG&E Corporation
makes no representation that the LTIP will comply with Section 409A and makes no undertaking to prevent Section 409A from applying to
the LTIP or any award or to mitigate its effects on any award.
You will be required to pay to PG&E Corporation, or to make arrangements satisfactory to PG&E Corporation for the payment of
withholding taxes, including social security and Medicare taxes due under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA), and the California
State Disability Insurance (SDI) tax that become due in connection with your awards. PG&E Corporation’s obligations under the LTIP and
your award agreement are subject to payment of, or to the arrangement for payment of, all withholding taxes. PG&E Corporation will have
the right, to the extent permitted by law, to deduct any such withholding taxes from any payment of any kind otherwise due to you.
Are there any tax consequences when I am granted a nonqualified stock option or SARs?
In general, there are no immediate federal income tax consequences when you are granted nonqualified stock options or SARs.
What are the tax consequences when I exercise my stock options or SARs?
When you exercise a nonqualified stock option or SAR, you generally will have taxable ordinary income equal to the difference
between the current fair market value of the shares of common stock and the exercise price or base price. The amount of ordinary income will
be included in your W-2 form for the year in which you exercised your stock option or SAR.
Will my exercise of a stock option or SAR be subject to tax withholding?
Yes.  In  connection  with  the  exercise  of  a  nonqualified  stock  option  or  SAR,  PG&E  Corporation  will  be  required  to  withhold
applicable taxes on income you recognize upon the exercise. Please see your award agreement for the methods by which you may satisfy the
applicable withholding taxes.
What are the tax consequences if I sell the shares purchased upon exercise of a stock option?
If you sell the shares you purchased upon exercise of your nonqualified stock options you will be taxed on the excess of the sale price
over the market value of the shares on the exercise date (your tax basis). (The market value of the shares on the date of exercise will be the
sum of the option exercise price plus the amount of ordinary income you recognized when the option was exercised.) Whether or not this
amount can be treated as long-term capital gain (or loss) depends on the length of time you held the shares before selling them. Currently, to
receive long-term capital gain treatment you must hold the stock for more than one year. If you are subject to alternative minimum tax, you
should consult your tax advisor.
If you paid the option exercise price by delivering shares you already owned, then the tax consequences upon sale of the shares are
slightly different. Your tax basis in the surrendered shares and the length of time (the holding period) that you held the surrendered shares
will be carried over to an equal number of shares that you acquired upon exercise. If you purchased more shares than the number
xi

of shares you delivered, the holding period for the excess shares will start on the date of exercise and the price of such shares will be equal to
the market value of the shares on the date of exercise.
Are there any tax consequences when I am granted an incentive stock option?
In general, there are no immediate federal income tax consequences when you are granted incentive stock options.
What are the tax consequences when I exercise my incentive stock options?
You  will  not recognize  any  taxable  income,  for  regular income tax purposes, at the time an incentive stock  option  is  exercised.
However, the amount by which the fair market value (at the time of exercise) of the purchased shares exceeds the exercise price paid for
those shares will constitute an adjustment to your income for purposes of the alternative minimum tax.
What are the tax consequences if I sell the shares purchased upon exercise of an incentive stock option?
    The federal income tax liability will depend upon whether you make a qualifying or disqualifying disposition of the shares purchased under
the incentive stock option. Subject to certain requirements in the Code, a qualifying disposition will occur if the sale or other disposition of
shares takes place more than two years after the date the incentive stock option was granted and more than one year after the date that the
stock option was exercised for the particular shares involved in the disposition. A disqualifying disposition is any sale or other disposition
made before both of these requirements are satisfied.
What if I make a qualifying disposition?
    You will recognize a long-term capital gain equal to the excess of (a) the amount realized upon the sale or other disposition over (b) the
exercise price paid for the shares. You will recognize a long-term capital loss if the amount realized is lower than the exercise price paid for
the shares.
What if I make a disqualifying disposition?
    If you dispose of shares before the minimum holding periods described above have been satisfied, you will recognize ordinary income at
the time of the disposition in an amount equal to the fair market value of the shares on the exercise date over the exercise price paid for those
shares. Any additional gain recognized on the disqualifying disposition will be taxable at capital gains rates (long-term if the shares have been
held for more than one year following the exercise date of the option). If the sale proceeds from a disqualifying disposition are less than the
fair market value of the shares on the date of exercise, any ordinary income recognized is limited to the gain (if any) realized on the sale.
What are the tax consequences relating to restricted stock (including any Performance Share awards)?
    You will not recognize income until the transfer restrictions and forfeiture provisions lapse (i.e., you vest) unless you voluntarily elect to
recognize income on the date of grant by filing an election under Section 83(b) of the Code. If you do not make a Section 83(b) election, then
at the time that the transfer restrictions and forfeiture provisions lapse, you will recognize as ordinary income an amount equal to the excess
of the fair market value of the shares on the date of lapse over the purchase price (if any) paid for such shares.
What is a Section 83(b) election?
    A Section 83(b) election is available only for awards of restricted stock (including performance shares). Section 83(b) allows you to
recognize  ordinary  income  on  the  fair  market  value  of  the  restricted  stock  on  the  date  of  grant  instead  of  on  the  date  the  award  vests.
Thereafter, any further gain or loss recognized upon the ultimate sale or disposition of the restricted stock is treated as capital gain or loss.
Section 83(b) elections may be made with respect to restricted stock awards, to the extent permitted by the Committee.
How are dividends and dividend equivalents related to my restricted stock awards taxed?
Any dividends received with respect to a restricted stock award will be subject to the same vesting terms as the related restricted stock award.
If you do not make a Section 83(b) election, you will not recognize ordinary income with respect to the dividends until the related restricted
stock award vests (and therefore the dividends vest).
xii

What are the tax consequences relating to restricted stock units (including Performance Units)?
You will not recognize income until the restricted stock units are settled. Generally, when your restricted stock units are settled after
vesting, you will have taxable ordinary income in the amount of the fair market value of the shares received in connection with the settlement
of the restricted stock units and you will be required to satisfy applicable withholding taxes.
In the following situations you may be required to satisfy FICA and California SDI taxes even though the restricted stock units have
not yet been settled:
•
If you are retirement-eligible on the date of the award (if your award agreement provides for continued vesting after retirement),
•
When you become “retirement-eligible,” if your award agreement provides for continued vesting after retirement,
•
If your service is terminated other than for cause (as described in your award agreement), or
•
Any other situations under which your restricted stock units vest before they are settled.
How can I satisfy the amount of California SDI and FICA taxes that may be due before my restricted stock units are settled?
Under these circumstances FICA and California SDI taxes must be paid either by check payable to PG&E Corporation or through
payroll deductions. Unless you deliver a check to PG&E Corporation, the amount will be satisfied through payroll deductions.
How can I satisfy the withholding taxes that arise when my restricted stock units vest?
    You  must  arrange  to  pay  the  withholding  taxes  that  arise  when  your  restricted  stock  units  vest  in  a  manner  acceptable  to  PG&E
Corporation. PG&E Corporation may withhold from the shares otherwise issuable to you in settlement of restricted stock units a number of
whole shares having a fair market value, as determined by PG&E Corporation, equal to the applicable withholding taxes. The remaining
number of whole shares will be issued to you.
What are the tax consequences if I sell shares I acquire upon vesting of restricted stock unit awards or settlement of my restricted
stock units?    
    If you recognize gain when you sell shares your gain will be taxable at long-term or short-term capital gain rates. If you recognize a loss, it
will be a capital loss. The amount of your gain or loss will be the difference between the amount you receive on the sale of the shares and the
value used to calculate the applicable withholding taxes when your award was settled. Whether your gain or loss is long-term or short-term
will depend on whether you have held your shares for more than one year. The holding period generally begins at the time your performance
awards or restricted stock units are settled or stock options are exercised, and shares are issued to you.
What is the impact of Section 409A of the Code on my awards?
    If an award is treated as “nonqualified deferred compensation” and the award does not comply with or is not exempt from Section 409A,
Section 409A may impose additional taxes, interest and penalties on you. All grants made under the LTIP are designed and intended to either
be  exempt  from  or  comply  with  Section  409A  to  avoid  such  additional  taxes,  interest  and  penalties.  Neither  the  Committee  nor  PG&E
Corporation is obligated to ensure that awards comply with Section 409A or to take any actions to ensure such compliance.
Additional Information about PG&E Corporation
PG&E Corporation has filed a registration statement relating to the offer and sale of its shares of common stock under the LTIP with
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The following documents filed by PG&E Corporation with the SEC are incorporated by
reference into the registration statement and into this prospectus:
xiii

•
The annual report on Form 10-K of PG&E Corporation;
•
Quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K;
•
All other documents filed with the SEC pursuant to Section 13(a), 13(c), 14 and 15(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended; and
•
The description of PG&E Corporation common stock filed with the SEC, including any amendment or report filed for the purpose of
updating such description.
All documents filed with the SEC by PG&E Corporation after the date the registration statement was filed and before the filing of a
post-effective amendment to the registration statement that indicates all securities offered under the LTIP have been sold or deregisters all
securities then remaining unsold, will also be incorporated by reference in this summary and deemed to be a part of this summary as of the
date such documents are filed with the SEC.
Copies of the documents listed above (other than exhibits to such documents), and copies of PG&E Corporation’s latest annual report
to shareholders, proxy statement, reports, and other communications sent to shareholders, will be sent to you without charge upon your
request. Requests may be directed to:
Office of the Corporate Secretary
PG&E Corporation
77 Beale Street    P.O. Box 770000
San Francisco, California 94177
(Telephone: 415-973-8200)
These  reports  are  also  available  through  PG&E  Corporation’s  website  at www.pgecorp.com,  through  the  SEC’s  website  at
www.sec.gov, and through various financial websites.
PG&E Corporation’s filings with the SEC, including its Annual Report on Form 10-K are available on PG&E Corporation’s website
at www.pgecorp.com under the “Investors” link. (Click on “Financial Reports” and then click on “SEC Filings.”)
xiv

EXHIBIT 10.93
PG&E CORPORATION 
2021 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AWARD
PG&E CORPORATION, a California corporation, hereby grants Restricted Stock Units to the Recipient named
below (sometimes referred to as “you”). The Restricted Stock Units have been granted under the PG&E Corporation 2021 Long-
Term Incentive Plan, as amended (the “LTIP”). The terms and conditions of the Restricted Stock Units are set forth in this cover
sheet and in the attached Restricted Stock Unit Agreement (the “Agreement”).
Date of Grant:     June 01, 2021
Name of Recipient:     Carla Peterman    
Recipient’s Participant ID:     XXXXXXXX    
Number of Restricted Stock Units:     26,601    
By  accepting  this  award,  you  agree  to  all  of  the  terms  and  conditions  described  in  the  attached
Agreement. You and PG&E Corporation agree to execute such further instruments and to take such
further action as may reasonably be necessary to carry out the intent of the attached Agreement. You
are also acknowledging receipt of this award, the attached Agreement, and a copy of the prospectus
describing the LTIP and the Restricted Stock Units dated June 2021.
If, for any reason, you wish to not accept this award, please notify PG&E Corporation  in writing
within 30 calendar days of the date of this award at ATTN: LTIP Administrator,  Pacific Gas and
Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco, 94105.
Attachment

PG&E CORPORATION 
2021 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
NON-ANNUAL RESTRICTED STOCK UNIT AGREEMENT
The LTIP and Other
Agreements
This Agreement and the above cover sheet constitute the entire understanding between you and
PG&E Corporation regarding the Restricted Stock Units, subject to the terms of the LTIP. Any
prior agreements, commitments, or negotiations are superseded. In the event of any conflict or
inconsistency between the provisions of this Agreement or the above cover sheet and the LTIP,
the LTIP will govern. Capitalized terms that are not defined in this Agreement or the above cover
sheet  are  defined  in  the  LTIP.  In  the  event  of  any  conflict  between  the  provisions  of  this
Agreement or the above cover sheet and the PG&E Corporation 2012 Officer Severance Policy,
this  Agreement  or  the  above  cover  sheet  will  govern,  as  applicable.  For  purposes  of  this
Agreement, employment with PG&E Corporation means employment with any member of the
Participating Company Group.
Grant of Restricted Stock
Units
PG&E Corporation grants you the number of Restricted Stock Units shown on the cover sheet of
this  Agreement.  The  Restricted  Stock  Units  are  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this
Agreement and the LTIP.

Vesting of Restricted Stock
Units
As long as you remain employed with PG&E Corporation, the total number of Restricted Stock
Units originally subject to this Agreement, as shown on the cover sheet, will vest in accordance
with the below vesting schedule (the “Normal Vesting Schedule”).
13,300 on June 01, 2022
13,301 on June 01, 2023
The  amounts  payable  upon  each  vesting  date  are  hereby  designated  separate  payments  for
purposes of Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (“Code”). Except as
described below, all Restricted Stock Units subject to this Agreement which have not vested upon
termination of your employment will then be cancelled. As set forth below, the Restricted Stock
Units may vest earlier upon the occurrence of certain events.
Dividends
Restricted Stock Units will accrue Dividend Equivalents in the event that cash dividends are paid
with respect to PG&E Corporation common stock having a record date prior to the date on which
the RSUs are settled. Such Dividend Equivalents will be converted into cash and paid, if at all,
upon settlement of the underlying Restricted Stock Units.
Settlement
Vested Restricted Stock Units will be settled in an equal number of shares of PG&E Corporation
common  stock,  subject  to  the  satisfaction  of  Withholding  Taxes,  as  described  below.  PG&E
Corporation  will  issue  shares  as  soon  as  practicable  after  the  Restricted  Stock  Units  vest  in
accordance  with  the  Normal  Vesting  Schedule  (but  not  later  than  sixty  (60)  days  after  the
applicable  vesting  date);  provided,  however,  that  such  issuance  will,  if  earlier,  be  made  with
respect to all of your outstanding vested Restricted Stock Units (after giving effect to the vesting
provisions described below) as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after)
the earliest to occur of your (1) Disability (as defined under Code Section 409A), (2) death, or (3)
“separation from service,” within the meaning of Code Section 409A within 2 years following a
Change in Control.
2    

Voluntary Termination
In the event of your voluntary termination (other than Retirement), all unvested Restricted Stock
Units will be cancelled on the date of termination.
Retirement
In  the  event  of  your  Retirement,  any  unvested  Restricted  Stock  Units  that  would  have  vested
within the 12 months following such Retirement had your employment continued will continue to
vest and be settled pursuant to the Normal Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement
that you be employed), subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement; provided,
however, that in the event of your Retirement within 2 years following a Change in Control, those
Restricted Stock Units that would have vested within 12 months following such Retirement will
be vested and settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than 60 days after) the date of such
Retirement.  All  other  unvested  Restricted  Stock  Units  will  be  cancelled.  Your  voluntary
termination of employment will be considered Retirement if you are age 55 or older on the date of
termination (other than termination for cause) and if you were employed by PG&E Corporation
for at least eight consecutive years ending on the date of termination of your employment.
Termination for Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated at any time by PG&E Corporation for
cause,  all  unvested  Restricted  Stock  Units  will  be  cancelled  on  the  date  of  termination.  In
general,  termination  for  “cause”  means  termination  of  employment  because  of  dishonesty,  a
criminal offense, or violation of a work rule, and will be determined by and in the sole discretion
of  PG&E  Corporation.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  you  will  not  be  eligible  to  retire  if  your
employment is being or is terminated for cause.
Termination other than for
Cause
If your employment with PG&E Corporation is terminated by PG&E Corporation other than for
cause or Retirement, any unvested Restricted Stock Units that would have vested within the 12
months following such termination had your employment continued will continue to vest and be
settled pursuant to the Normal Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement that you be
employed),  subject  to  the  earlier  settlement  provisions  of  this  Agreement.  All  other  unvested
Restricted  Stock  Units  will  be  cancelled  unless  your  termination  of  employment  was  in
connection with a Change in Control as provided below.
3    

Death/Disability
In  the  event  of  your  death  or  Disability  (as  defined  in  Code  Section  409A)  while  you  are
employed, all of your Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled as soon as practicable
after (but not later than sixty (60) days after) the date of such event. If your death or Disability
occurs following the termination of your employment and your Restricted Stock Units are then
outstanding  under the terms hereof, then all of your vested Restricted  Stock Units plus any
Restricted Stock Units that would have otherwise vested during any continued vesting period
hereunder will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later than sixty (60) days after)
the date of your death or Disability.
Termination Due to Disposition
of Subsidiary
If your employment is terminated (other than for cause, or your voluntary termination, or your
Retirement]  (1)  by  reason  of  a  divestiture  or  change  in  control  of  a  subsidiary  of  PG&E
Corporation,  which  divestiture  or  change  in  control  results  in  such  subsidiary  no  longer
qualifying as a subsidiary corporation under Code Section 424(f), or (2) coincident with the
sale of all or substantially all of the assets of a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation, then your
Restricted Stock Units will vest and be settled in the same manner as for a “Termination other
than for Cause” described above.
Change in Control
In  the  event  of  a  Change  in  Control,  the  surviving,  continuing,  successor,  or  purchasing
corporation or other business entity or parent thereof, as the case may be (the “Acquiror”),
may,  without  your  consent,  either  assume  or  continue  PG&E  Corporation’s  rights  and
obligations under this Agreement or provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for
the Restricted Stock Units subject to this Agreement.
If the Restricted Stock Units are neither so assumed nor so continued by the Acquiror, and the
Acquiror does not provide a substantially equivalent award in substitution for the Restricted
Stock Units, all of your unvested Restricted Stock Units will vest immediately preceding and
contingent on, the Change in Control and be settled in accordance with the Normal Vesting
Schedule, subject to the earlier settlement provisions of this Agreement.
4    

Termination In Connection
with a Change in Control
If you separate from service (other than termination for cause, or your voluntary termination, or
your Retirement) in connection with a Change in Control within three months before the Change
in  Control  occurs,  all  of  your  outstanding  Restricted  Stock  Units  (including  Restricted  Stock
Units that you would have otherwise forfeited after the end of the continued vesting period) will
vest on  the date of the  Change  in Control  and will be  settled  in accordance  with  the Normal
Vesting Schedule (without regard to the requirement that you be employed) subject to the earlier
settlement provisions of this Agreement.
In  the  event  of  such  a  separation  in  connection  with  a  Change  in  Control  within  two  years
following  the  Change  in  Control,  your  Restricted  Stock  Units  (to  the  extent  they  did  not
previously vest upon, for example, failure of the Acquiror to assume or continue this award) will
vest on the date of such separation and will be settled as soon as practicable after (but not later
than sixty (60) days after) the date of such separation. PG&E Corporation has the sole discretion
to determine whether termination of your employment was made in connection with a Change in
Control.
Delay
PG&E  Corporation  will  delay  the  issuance  of  any  shares  of  common  stock  to  the  extent  it  is
necessary to comply with Code Section 409A(a)(2)(B)(i) (relating to payments made to certain
“key  employees”  of  certain  publicly-traded  companies);  in  such  event,  any  shares  of  common
stock to which you would otherwise be entitled during the six (6) month period following the date
of your “separation from service” under Section 409A (or shorter period ending on the date of
your death following such separation) will instead be issued on the first business day following
the expiration of the applicable delay period.
5    

Withholding Taxes
The number of shares of PG&E Corporation  common stock that you are otherwise entitled to
receive upon settlement of Restricted Stock Units will be reduced by a number of shares having
an aggregate Fair Market Value, as determined by PG&E Corporation, equal to the amount of any
Federal, state, or local taxes of any kind required by law to be withheld by PG&E Corporation in
connection with the Restricted Stock Units determined using the applicable minimum statutory
withholding rates, including social security and Medicare taxes due under the Federal Insurance
Contributions Act and the California State Disability Insurance tax (“Withholding Taxes”). If the
withheld  shares  were  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  your  minimum  Withholding  Taxes,  you  will  be
required  to  pay,  as  soon  as  practicable,  including  through  additional  payroll  withholding,  any
amount  of  the  Withholding  Taxes  that  is  not  satisfied  by  the  withholding  of  shares  described
above.
Leaves of Absence
For  purposes  of  this  Agreement,  if  you  are  on  an  approved  leave  of  absence  from  PG&E
Corporation, or a recipient of PG&E Corporation sponsored disability benefits, you will continue
to be considered as employed. If you do not return to active employment upon the expiration of
your leave of absence or the expiration of your PG&E Corporation sponsored disability benefits,
you  will  be  considered  to  have  voluntarily  terminated  your  employment.  See  above  under
“Voluntary Termination.”
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the leave of absence exceeds six (6) months, and a return to
service upon expiration of such leave is not guaranteed by statute or contract, then you will be
deemed to have had a “separation from service” for purposes of any Restricted Stock Units that
are settled hereunder upon such separation. To the extent an authorized leave of absence is due to
a medically determinable physical or mental impairment that can be expected to result in death or
to last for a continuous period of at least six (6) months and such impairment causes you to be
unable to perform the duties of your position of employment or any substantially similar position
of employment, the six (6) month period in the prior sentence will be twenty-nine (29) months.
PG&E Corporation reserves the right to determine which leaves of absence will be considered as
continuing  employment  and  when  your  employment  terminates  for  all  purposes  under  this
Agreement.
6    

Voting and Other Rights
You  will  not  have  voting  rights  with  respect  to  the  Restricted  Stock  Units  until  the  date  the
underlying  shares  are  issued  (as  evidenced  by  appropriate  entry  on  the  books  of  PG&E
Corporation  or  its  duly  authorized  transfer  agent).  No  Restricted  Stock  Units  and  no  shares  of
Stock  that  have  not  been  issued  hereunder  may  be  sold,  assigned,  transferred,  pledged,  or
otherwise encumbered, other than by will or the laws of decent and distribution, and the Restricted
Stock  Units  may  be  exercised  during  the  life  of  the  Recipient  only  by  the  Recipient  or  the
Recipient’s guardian or legal representative.
No Retention Rights
This Agreement is not an employment agreement and does not give you the right to be retained by
PG&E Corporation. Except as otherwise provided in an applicable employment agreement, PG&E
Corporation reserves the right to terminate your employment at any time and for any reason.
Recoupment of Awards
Awards  are  subject  to  recoupment  in  accordance  with  any  applicable  law  and  any  recoupment
policy  adopted  by  the  Corporation  from  time  to  time,  including  provisions  of  the  Officer
Severance Policy, and provisions of the PG&E Corporation and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
Executive Incentive Compensation Recoupment Policy, as last revised on February 19, 2019 and
available  on  the  PG&E@Work  internet  site  for  the  Long-Term  Incentive  Plan  (the  policy  and
location may be changed from time to time by PG&E Corporation).
Applicable Law
This Agreement will be interpreted and enforced under the laws of the State of California.
7    

PG&E CORPORATION
2014 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PLAN
A total of 47,000,000 shares of PG&E Corporation common stock (“Shares”), no par value, are available for issuance under the
PG&E Corporation 2014 Long-Term Incentive Plan, as may be amended (LTIP), less the number of Shares covered by awards granted under
the PG&E Corporation 2006 Long-Term Incentive Plan after December 31, 2013, but prior to the effective date of the LTIP, and determined
in accordance with Section 4.1 of the LTIP. The Shares will come from PG&E Corporation’s authorized, but unissued, shares of common
stock  and/or  Shares  reacquired  by  PG&E  Corporation  on  the  open  market  for  this  purpose.  The  purpose  of  the  LTIP  is  to  advance  the
interests of PG&E Corporation and its shareholders by providing officers, key management employees, and other eligible participants with
financial incentives tied directly to PG&E Corporation's long-term business objectives. Awards granted under the LTIP can include stock
options,  stock  appreciation  rights  (SARs),  restricted  stock,  restricted  stock  units,  performance  shares,  performance  units,  deferred
compensation awards, and other stock-based awards.
This  summary describes  the stock  options, SARs, restricted stock, performance awards, and restricted stock units  which may be
granted under the LTIP. This summary does not purport to be complete, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the LTIP and your
award agreement evidencing an award. The terms of the LTIP will govern in case there is any conflict with any part of this summary or your
individual award agreement. Certain terms of stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards differ
from those described in this summary and such terms will be set forth in your award agreement governing such award. You may obtain a
copy of the LTIP by calling or writing the LTIP Administrator, Pacific Gas and Electric Company, 245 Market Street, N2T, San Francisco,
CA 94105, (415) 266-8644.
______________________________
THIS DOCUMENT CONSTITUTES PART OF A PROSPECTUS COVERING SECURITIES THAT HAVE BEEN REGISTERED
UNDER THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933.
March 2021
8    

Contents
Information about the LTIP
iv
Administration of the LTIP.
iv
Eligibility.
iv
Duration of the LTIP.
iv
Adjustment Upon Changes in Number or Value of Shares of Common Stock.
iv
Award Agreements.
iv
Amendment and Termination of the LTIP and Incentive Awards.
iv
Withholding Taxes.
v
Recoupment of Awards.
v
Miscellaneous.
v
Stock Options
v
What is a stock option?
v
Will I be required to pay for a grant of a stock option?
v
When may I exercise my stock options?
v
How do I exercise my stock options?
v
What happens if my service with PG&E Corporation ends before my stock option is fully vested and exercisable?
vi
When do my stock options expire?
vi
Do I have any shareholder rights?
vi
How do I pay for shares and taxes upon exercise of my stock options?
vi
How is an incentive stock option different than a nonqualified stock option?
vi
Stock Appreciation Rights
vi
What is a stock appreciation right?
vi
Will I be required to pay for a grant of stock appreciation rights?
vii
When may I exercise my SARs?
vii
How do I exercise my SARs?
vii
What happens if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before my stock appreciation right vests?
vii
When do my SARs expire?
vii
Do I have any shareholder rights?
vii
Restricted Stock
vii
What is a restricted stock award?
vii
Will I be required to pay for a grant of restricted stock?
vii
When will restricted stock awards vest?
vii
What happens to restricted stock awards if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before my Award vests?
viii
When will restricted stock awards be settled?
viii
Do I have any shareholder rights?
viii
Restricted Stock Units
viii
What are restricted stock units?
viii
Will I be required to pay for a grant of restricted stock units?
viii
When will restricted stock units vest?
viii

What happens to restricted stock unit awards if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before the scheduled
vesting date?
viii
Will I receive dividends on restricted stock units?
viii
How soon will I receive the shares after the restricted stock units have vested?
ix
Do I have the same rights as other shareholders?
ix
Performance Awards
ix
What are performance awards?
ix
What are the performance measures and how do they work?
ix
When will performance awards vest?
ix
Termination of Service
ix
What happens to stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards if my service is
terminated?
ix
What happens to my stock options, SARS, restricted stock, performance awards, and restricted stock units if I retire?
x
Change in Control
x
What happens to stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards if there is a
“change in control” of PG&E Corporation?
x
What happens to my award if my service is terminated other than for cause in connection with a “change in control” of
PG&E Corporation?
x
What would be considered a “change in control” of PG&E Corporation?
x
What happens to my award if I am terminated from my position with a subsidiary of PG&E Corporation as a result of the
divestiture or change in control of the subsidiary?
xi
Transferability: Resale Restrictions
xi
May I transfer my stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards to someone else?
xi
Are there any restrictions on my ability to sell common stock received when my awards are settled in shares of common
stock or when I exercise my stock options?
xi
What if I am an executive officer of PG&E Corporation?
xi
Tax Consequences
xii
Are there any tax consequences when I am granted a nonqualified stock option or SARs?
xii
What are the tax consequences when I exercise my stock options or SARs?
xii
Will my exercise of a stock option or SAR be subject to tax withholding?
xii
What are the tax consequences if I sell the shares purchased upon exercise of a stock option?
xii
Are there any tax consequences when I am granted an incentive stock option?
xiii
What are the tax consequences when I exercise my incentive stock options?
xiii
What are the tax consequences if I sell the shares purchased upon exercise of an incentive stock option?
xiii
What if I make a qualifying disposition?
xiii
What if I make a disqualifying disposition?
xiii
What are the tax consequences relating to restricted stock (including any Performance Share awards)?
xiii
What is a Section 83(b) election?
xiii
How are dividends and dividend equivalents related to my restricted stock awards taxed?
xiv
What are the tax consequences relating to restricted stock units (including Performance Units)?
xiv
    A-2    

How can I satisfy the amount of California SDI and FICA taxes that may be due before my restricted stock units are
settled?
xiv
How can I satisfy the withholding taxes that arise when my restricted stock units vest?
xiv
What are the tax consequences if I sell shares I acquire upon vesting of restricted stock unit awards or settlement of my
restricted stock units?
xiv
What is the impact of Section 409A of the Code on my awards?
xv
Additional Information about PG&E Corporation
xv
    A-3    

Information about the LTIP
Administration of the LTIP.
The LTIP is administered by the Compensation Committee (the “Committee”) of the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation (the
“Company”).  The  Committee  is  composed  entirely  of  directors  who  satisfy  the  definition  of  “independent  director”  set  forth  in  PG&E
Corporation’s Corporate Governance Guidelines and also meet the enhanced independence standards established by the New York Stock
Exchange or any other applicable stock exchanges.
Generally, the Committee approves LTIP awards made to officers of PG&E Corporation and to officers of Pacific Gas and Electric
Company and approves guidelines for LTIP awards to be made to certain other eligible participants during a particular year, including the
amount and type of award, the terms and conditions of awards, and the aggregate value of awards. The Chief Executive Officer of PG&E
Corporation has authority to implement the award guidelines approved by the Committee. The Committee may also (i) amend or modify
awards in accordance with the terms of the LTIP, (ii) prescribe, amend or rescind rules relating to the LTIP, (iii) construe, interpret and
reconcile any inconsistency regarding the LTIP and (iv) make all other determinations with respect to the LTIP, to the extent permitted by
applicable law and subject to certain restrictions specified in the LTIP.
Eligibility.
Awards  may  be  granted  to  employees,  directors  (including  non-employee  directors)  and  consultants  of  PG&E  Corporation  and
certain subsidiaries, at the discretion of the Committee. Nothing in the LTIP or in any award agreement is intended to provide you with the
right to remain in the service of the PG&E Corporation or any of its subsidiaries for any specific period.
Duration of the LTIP.
The LTIP will terminate on May 11, 2024, unless terminated sooner according to the terms of the LTIP.
Adjustment Upon Changes in Number or Value of Shares of Common Stock.
In the event of certain changes in PG&E Corporation common stock without receipt of consideration, such as stock dividends, stock
splits,  recapitalizations,  mergers,  consolidations  and  similar  changes,  or  in  the  event  of  payment  of  certain  non-stock  dividends  or
distributions that have a material effect on the value of PG&E Corporation common stock, appropriate adjustments shall be made to the
number and kind of shares subject to the LTIP and to any outstanding awards, the award limitations and in the exercise or purchase price per
share  under  any  outstanding  awards  in  order  to  prevent  dilution  or  enlargement  of  a  participant’s  right  under  the  LTIP, subject  to  the
provisions of Section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”).
Award Agreements.
    Awards granted under the LTIP will be evidenced by award agreements in a written or electronic form that will provide additional terms
and conditions associated with such awards, as determined by the Committee.
Amendment and Termination of the LTIP and Incentive Awards.
The Board of Directors or the Committee may at any time suspend, terminate, modify, or amend the LTIP in any respect. However,
shareholder approval of amendments shall be obtained in the manner and to the degree required by applicable laws or regulations, or the
terms of the LTIP. The Committee also may amend or modify the terms and conditions of any incentive award granted under the LTIP, or
extend, cancel or renew any grant of an award; provided that no such amendment, modification, cancellation, extension or renewal may,
without your consent, adversely affect your rights under awards previously granted to you.
Withholding Taxes.
    You will be responsible for payment of any taxes or similar charges required by law to be paid or withheld with respect to any award,
including with respect to the vesting, settlement and exercise of any award. Any required withholdings must be paid by you on or prior to the
payment or other event that results in taxable income with respect to an award. The award agreement may specify the manner in which the
withholding obligation shall be satisfied with respect to the particular type of award, which may include permitting you to elect to satisfy the
withholding obligation by tendering shares of PG&E Corporation common stock to the PG&E Corporation or having the PG&E Corporation
withhold a
    A-4    

number of shares of common stock having a value equal to the minimum statutory tax or similar charge required to be paid or withheld.
Recoupment of Awards.
Awards are subject to recoupment in accordance with any applicable law and any recoupment policies, procedures, or requirements
adopted by or applicable to the Corporation from time to time.
Miscellaneous.
The LTIP is generally not subject to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) and it is not qualified under
Section 401(a) of the Code.
Stock Options
What is a stock option?
A stock option allows you to buy a certain number of shares of PG&E Corporation common stock at a fixed price. The per share
purchase price (or exercise price) generally will be equal to the closing price of PG&E Corporation common stock on the date on which the
option is granted, unless otherwise specified in your award agreement.
Will I be required to pay for a grant of a stock option?
    Generally, no. It is anticipated that the grant of stock options would be made in recognition of your service to PG&E Corporation (or any
of its subsidiaries) and would not require any cash payment. To purchase PG&E Corporation common stock underlying a stock option,
however, you must exercise the stock option and pay the exercise price as described below and set forth in your award agreement.
When may I exercise my stock options?
You may not exercise your stock options until your right to do so has vested in accordance with the vesting terms that are determined
when the stock options are granted and set forth in your award agreement governing your stock options. Vesting is generally contingent on
your  continued  service  to  PG&E  Corporation  or  its  affiliates  through  the  applicable  vesting  date.  Stock  options  may  also  be  subject  to
performance-based vesting measures that affect the number of options that you ultimately may be permitted to exercise. Please consult your
award agreement for details regarding the vesting terms of your stock options.
How do I exercise my stock options?
You must deliver a completed electronic exercise election form to the record-keeper for the LTIP, which is currently Charles Schwab.
Instructions for completing and submitting the form are available from the recordkeeper.
What happens if my service with PG&E Corporation ends before my stock option is fully vested and exercisable?
The award agreement describes what happens to the stock option if your service terminates before the stock option is fully vested and
exercisable. In general, upon termination of service with PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries), you will forfeit all unvested stock
options.
When do my stock options expire?
Although the term of an option may vary, in general, the term of each stock option is 10 years, unless otherwise specified in your
award agreement. The options generally will expire earlier upon or within a specified period following your termination of service.
Do I have any shareholder rights?
You will not have any rights of a shareholder with respect to the shares subject to the options unless an option is exercised and shares
are issued to you.
    A-5    

How do I pay for shares and taxes upon exercise of my stock options?
Unless your award agreement provides otherwise, you may pay the option exercise price and applicable tax withholdings using (1)
cash, check or cash equivalent; (2) shares of PG&E Corporation common stock; (3) a "cashless exercise" procedure (whereby a broker sells a
number of shares purchased upon exercise, with a value equal to the aggregate exercise price and applicable tax withholdings and remits the
sale proceeds to PG&E Corporation to pay for the aggregate exercise price and applicable tax withholdings); (4) by surrendering a number of
shares of PG&E Corporation common stock that otherwise would have been issued to you in connection with the stock option exercise, with
an aggregate fair market value (as determined as of the business day before the date of exercise) equal to the aggregate exercise price and
applicable tax withholdings, (5) by another method that pay be approved by the Committee or (6) any combination of the foregoing. If shares
are used to pay all or part of the exercise price, the cash and any shares surrendered must have a fair market value (determined as of the
business day before the date of exercise) that is not less than the applicable exercise price.
How is an incentive stock option different than a nonqualified stock option?    
An incentive stock option and a nonqualified stock option have different U.S. federal tax consequences, which are explained in more
detail in the “Tax Consequences” section below. Each stock option will be designated by the Committee as either an incentive stock option or
a nonqualified stock option and set forth in the Award Agreement evidencing the grant. If an option granted as an incentive stock option fails
to qualify as an incentive stock option under the Code, it will be treated as a nonqualified stock option.
Stock Appreciation Rights
What is a stock appreciation right?
    A stock appreciation right (SAR) gives you the right to receive an amount equal to the excess of the fair market value of a share of
common stock of PG&E Corporation on the date of exercise over a fixed value (the “Base Price”) of the SAR. A SAR may be settled in
[shares of common stock, cash, or any combination thereof] as specified by the Committee. The Base Price of a SAR granted under the LTIP
will not be less than the fair market value of the shares of common stock subject to the SAR on the date the SAR is granted.
Will I be required to pay for a grant of stock appreciation rights?
    Generally, no. It is anticipated that SARs would be granted in recognition of your service to PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries)
and would not require any cash payment.
When may I exercise my SARs?
You may not exercise your SARs until your right to do so has vested in accordance with the vesting terms that are determined when
the SARs are granted and set forth in your award agreement governing your SARs. Vesting is generally contingent on your continued service
to PG&E Corporation or its affiliates through the applicable vesting date. SARs may also be subject to performance-based vesting measures
that affect the number of SARs that you ultimately may be permitted to exercise. Please consult your award agreement for details regarding
the vesting terms of your SARs.
How do I exercise my SARs?
    You must deliver a completed electronic exercise election form to the record-keeper for the LTIP, currently Charles Schwab. Instructions
for completing and submitting the form are available from the recordkeeper
What happens if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before my stock appreciation right vests?
    The award agreement describes what happens to the SARs if your service terminates before the SARs are fully vested and exercisable. In
general upon termination of service with PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries), you will forfeit all unvested SARs.
When do my SARs expire?
    Although the term of an SAR may vary, in general, the term of each SAR is 10 years, unless otherwise specified in your award agreement.
The SARs generally will expire earlier upon or within a specified period following termination of service.
    A-6    

Do I have any shareholder rights?
You  will  not  have  any  rights  of  a  shareholder  with  respect  to  the  SARs  unless  shares  subject  to  the  SARs  are  issued  to  you  in
settlement of the SARs. However, if the SARs are settled in cash, you will not become a shareholder, even if the amount of cash payable is
determined by reference to the value of shares of common stock.
Restricted Stock
What is a restricted stock award?
    A restricted stock award is a grant of shares of PG&E Corporation common stock that is subject to vesting.
Will I be required to pay for a grant of restricted stock?
    Generally, no. It is anticipated that restricted stock awards would be granted in recognition of your service to the PG&E Corporation (or
any of its subsidiaries) and would not require any cash payment. However, in setting the terms of the grant, the Committee has the discretion
to require payment.
When will restricted stock awards vest?
    In order for your restricted stock awards to vest, you must generally remain in the service of PG&E Corporation during the vesting period.
Vesting may also be contingent upon the achievement of specified performance conditions and/or such other terms and conditions determined
by the Committee. Restricted stock awards that are subject to performance-based vesting terms are referred to as Performance Shares in the
LTIP,  and  also  may  be  called  performance  share  units.  The  vesting  terms  of  a  restricted  stock  award  will  be  set  forth  in  your  award
agreement.
What happens to restricted stock awards if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before my Award vests?
    The award agreement describes what happens to the restricted stock award if your service terminates before the restricted stock award is
fully vested and transferable. In general upon termination of service with the PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries), you will forfeit
all unvested restricted stock awards.
When will restricted stock awards be settled?
    When restrictions on the restricted stock award lapse (i.e., you vest) and you satisfy any other conditions imposed by the Committee
pursuant to the LTIP or your award agreement, you will become the owner of unrestricted shares of common stock of PG&E Corporation.
Do I have any shareholder rights?
     Unless otherwise provided in your award agreement, you will have all of the rights of a shareholder with respect to restricted stock during
the applicable restricted period, including the right to receive payment of dividends and distributions with respect to the underlying shares of
PG&E Corporation common stock (which will be subject to the same vesting terms as the underlying shares of common stock).
Restricted Stock Units
What are restricted stock units?
A restricted stock unit is a right to receive shares of PG&E Corporation common stock when the restricted stock units are settled
following vesting. PG&E Corporation common stock is not issued at the time of grant of a restricted stock unit award.
Will I be required to pay for a grant of restricted stock units?
Generally,  no.  It  is  anticipated  that  restricted  stock  unit  awards  would  be  granted  in  recognition  of  your  service  to  the  PG&E
Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries) and would not require any cash payment. However, in setting the terms of the grant, the Committee
has the discretion to require payment.
When will restricted stock units vest?
In order for your restricted stock awards to vest, you must generally remain in the service of PG&E Corporation during the vesting
period. Vesting may also be contingent upon the achievement of
    A-7    

specified performance conditions and/or such other terms and conditions determined by the Committee. Restricted stock unit awards that are
subject to performance-based vesting terms are referred to as Performance Shares in the LTIP. The vesting terms of a restricted stock award
will be set forth in your award agreement.
What happens to restricted stock unit awards if my service with PG&E Corporation terminates before the scheduled vesting date?
    Your award agreement describes what happens to the restricted stock unit if your service terminates before the scheduled vesting date. In
general, upon termination of service with the PG&E Corporation (or any of its subsidiaries), you will forfeit all unvested restricted stock
units.
Will I receive dividends on restricted stock units?
The Committee may provide in an award agreement that you will be entitled to receive dividend equivalents with respect to the
payment of cash dividends, which, unless otherwise provided in an award agreement, will be credited to you in the form of additional whole
restricted stock units as of the date of payment of such cash dividends on PG&E Corporation common stock. The number of additional
restricted stock units (rounded to the nearest whole number) to be credited shall be determined by dividing the amount of cash dividends paid
on such date with respect to the number of shares of common stock represented by the restricted stock units previously granted to you, by the
fair market value of a share of common stock on such date. Settlement of dividend equivalents will be made in the same manner as the
restricted stock units, which may include cash, shares of common stock of PG&E Corporation or a combination thereof.
How soon will I receive the shares after the restricted stock units have vested?     
PG&E Corporation will generally issue shares of PG&E Corporation common stock in respect of your restricted stock units within 60
days after the restricted stock units vest but no later than March 15 of the year following the year in which any applicable performance period
ends or at such other times as set forth in your award agreement. However, the Committee may also settle restricted stock units in cash or a
combination of cash and shares of common stock.
PG&E  Corporation  will  delay  the  issuance  of  any  shares  of  common  stock  to  the  extent  it  is  necessary  to  comply  with  Section
409A(a)(2)(B)(i) (relating to payments made to certain “key employees” of certain publicly-traded companies). In such event, any shares of
common stock to which you would otherwise be entitled during the six-month period following the date of your “separation from service”
under Section 409A (or shorter period ending on the date of your death following such separation) will instead be issued on the first business
day following the expiration of the applicable delay period.
Do I have the same rights as other shareholders?
You will not have voting rights with respect to the restricted stock units until the date the underlying shares are issued (as evidenced
by appropriate entry on the books of PG&E Corporation or its duly authorized transfer agent).
Performance Awards
What are performance awards?
Performance awards may be in the form of Performance Shares or Performance Units (each as may be described above) and are
awards  that  are  eligible  to  vest  based  on  the  achievement  of  performance  measures  at  the  end  of  a  pre-established  performance  period
(“Performance Period”), as set forth in your award agreement. Participants may receive one or more grants of performance awards, and each
grant may reference one or more performance measures.
What are the performance measures and how do they work?
    A description of the applicable performance measures and how they work can be found in your award agreement.
When will performance awards vest?
Except as otherwise set forth in your ward agreement, vesting will occur following the Committee’s certification of the extent to
which the performance goals applicable to each type of performance measure are achieved. Certification will occur after the completion of
the relevant Performance Period.
    A-8    

Termination of Service
What happens to stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards if my service is terminated?
In  general,  and  unless  otherwise  specified  in  your  award  agreement,  upon  your  voluntary  termination  of  service  with  PG&E
Corporation (other than retirement, if provided for in your award agreement), your termination of service with or without cause, or your death
or disability, you will forfeit (1) any awards that have not yet vested and (2) any associated accrued dividends. Vested options generally must
be exercised within 30 days or the remaining term of the stock options, whichever is shorter.
What happens to my stock options, SARS, restricted stock, performance awards, and restricted stock units if I retire?
If applicable, your award agreement will provide for the treatment of awards in the case of retirement.
Change in Control
What happens to stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards if there is a “change in
control” of PG&E Corporation?
In general, and unless otherwise specified in your award agreement, in the event of a “change in control” (as defined in the LTIP), the
surviving, continuing, successor, or purchasing corporation or other business entity or parent thereof, as the case may be (“Acquiror”), may,
without your consent, either assume or continue your outstanding award or the Acquiror may provide substantially equivalent awards in
substitution for those awards.
In general, and unless otherwise specified in your award agreement, if the Acquiror does not assume or continue your outstanding
award or if the Acquiror does not provide substantially equivalent awards, then your awards will become fully vested, and your options and
SARs become exercisable immediately prior to the “change in control.”
What happens to my award if my service is terminated other than for cause in connection with a “change in control” of PG&E
Corporation?
Your award agreement describes what happens to your award upon termination of your service by PG&E Corporation other than for
cause in connection with a “change in control.”
What would be considered a “change in control” of PG&E Corporation?
The LTIP defines the term “change in control.” A change in control of PG&E Corporation occurs when:
•
Any person becomes the beneficial owner of securities of PG&E Corporation representing 30% or more of the combined voting power of
PG&E Corporation’s then outstanding securities;
•
If during any two consecutive years the directors at the beginning of the two-year period cease to be a majority of the Board of
Directors at the end of the period, unless the election, or the nomination for election by the shareholders, of each new director was
approved by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the directors then still in office who were either (a) directors at the beginning of the
two-year  period  or  (b)  were  previously  elected  or  nominated  by  at  least  two-thirds  of  the  directors  in  office  at  the  time  of  the
individual director’s election or nomination;
•
A consolidation or merger of PG&E Corporation is consummated and results in the former PG&E Corporation shareholders owning
less than 70% of the voting power in the surviving entity (or parent of the surviving entity);
•
Any sale, lease, exchange or other transfer (in one transaction or a series of related transactions) of all or substantially all of the assets
of PG&E Corporation is consummated; or
•
The shareholders of PG&E Corporation approve a plan of liquidation or dissolution of PG&E Corporation.
    A-9    

What  happens  to  my  award  if  I  am  terminated  from  my  position  with  a  subsidiary  of  PG&E  Corporation  as  a  result  of  the
divestiture or change in control of the subsidiary?
Your  award  agreement  describes  what  happens  to  your  award  upon  termination  of  your  position  by  a  subsidiary  of  PG&E
Corporation as a result of a divestiture or “change in control” of the subsidiary.
Transferability: Resale Restrictions
May I transfer my stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards to someone else?
Unless otherwise specified in your award agreement in accordance with the terms of the LTIP, you may not transfer your stock
options, SARS, restricted stock, performance awards, or restricted stock units during your lifetime other than pursuant to a qualified domestic
relations  order  (QDRO)  or  similar  court  order. After  your  death,  your  awards  may  be  transferred  in  accordance  with your  will  or  in
accordance with the laws of descent and distribution. Except for options that may have been transferred as described above, your options may
be exercised during your lifetime only by you, your duly appointed legal representative, or the person named in a QDRO.
Are there any restrictions on my ability to sell common stock received when my awards are settled in shares of common stock or
when I exercise my stock options?
You are free to sell your stock at any time, except when you are subject to a trading blackout or while you are in possession of
nonpublic material information about PG&E Corporation or any of its subsidiaries. Confidential, nonpublic information should be considered
material if there is substantial likelihood that a reasonable investor would consider the information important. You are prohibited by securities
laws  and  by  PG&E  Corporation’s  and  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric  Company’s  Insider  Trading  Policy  from  trading  in  securities  of  PG&E
Corporation or Pacific Gas and Electric Company until the information has been disclosed and widely disseminated to the investing public,
typically  two  full  trading  days  following  such  disclosure.  Also,  if  as  determined  by  PG&E  Corporation,  your  position  exposes  you  to
nonpublic material information, you may be temporarily prohibited from trading shares. You will be notified if this “blackout” period applies
to you.
What if I am an executive officer of PG&E Corporation?
If you are an executive officer of PG&E Corporation or Pacific Gas and Electric Company, you will be prohibited from engaging in
transactions involving securities of PG&E Corporation or Pacific Gas and Electric Company during quarterly blackout periods and you will
be subject to the other conditions of PG&E Corporation’s and Pacific Gas and Electric Company’s Insider Trading Policy (in particular,
requiring 10b5-1 plans for your transactions in PG&E shares subject to this prospectus). Executive officers of PG&E Corporation will be
considered “affiliates” of PG&E Corporation (along with their spouses and other relatives sharing the same household). In general, if you are
an affiliate of PG&E Corporation, your sales of shares must comply with SEC Rule 144. In addition, executive officers of PG&E Corporation
and Pacific Gas and Electric Company are subject to the reporting and short-swing profit liability provisions of Section 16 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 Act with respect to their transactions in PG&E Corporation common stock and Pacific Gas and Electric Company
preferred securities, respectively. Information regarding Rule 144 and Section 16 is available from the Corporate Secretary.
In addition, you will not be able to buy or sell your shares if you are subject to the trading restrictions imposed by the Sarbanes Oxley
Act of 2002 in connection with a blackout period under a PG&E Corporation sponsored retirement plan.
    A-10    

Tax Consequences
    The following is a general description of the United States federal income tax consequences relating to your awards under the Code as
currently in effect and is not intended to be a complete description of all the possible tax consequences. Federal tax treatment may change
should the Code be amended. The consequences may differ based on your personal situation. PG&E Corporation cannot assure you of any
particular tax result and is not providing you with tax advice. If you have any questions regarding the tax consequences of receiving a grant of
stock options, SARS, restricted stock, restricted stock units, and performance awards you should contact your tax advisor. PG&E Corporation
makes no representation that the LTIP will comply with Section 409A and makes no undertaking to prevent Section 409A from applying to
the LTIP or any award or to mitigate its effects on any award.
You will be required to pay to PG&E Corporation, or to make arrangements satisfactory to PG&E Corporation for the payment of
withholding taxes, including social security and Medicare taxes due under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA), and the California
State Disability Insurance (SDI) tax that become due in connection with your awards. PG&E Corporation’s obligations under the LTIP and
your award agreement are subject to payment of, or to the arrangement for payment of, all withholding taxes. PG&E Corporation will have
the right, to the extent permitted by law, to deduct any such withholding taxes from any payment of any kind otherwise due to you.
Are there any tax consequences when I am granted a nonqualified stock option or SARs?
In general, there are no immediate federal income tax consequences when you are granted nonqualified stock options or SARs.
What are the tax consequences when I exercise my stock options or SARs?
When you exercise a nonqualified stock option or SAR, you generally will have taxable ordinary income equal to the difference
between the current fair market value of the shares of common stock and the exercise price or base price. The amount of ordinary income will
be included in your W-2 form for the year in which you exercised your stock option or SAR.
Will my exercise of a stock option or SAR be subject to tax withholding?
Yes.  In  connection  with  the  exercise  of  a  nonqualified  stock  option  or  SAR,  PG&E  Corporation  will  be  required  to  withhold
applicable taxes on income you recognize upon the exercise. Please see your award agreement for the methods by which you may satisfy the
applicable withholding taxes.
What are the tax consequences if I sell the shares purchased upon exercise of a stock option?
If you sell the shares you purchased upon exercise of your nonqualified stock options you will be taxed on the excess of the sale price
over the market value of the shares on the exercise date (your tax basis). (The market value of the shares on the date of exercise will be the
sum of the option exercise price plus the amount of ordinary income you recognized when the option was exercised.) Whether or not this
amount can be treated as long-term capital gain (or loss) depends on the length of time you held the shares before selling them. Currently, to
receive long-term capital gain treatment you must hold the stock for more than one year. If you are subject to alternative minimum tax, you
should consult your tax advisor.
If you paid the option exercise price by delivering shares you already owned, then the tax consequences upon sale of the shares are
slightly different. Your tax basis in the surrendered shares and the length of time (the holding period) that you held the surrendered shares
will be carried over to an equal number of shares that you acquired upon exercise. If you purchased more shares than the number of shares
you delivered, the holding period for the excess shares will start on the date of exercise and the price of such shares will be equal to the
market value of the shares on the date of exercise.
Are there any tax consequences when I am granted an incentive stock option?
In general, there are no immediate federal income tax consequences when you are granted incentive stock options.
What are the tax consequences when I exercise my incentive stock options?
You  will  not recognize  any  taxable  income,  for  regular income tax purposes, at the time an incentive stock  option  is  exercised.
However, the amount by which the fair market value (at the time of exercise) of the purchased shares exceeds the exercise price paid for
those shares will constitute an adjustment to your income for purposes of the alternative minimum tax.
    A-11    

What are the tax consequences if I sell the shares purchased upon exercise of an incentive stock option?
    The federal income tax liability will depend upon whether you make a qualifying or disqualifying disposition of the shares purchased under
the incentive stock option. Subject to certain requirements in the Code, a qualifying disposition will occur if the sale or other disposition of
shares takes place more than two years after the date the incentive stock option was granted and more than one year after the date that the
stock option was exercised for the particular shares involved in the disposition. A disqualifying disposition is any sale or other disposition
made before both of these requirements are satisfied.
What if I make a qualifying disposition?
    You will recognize a long-term capital gain equal to the excess of (a) the amount realized upon the sale or other disposition over (b) the
exercise price paid for the shares. You will recognize a long-term capital loss if the amount realized is lower than the exercise price paid for
the shares.
What if I make a disqualifying disposition?
    If you dispose of shares before the minimum holding periods described above have been satisfied, you will recognize ordinary income at
the time of the disposition in an amount equal to the fair market value of the shares on the exercise date over the exercise price paid for those
shares. Any additional gain recognized on the disqualifying disposition will be taxable at capital gains rates (long-term if the shares have been
held for more than one year following the exercise date of the option). If the sale proceeds from a disqualifying disposition are less than the
fair market value of the shares on the date of exercise, any ordinary income recognized is limited to the gain (if any) realized on the sale.
What are the tax consequences relating to restricted stock (including any Performance Share awards)?
    You will not recognize income until the transfer restrictions and forfeiture provisions lapse (i.e., you vest) unless you voluntarily elect to
recognize income on the date of grant by filing an election under Section 83(b) of the Code. If you do not make a Section 83(b) election, then
at the time that the transfer restrictions and forfeiture provisions lapse, you will recognize as ordinary income an amount equal to the excess
of the fair market value of the shares on the date of lapse over the purchase price (if any) paid for such shares.
What is a Section 83(b) election?
    A Section 83(b) election is available only for awards of restricted stock (including performance shares). Section 83(b) allows you to
recognize  ordinary  income  on  the  fair  market  value  of  the  restricted  stock  on  the  date  of  grant  instead  of  on  the  date  the  award  vests.
Thereafter, any further gain or loss recognized upon the ultimate sale or disposition of the restricted stock is treated as capital gain or loss.
Section 83(b) elections may be made with respect to restricted stock awards, to the extent permitted by the Committee.
How are dividends and dividend equivalents related to my restricted stock awards taxed?
Any dividends received with respect to a restricted stock award will be subject to the same vesting terms as the related restricted stock award.
If you do not make a Section 83(b) election, you will not recognize ordinary income with respect to the dividends until the related restricted
stock award vests (and therefore the dividends vest).
What are the tax consequences relating to restricted stock units (including Performance Units)?
You will not recognize income until the restricted stock units are settled. Generally, when your restricted stock units are settled after
vesting, you will have taxable ordinary income in the amount of the fair market value of the shares received in connection with the settlement
of the restricted stock units and you will be required to satisfy applicable withholding taxes.
In the following situations you may be required to satisfy FICA and California SDI taxes even though the restricted stock units have
not yet been settled:
•
If you are retirement-eligible on the date of the award (if your award agreement provides for continued vesting after retirement),
    A-12    

•
When you become “retirement-eligible,” if your award agreement provides for continued vesting after retirement,
•
If your service is terminated other than for cause (as described in your award agreement), or
•
Any other situations under which your restricted stock units vest before they are settled.
How can I satisfy the amount of California SDI and FICA taxes that may be due before my restricted stock units are settled?
Under these circumstances FICA and California SDI taxes must be paid either by check payable to PG&E Corporation or through
payroll deductions. Unless you deliver a check to PG&E Corporation, the amount will be satisfied through payroll deductions.
How can I satisfy the withholding taxes that arise when my restricted stock units vest?
    You  must  arrange  to  pay  the  withholding  taxes  that  arise  when  your  restricted  stock  units  vest  in  a  manner  acceptable  to  PG&E
Corporation. PG&E Corporation may withhold from the shares otherwise issuable to you in settlement of restricted stock units a number of
whole shares having a fair market value, as determined by PG&E Corporation, equal to the applicable withholding taxes. The remaining
number of whole shares will be issued to you.
What are the tax consequences if I sell shares I acquire upon vesting of restricted stock unit awards or settlement of my restricted
stock units?    
    If you recognize gain when you sell shares your gain will be taxable at long-term or short-term capital gain rates. If you recognize a loss, it
will be a capital loss. The amount of your gain or loss will be the difference between the amount you receive on the sale of the shares and the
value used to calculate the applicable withholding taxes when your award was settled. Whether your gain or loss is long-term or short-term
will depend on whether you have held your shares for more than one year. The holding period generally begins at the time your performance
awards or restricted stock units are settled or stock options are exercised, and shares are issued to you.
What is the impact of Section 409A of the Code on my awards?
    If an award is treated as “nonqualified deferred compensation” and the award does not comply with or is not exempt from Section 409A,
Section 409A may impose additional taxes, interest and penalties on you. All grants made under the LTIP are designed and intended to either
be  exempt  from  or  comply  with  Section  409A  to  avoid  such  additional  taxes,  interest  and  penalties.  Neither  the  Committee  nor  PG&E
Corporation is obligated to ensure that awards comply with Section 409A or to take any actions to ensure such compliance.
Additional Information about PG&E Corporation
PG&E Corporation has filed a registration statement relating to the offer and sale of its shares of common stock under the LTIP with
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The following documents filed by PG&E Corporation with the SEC are incorporated by
reference into the registration statement and into this prospectus:
•
The annual report on Form 10-K of PG&E Corporation;
•
Quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K;
•
All other documents filed with the SEC pursuant to Section 13(a), 13(c), 14 and 15(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as
amended; and
•
The description of PG&E Corporation common stock filed with the SEC, including any amendment or report filed for the purpose of
updating such description.
All documents filed with the SEC by PG&E Corporation after the date the registration statement was filed and before the filing of a
post-effective amendment to the registration statement that indicates all securities offered under the LTIP have been sold or deregisters all
securities then remaining unsold, will also be incorporated by reference in this summary and deemed to be a part of this summary as of the
date such documents are filed with the SEC.
    A-13    

Copies of the documents listed above (other than exhibits to such documents), and copies of PG&E Corporation’s latest annual report
to shareholders, proxy statement, reports, and other communications sent to shareholders, will be sent to you without charge upon your
request. Requests may be directed to:
Office of the Corporate Secretary
PG&E Corporation
77 Beale Street    P.O. Box 770000
San Francisco, California 94177
(Telephone: 415-973-8200)
These  reports  are  also  available  through  PG&E  Corporation’s  website  at www.pgecorp.com,  through  the  SEC’s  website  at
www.sec.gov, and through various financial websites.
PG&E Corporation’s filings with the SEC, including its Annual Report on Form 10-K are available on PG&E Corporation’s website
at www.pgecorp.com under the “Investors” link. (Click on “Financial Reports” and then click on “SEC Filings.”)

EXHIBIT 10.99
PG&E CORPORATION 
2012 OFFICER SEVERANCE POLICY 
(Amended effective as of November 1, 2021)
1.
Purpose. This is the controlling and definitive statement of the Officer Severance Policy of PG&E Corporation (“Policy”).
Since Officers (defined below) are employed at the will of PG&E Corporation (“Corporation”) or a participating employer
(“Employer”), their employment may be terminated at any time, with or without cause. A list of Employers is attached hereto as
Appendix A. The Policy became effective March 1, 2012, and provides employees with the positions of Vice President, Senior Vice
President, Executive Vice President or higher at the time of termination (“Officers”) of the Corporation and Employers with
severance benefits if their employment is terminated.  The Policy’s definition of Change in Control was amended effective May 12,
2014.  The Policy’s treatment of STIP payouts and limitations on certain severance payments were added effective September 25,
2020. The value of and eligibility for severance benefits was amended effective November 1, 2021. For the avoidance of doubt,
revisions made to this Policy relating to Code Section 409A (defined below), apply to all Officers including those that may be
covered under prior provisions of the Policy as required by Section 6 hereof.
The purpose of the Policy is to attract and retain Officers by defining terms and conditions for severance benefits, to provide
severance benefits that are part of a competitive total compensation package, to provide consistent treatment for all terminated
officers, and to minimize potential litigation costs associated with Officer termination of employment.
2.
Termination of Employment Not in Connection with Change in Control .
(a)
Corporation or Employer’s Obligations. If the Corporation or an Employer exercises its right to terminate an Officer’s
employment without cause and such termination does not entitle Officer to payments under Section 3, the Officer shall be given
thirty (30) days’ advance written notice or pay in lieu thereof (which shall be paid in a lump sum together with the payment
described in Section 2(a)(1) below). Except as provided in Section 2(c) below, in consideration of the Officer’s agreement to the
obligations described in Section 4 below and to the arbitration provisions described in Section 13 below, the following payments and
benefits shall also be provided to Officer following Officer’s separation from service (within the meaning of Code Section 409A):
(1)
A lump sum severance payment equal to the sum of the Officer’s annual base compensation and the Officer’s
Short-Term Incentive Plan (“STIP”) target award at the time of his or her termination) (the “Severance Base Amount”); provided,
however, that for purposes of this section 2(a)(1), any lump sum severance payment for the Corporation’s Chief
Severance benefits for Officers who are currently covered by an employment agreement will continue to be provided solely under such agreements until their
expiration at which time this Policy will become effective for such Officers. Specific elements of any officer’s severance benefits may be amended by
appropriate Board-level approval. Any Officer’s waiver of benefits under this Policy shall take precedence over the terms of this Policy. If an employee
becomes a covered Officer under this Policy as a result of a promotion, and if such Officer was then covered by a severance arrangement subject to Section
409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (“Code Section 409A”), the severance benefits under this Policy provided to such person shall comply with the
time and form of payment provisions of such prior severance arrangement, to the extent required by Code Section 409A.
    .
    Any payments made hereunder shall be less applicable taxes.
    A-14    
1
2
3
1.    
2

Executive Officer shall be equal to the product of (1) two and (2) such officer’s Severance Base Amount. Annual base compensation
shall mean the Officer’s monthly base pay for the month in which the Officer is given notice of termination, multiplied by 12. The
payment described in this Section 2(a)(1) shall be made in a single lump sum as soon as practicable following the date the release of
claims described in Section 2(e)(1) becomes effective, provided that payment shall in no event be made later than the 15th day of the
third month following the later of the end of the calendar year or the Corporation’s taxable year in which the Officer’s separation
from service occurs;
(2)
Except as otherwise set forth in the applicable award agreement or as otherwise required by applicable law,
the equity-based incentive awards granted to Officer under the Corporation’s Long-Term Incentive Program (“LTIP”) which have
not yet vested as of the date of termination will continue to vest over a period of twelve months after the date of termination as if the
Officer had remained employed for such period. Except as otherwise set forth in the applicable award agreement, for vested stock
options as of the date of termination, the Officer shall have the right to exercise such stock options at any time within their respective
terms or within five years after termination, whichever is shorter. Except as otherwise set forth in the applicable award agreement,
for stock options that vest during a period of twelve months, the Officer shall have the right to exercise such options at any time
within one year after termination, subject to the term of the options. Except as otherwise set forth in the applicable award agreement,
any unvested equity-based incentive awards remaining at the end of such period shall be forfeited;
(3) A prorated annual incentive payment equal to the annual incentive payment, if any, that the Officer would have
earned for the entire calendar year in which the termination occurs pursuant to the Officer’s then-current STIP; based on Eligible
Earnings paid between January 1 of such calendar year and the Officer’s date of termination (a “Pro-Rata Incentive”). Subject to
Section 14, an Officer’s Pro-Rata Incentive shall be paid by the Officer’s former employer on the date that annual incentive
payments are paid to the Employers’ active employees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the People and Compensation Committee (or
its successor) of the Corporation may, decrease, or eliminate the Pro-Rata Incentive for the Officer in its sole discretion. For
purposes of this section, “Eligible Earnings” means the sum of the Officer’s: base pay, including paid time off; lump-sum payments
as part of a merit increase; temporary assignment pay, including lump-sum payments; and for an Officer on Paid Family Leave or
Short-Term Disability, payments made for approved leaves;
(4)    A lump sum cash payment equal to the estimated value of 18 months’of COBRA premiums for the Officer,
based on the Officer’s benefit levels at the time of termination (with such payment subject to taxation under applicable law);
(5)    To the extent not theretofore paid or provided, the Officer shall be paid or provided with any other amounts or
benefits required to be paid or provided or which the Officer is eligible to receive under any plan, contract or agreement of the
Corporation or Employer;
(6)    A lump sum cash payment of $19,500, equal to the estimated reasonable value of career transition services for
the Officer following separation from service.
(7)    All acts required of the Employer under the Policy may be performed by the Corporation for itself and the
Employer, and the costs of the Policy may be equitably apportioned by the Administrator among the Corporation and the other
Employers. The Corporation shall be responsible for making payments and providing benefits pursuant to this Policy for Officers
employed by the Corporation. Whenever the Employer is permitted or required under the terms of the Policy to do or perform any
act, matter or thing, it shall be done and performed by any Officer or employee of the Employer who is thereunto duly authorized by
2

the board of directors of the Employer. Each Employer shall be responsible for making payments and providing benefits pursuant to
the Policy on behalf of its Officers or for reimbursing the Corporation for the cost of such payments or benefits, as determined by the
Corporation in its sole discretion. In the event the respective Employer fails to make such payment or reimbursement, an Officer’s
(or other payee’s) sole recourse shall be against the respective Employer, and not against the Corporation;
(b)
Remedies. An Officer shall be entitled to recover damages for late or nonpayment of amounts to which the Officer is
entitled hereunder. The Officer shall also be entitled to seek specific performance of the obligations and any other applicable
equitable or injunctive relief.
(c)
Section 2(a) shall not apply in the event that an Officer’s employment is terminated “for cause.” Except as used in
Section 3 of this Policy, “for cause” means that the Corporation, in the case of an Officer employed by the Corporation, or Employer
in the case of an Officer employed by an Employer, acting in good faith based upon information then known to it, determines that
the Officer has engaged in, committed, or is responsible for (1) serious misconduct, gross negligence, theft, or fraud against the
Corporation and/or an Employer; (2) refusal or unwillingness to perform his duties; (3) inappropriate conduct in violation of
Corporation’s equal employment opportunity policy; (4) conduct which reflects adversely upon, or making any remarks disparaging
of, the Corporation, its Board of Directors, Officers, or employees, or its affiliates or subsidiaries; (5) insubordination; (6) any
willful act that is likely to have the effect of injuring the reputation, business, or business relationship of the Corporation or its
subsidiaries or affiliates; (7) violation of any fiduciary duty; or (8) breach of any duty of loyalty; or (9) any breach of the restrictive
covenants contained in Section 4 below. Upon termination “for cause,” the Corporation, its Board of Directors, Officers, or
employees, or its affiliates or subsidiaries shall have no liability to the Officer other than for accrued salary, vacation benefits, and
any vested rights the Officer may have under the benefit and compensation plans in which the Officer participates and under the
general terms and conditions of the applicable plan.
(d)
The Board of Directors of the Corporation and the Board of Directors of Pacific Gas and Electric Company (the
“Utility”) reserve the right to: (a) restrict, limit, cancel, reduce or require forfeiture of payments or benefits pursuant to the
provisions of Section 2(a), (i) for any executive officer of the Utility (as defined in California Public Utilities Code § 451.5) or any
executive officer of the Corporation (as defined in Rule 3b-7 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) in the event of any felony
conviction of the Corporation or the Utility related to public health and safety or financial misconduct by the Corporation or the
Utility following its July 1, 2020 emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy, provided that such executive officer was serving as an
executive officer of the Corporation or the Utility, as applicable, at the time of the underlying conduct that led to the conviction
(“Company Conviction”), or (ii) for the chief executive officer or chief financial officer of the Corporation or the Utility if that entity
is required to prepare a restatement of the financial statement due to the material noncompliance of the Corporation or the Utility, as
applicable, with any financial reporting requirement under the federal securities laws, as a result of misconduct, provided that only
the payment and benefits under Section 2(a) that the chief executive officer or chief financial officer is eligible to receive during the
twelve (12)-month period following the first public issuance or filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission (whichever first
occurs) of the financial statement are subject to restriction, limitation, cancellation, reduction or forfeiture and further provided the
executive officer was serving as a chief executive officer or chief financial officer of the Corporation or the Utility, as applicable,
during the period for which the financial statement is restated; and (b) recoup or require reimbursement or repayment of rights,
payments, and benefits under Section 2(a) for any executive officer of the Utility (as defined in California Public Utilities Code
§ 451.5) or any executive officer of the Corporation (as defined in Rule 3b-7 under
3

the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) in the event such executive officer engaged in misconduct that materially contributed to some
of the actions or omissions on which the Company Conviction is based (as determined by the applicable Board in its discretion). The
Corporation, the Utility, their affiliates, and their respective directors, officers, and employees shall have no liability to any such
executive officer, including the chief executive officer and chief financial officer of the Corporation or the Utility, in the event of
restriction, limitation, reduction, recoupment, forfeiture, reimbursement, or cancellation of the provisions of Section 2(a), other than
for accrued salary, vacation benefits, and any vested rights such executive officer may have under the benefit and compensation
plans in which the executive officer participates and under the general terms and conditions of the applicable plan.
3.
Termination of Employment In Connection With a Change in .
(a)
If an Executive Officer’s (defined below) employment by the Corporation or any subsidiary or successor of the
Corporation shall be subject to an Involuntary Termination within the Covered Period, then the provisions of this Section 3 instead
of Section 2 shall govern the obligations of the Corporation as to the payments and benefits it shall provide to the Executive Officer.
In the event that Executive Officer’s employment with the Corporation or an employing subsidiary is terminated under
circumstances which would not entitle Executive Officer to payments under this Section 3, Executive Officer shall only receive such
benefits to which he is entitled under Section 2, if any. In no event shall Executive Officer be entitled to receive termination benefits
under both this Section 3 and Section 2.
All the terms used in this Section 3 shall have the following meanings:
(1)
“Affiliate” shall mean any entity which owns or controls, is owned or is under common ownership or control
with, the Corporation.
(2)
“Cause” shall mean (i) the willful and continued failure of the Executive Officer to perform substantially the
Executive Officer’s duties with the Corporation or one of its affiliates (other than any such failure resulting from incapacity due to
physical or mental illness), after a written demand for substantial performance is delivered to the Executive Officer by the Board of
Directors or the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation which specifically identifies the manner in which the Board of Directors
or Chief Executive Officer believes that the Executive Officer has not substantially performed the Executive Officer’s duties; or (ii)
the willful engaging by the Executive Officer in illegal conduct or gross misconduct which is materially demonstrably injurious to
the Corporation.
For purposes of the provision, no act or failure to act, on the part of the Executive Officer, shall be considered
“willful” unless it is done, or omitted to be done, by the Executive Officer in bad faith or without reasonable belief that the
Executive Officer’s action or omission was in the best interests of the Corporation. Any act, or failure to act, based upon authority
given pursuant to a resolution duly adopted by the Board of Directors or upon the instructions of the Chief Executive Officer or a
senior officer of the Corporation or based upon the advice of counsel for the Corporation shall be conclusively presumed to be done,
or omitted to be done, by the Executive Officer in good faith and in the best interests of the Corporation. The cessation of
employment of the Executive Officer shall not be deemed to be for Cause unless and until there shall have been delivered to the
Executive Officer a copy of a resolution duly adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than three-quarters of the entire membership
of the Board of Directors at a meeting of the Board of Directors called and held for such purpose (after reasonable notice is provided
to the Executive Officer and the Executive Officer is given an opportunity, together with counsel, to be heard before the Board of
Directors), finding that, in the good faith opinion of the Board of Directors, the Executive Officer is guilty of the conduct described
in subparagraph (i) or (ii) above, and specifying the particulars thereof in detail.
4

(3)
“Change in Control” shall mean the occurrence of any of the following:
a.
any “person” (as such term is used in Sections 13(d) and 14(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
(“Exchange Act”), but excluding any benefit plan for employees or any trustee, agent or other fiduciary for any such plan acting in
such person’s capacity as such fiduciary), directly or indirectly, becomes the “beneficial owner” (as defined in Rule 13d-3
promulgated under the Exchange Act) of securities of the Corporation representing thirty percent (30%) or more of the combined
voting power of the Corporation’s then outstanding voting securities; or
b.
during any two consecutive years, individuals who at the beginning of such a period constitute the
Board of Directors of the Corporation (“Board”) cease for any reason to constitute at least a majority of the Board, unless the
election, or the nomination for election by the shareholders of the Corporation, of each new member of the Board (“Director”) was
approved by a vote of at least two-thirds ( / ) of the Directors then still in office (1) who were Directors at the beginning of the
period or (2) whose election or nomination was previously so approved; or
c.
the consummation of any consolidation or merger of the Corporation other than a merger or
consolidation which would result in the holders of the voting securities of the Corporation outstanding immediately prior thereto
continuing to directly or indirectly hold at least seventy percent (70%) of the Combined Voting Power of the Corporation, the
surviving entity in the merger or consolidation or the parent of such surviving entity outstanding immediately after the merger or
consolidation; or
d.
(1) the consummation of any sale, lease, exchange or other transfer (in one or a series of related
transactions) of all or substantially all of the assets of the Corporation or (2) the approval of the shareholders of the Corporation of a
plan of liquidation or dissolution of the Corporation.
(4)
“Change in Control Date” shall mean the date on which a Change in Control occurs.
(5)
“Combined Voting Power” shall mean the combined voting power of the Corporation’s or other relevant
entity’s then outstanding voting securities.
(6)
“Covered Period” shall mean the period commencing three months prior to the Change in Control Date and
terminating two (2) years following said Change in Control Date.
(7)
“Disability” shall mean the absence of the Executive Officer from the Executive Officer’s duties with the
Corporation or the employing subsidiary on a full-time basis for 180 consecutive business days as a result of incapacity due to
physical or mental illness which is determined to be total and permanent by a physician selected by the Corporation or its insurers
and acceptable to the Executive Officer or the Executive Officer’s legal representative.
(8)
“Executive Officer” shall mean officers of the Corporation or an Employer with titles of Senior Vice
President, Executive Vice President, or higher at time of Involuntary Termination.
     For a period of three years following notification of this definition of “Covered Period,” Executive Officers who were eligible for benefits under Section 3 as
of November 1, 2021, will continue to be subject to the defintion of “Covered Period” as set forth in the Policy as effective September 24, 2020.
2 3
4
4
5

(9)
“Good Reason” shall mean any one or more of the following which takes place within the Covered Period:
            a.    A material diminution in the Executive Officer’s base compensation;
            b.    A material diminution in the Executive Officer’s authority, duties, or responsibilities;
            c.    A material diminution in the authority, duties, or responsibilities of the supervisor to whom the Executive Officer is
required to report, including a requirement that the Executive Officer report to a corporate officer or employee instead of reporting
directly to the Board of Directors of the Corporation (in the case of an Executive Officer reporting to such Board of Directors);
            d.    A material diminution in the budget over which the Executive Officer retains authority;
            e.    A material change in the geographic location at which the Executive Officer must perform the services; or
            f.    Any other action or inaction that constitutes a material breach by the Corporation of this Policy;
provided, however, that the Executive Officer must provide notice to the Corporation of the existence of the applicable condition
described in this Section 3(a)(9) within 90 days of the initial existence of the condition, upon the notice of which the Corporation
shall have 30 days during which it may remedy the condition and, if remedied, Good Reason shall not exist.
(10)
 “Involuntary Termination” shall mean a termination (i) by the Corporation without Cause, or (ii) by
Executive Officer following Good Reason; provided, however, the term "Involuntary Termination" shall not include termination of
Executive Officer’s employment due to Executive Officer’s death, Disability, or voluntary retirement.
(11)
“Reference Salary” shall mean the greater of (i) the annual rate of Executive Officer’s base salary from the
Corporation or the employing subsidiary in effect immediately before the date of Executive Officer’s Involuntary Termination, or
(ii) the annual rate of Executive Officer’s base salary from the Corporation or the employing subsidiary in effect immediately before
the Change in Control Date.
(12)
“Termination Date” shall be the date specified in the written notice of termination of Executive Officer’s
employment given by either party in accordance with Section 3(b) of this Policy.
(b)
Notice of Termination. During the Covered Period, in the event that the Corporation (including an employing
subsidiary) or Executive Officer terminates Executive Officer’s employment with the Corporation or Employer, the party
terminating employment shall give written notice of termination to the other party, specifying the Termination Date and the specific
termination provision in this Section 3 that is relied upon, if any, and setting forth in reasonable detail the facts and circumstances
claimed to provide a basis for termination of Executive Officer’s employment under the provision so indicated. The Termination
Date shall be determined as follows: (i) if Executive Officer’s employment is terminated for Disability, thirty (30) days after a
Notice of Termination is given (provided that Executive Officer shall not have returned to the full-time performance of Executive
Officer’s duties during such 30-day
6

period); (ii) if Executive Officer’s employment is terminated by the Corporation in an Involuntary Termination, thirty days after the
date the Notice of Termination is received by Executive Officer (provided that the Corporation may provide Officer with pay in lieu
of notice, which shall be paid in a lump sum together with the payment described in Section 3(c)(1) below); and (iii) if Executive
Officer’s employment is terminated by the Corporation for Cause (as defined in this Section 3), the date specified in the Notice of
Termination, provided, that the events or circumstances cited by the Board of Directors as constituting Cause are not cured by
Executive Officer during any cure period that may be offered by the Board of Directors. The Date of Termination for a resignation
of employment other than for Good Reason shall be the date set forth in the applicable notice, which shall be no earlier than ten (10)
days after the date such notice is received by the Corporation, unless waived by the Corporation. 
During the Covered Period, a otice of termination given by Executive Officer for Good Reason shall be given within 90 days after
occurrence of the event on which Executive Officer bases his notice of termination and shall provide a Termination Date of thirty
(30) days after the notice of termination is given to the Corporation (provided that the Corporation may provide Officer with pay in
lieu of notice, which shall be paid in a lump sum together with the payment described in Section 3(c)(1) below).
(c)
Corporation’s Obligations. If Executive Officer separates from service due noExecutive Officer the following
benefits:
(1)
The Corporation shall pay to the Executive Officer a lump sum in cash within thirty (30) days after the later of
the Change in Control Date or the Executive Officer’s separation from service:
a.
the sum of (1) any earned but unpaid base salary through the Termination Date at the rate in effect at
the time of the notice of termination to the extent not theretofore paid; (2) the Executive Officer’s target bonus under the STIP of the
Corporation, an Affiliate, or a predecessor, for the fiscal year in which the Termination Date occurs (the “Target Bonus”), pro-rated
to reflect service during that year; and (3) any accrued but unpaid vacation pay, in each case to the extent not theretofore paid;
b.
the amount equal to the product of (1) two and (2) the sum of (x) the Reference Salary and (y) the
Target Bonus; provided, however, that for the Corporation’s Chief Executive Officer, such amount shall be equal to the product of
(1) three and (2) the sum of (x) the Reference Salary and (y) the Target Bonus;
c.
a lump sum cash payment equal to the estimated value of 18 months’of COBRA premiums for the
Executive Officer, based on the Executive Officer’s benefit levels at the time of termination (with such payment subject to taxation
under applicable law), if any; and
d.    a lump sum cash payment of $19,500, equal to the estimated reasonable value of career transition
services for the Officer following separation from service.
(2)
Except as otherwise set forth in the applicable award agreement or as otherwise required by applicable law, in
the event of involuntary termination in connection with a Change in Control in which equity-based awards granted to the Executive
Officer under the LTIP are not assumed or continued, Executive Officer’s then-outstanding awards that are not vested shall
immediately vest in full, and all performance conditions associated with performance-based LTIP awards shall be deemed satisfied
as if target performance was achieved, and shall be settled in cash, shares or a combination thereof, as determined by the People and
Compensation Committee (or its successor), within thirty (30) days following such Change in
7

Control (except to the extent that settlement of the award must be made pursuant to its original schedule in order to comply with
Code Section 409A), notwithstanding that the applicable performance period, retention period or other restrictions and conditions
have not been completed or satisfied.
(3)
Remedies. The Executive Officer shall be entitled to recover damages for late or nonpayment of amounts
which the Corporation is obligated to pay hereunder. The Executive Officer shall also be entitled to seek specific performance of the
Corporation’s obligations and any other applicable equitable or injunctive relief.
(d)
Adjustment for Excise Taxes.
(1) “Best-Net Provision”
Subject to Section 3(d)(2) below, in the event that the payments and other benefits provided for in this Policy or otherwise payable to
Executive Officer (i) constitute “parachute payments” within the meaning of Section 280G of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended (the “Code”) and (ii) would be subject to the excise tax imposed by Section 4999 of the Code, then Executive Officer’s
payments and benefits under this Policy or otherwise payable to Executive Officer outside of this Policy shall be either delivered in
full (without the Corporation paying any portion of such excise tax), or delivered as to 2.99 times of Executive's base amount (within
the meaning of Section 280G of the Code) so as to result in no portion of such payments and benefits being subject to such excise
tax, whichever of the foregoing amounts, taking into account the applicable federal, state and local income taxes and such excise tax,
results in the receipt by Executive Officer on an after-tax basis of the greatest amount of payments and benefits, notwithstanding that
all or some portion of such payments and benefits may subject to such excise tax. Unless the Corporation and Executive Officer
otherwise agree in writing, any determination required under this Section 3(d)(1) shall be made in writing by Deloitte & Touche (the
“Accounting Firm”), whose determination shall be conclusive and binding upon Executive Officer and the Corporation for all
purposes. For purposes of making the calculations required by this Section 3(d)(1), the Accounting Firm may make reasonable
assumptions and approximations concerning applicable taxes and may rely on reasonable, good faith interpretations concerning the
application of Section 280G and 4999 of the Code. The Corporation and Executive Officer shall furnish to the Accounting Firm such
information and documents as the Accounting Firm may reasonably request in order to make a determination under this Section 3(d)
(1).
Any reduction in payments and/or benefits shall occur in the following order as reasonably determined by the Accounting Firm: (1)
reduction of cash payments, (2) reduction of non-cash/non-equity-based payments or benefits, and (3) reduction of vesting
acceleration of equity-based awards; provided, however, that any non-taxable payments or benefits shall be reduced last in
accordance with the same categorical ordering rule.  In the event items described in (1) or (2) are to be reduced, reduction shall occur
in reverse chronological order such that the payment or benefit owed on the latest date following the occurrence of the event
triggering the excise tax will be the first payment to be reduced (with reductions made pro-rata in the event payments are owed at the
same time).  In the event that acceleration of vesting of equity-based awards is to be reduced, such acceleration of vesting shall be
cancelled in a manner such as to obtain the best economic benefit for the officer (with reductions made pro-rata if economically
equivalent), as determined by the Accounting Firm.
4.
Obligations of Officer.
(1)
Release of Claims. There shall be no obligation to commence the payment of the amounts and benefits described in
Section 2(a) or Section 3(c) (as applicable) until the latter of (1) the delivery by Officer to the Corporation a fully executed
comprehensive general release of
8

any and all known or unknown claims that he or she may have against the Corporation, its Board of Directors, Officers, or
employees, or its affiliates or subsidiaries and a covenant not to sue in the form prescribed by the Administrator, and (2) the
expiration of any revocation period set forth in the release. The Corporation shall promptly furnish such release to Officer in
connection with the Officer’s separation from service, and such release must be executed by Officer and become effective during the
period set forth in the release as a condition to Officer receiving the payments and benefits described in Section 2(a) or Section 3(c)
(as applicable).
(2)
Covenant Not to Compete. (i) During the period of Officer’s employment with the Corporation or its subsidiaries and
for a period of twelve (12) months thereafter (the “Restricted Period”), Officer shall not, in any county within the State of California
or in any city, county or area outside the State of California within the United States or in the countries of Canada or Mexico,
directly or indirectly, whether as partner, employee, consultant, creditor, shareholder, or other similar capacity, promote, participate,
or engage in any activity or other business competitive with the Corporation’s business or that of any of its subsidiaries or affiliates,
without the prior written consent of the Corporation’s Chief Executive Officer. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Officer may have an
interest in any public company engaged in a competitive business so long as Officer does not own more than 2 percent of any class
of securities of such company, Officer is not employed by and does not consult with, or becomes a director of, or otherwise engage
in any activities for, such competing company.
(1)
The Corporation and its subsidiaries presently conduct their businesses within each county in the State of
California and in areas outside California that are located within the United States, and it is anticipated that the Corporation and its
subsidiaries will also be conducting business within the countries of Canada and Mexico. Such covenants are necessary and
reasonable in order to protect the Corporation and its subsidiaries in the conduct of their businesses. To the extent that the foregoing
covenant or any provision of this Section4(b)(1) shall be deemed illegal or unenforceable by a court or other tribunal of competent
jurisdiction with respect to (i) any geographic area, (ii) any part of the time period covered by such covenant, (iii) any activity or
capacity covered by such covenant, or (iv) any other term or provision of such covenant, such determination shall not affect such
covenant with respect to any other geographic area, time period, activity or other term or provision covered by or included in such
covenant.
(3)
Soliciting Customers and Employees. During the Restricted Period, Officer shall not, directly or indirectly, solicit or
contact any customer or any prospective customer of the Corporation or its subsidiaries or affiliates for any commercial pursuit that
could be reasonably construed to be in competition with the Corporation, or induce, or attempt to induce, any employees, agents or
consultants of or to the Corporation or any of its subsidiaries or affiliates to do anything from which Officer is restricted by reason of
this covenant nor shall Officer, directly or indirectly, offer or aid to others to offer employment to, or interfere or attempt to interfere
with any employment, consulting or agency relationship with, any employees, agents or consultants of the Corporation, its
subsidiaries and affiliates, who received compensation of $75,000 or more during the preceding six (6) months, to work for any
business competitive with any business of the Corporation, its subsidiaries or affiliates.
(4)
Confidentiality. Officer shall not at any time (including after termination of employment) divulge to others, use to the
detriment of the Corporation or its subsidiaries or affiliates, or use in any business competitive with any business of the Corporation
or its subsidiaries or affiliates any trade secret, confidential or privileged information obtained during his employment with the
Corporation or its subsidiaries or affiliates, without first obtaining the written consent of the Corporation’s Chief Executive Officer.
This paragraph covers but is not limited to discoveries, inventions (except as otherwise provided by California law), improvements,
and writings, belonging to or relating to the affairs of the Corporation or of any of
9

its subsidiaries or affiliates, or any marketing systems, customer lists or other marketing data. Officer shall, upon termination of
employment for any reason, deliver to the Corporation all data, records and communications, and all drawings, models, prototypes or
similar visual or conceptual presentations of any type, and all copies or duplicates thereof, relating to all matters contemplated by
this paragraph.
(5)
Assistance in Legal Proceedings. During the Restricted Period, Officer shall, upon reasonable notice from the
Corporation, furnish information and proper assistance (including testimony and document production) to the Corporation as may be
reasonably required by the Corporation in connection with any legal, administrative or regulatory proceeding in which it or any of its
subsidiaries or affiliates is, or may become, a party, or in connection with any filing or similar obligation of the Corporation imposed
by any taxing, administrative or regulatory authority having jurisdiction, provided, however, that the Corporation shall pay all
reasonable expenses incurred by Officer in complying with this paragraph within 60 days after Officer incurs such expenses.
(6)
Remedies. Upon Officer’s failure to comply with the provisions of this Section 4, the Corporation shall have the right
to immediately terminate any unpaid amounts or benefits described in Section 2(a) or Section 3 (as applicable) to Officer. In the
event of such termination, the Corporation shall have no further obligations under this Policy and shall be entitled to recover
damages. In the event of an Officer’s breach or threatened breach of any of the covenants set forth in this Section 4, the Corporation
shall also be entitled to specific performance by Officer of any such covenant and any other applicable equitable or injunctive relief.
5.
Administration. The Policy shall be administered by the Senior Human Resources Officer of the Corporation
(“Administrator”), who shall have the authority to interpret the Policy and make and revise such rules as may be reasonably
necessary to administer the Policy. The Administrator shall have the duty and responsibility of maintaining records, making the
requisite calculations, securing Officer releases, and disbursing payments hereunder. The Administrator’s interpretations,
determinations, rules, and calculations shall be final and binding on all persons and parties concerned.
6.    No Mitigation. Payment of the amounts and benefits under Section2(a) and Section 3 (except as otherwise provided in Section
2(a)(6)) shall not be subject to offset, counterclaim, recoupment, defense or other claim, right or action which the Corporation or an
Employer may have and shall not be subject to a requirement that Officer mitigate or attempt to mitigate damages resulting from
Officer’s termination of employment.
7.    Amendment and Termination. The Corporation, acting through its People and Compensation Committee (or its successor),
reserves the right to amend or terminate the Policy at any time; provided, however, that any amendment which would reduce the
aggregate level of benefits, or terminate the Policy, shall not become effective prior to the completion of the notice period. Such
notice period shall be the first anniversary of the Corporation giving notice to Officers of such amendment or termination.
8.    Successors. The Corporation will require any successor (whether direct or indirect, by purchase, merger, consolidation or
otherwise) to all or substantially all of the business or assets of the Corporation expressly to assume and to agree to perform its
obligations under this Policy
     To the extent that Officers are eligible for benefits until this Policy as of November 1, 2021, the Notice Period shall be three years from the receipt of notice
that the Notice Period has been reduced to one year.
5
5
10

in the same manner and to the same extent that the Corporation would be required to perform such obligations if no such succession
had taken place; provided, however, that no such assumption shall relieve the Corporation of its obligations hereunder. As used
herein, the “Corporation” shall mean the Corporation as hereinbefore defined and any successor to its business and/or assets as
aforesaid which assumes and agrees to perform its obligations by operation or law or otherwise.
This Policy shall inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the Officer (and Officer’s personal representatives and heirs),
Corporation and its successors and assigns, and any such successor or assignee shall be deemed substituted for the Corporation under
the terms of this Policy for all purposes. As used herein, “successor” and “assignee” shall include any person, firm, corporation or
other business entity which at any time, whether by purchase, merger or otherwise, directly or indirectly acquires the stock of the
Corporation or to which the Corporation assigns this Policy by operation of law or otherwise. If Officer should die while any amount
would still be payable to Officer hereunder if Officer had continued to live, all such amounts, unless otherwise provided herein, shall
be paid in accordance with this Policy to Officer’s devisee, legatee or other designee, or if there is no such designee, to Officer’s
estate.
9.    Nonassignability of Benefits. The payments under this Policy or the right to receive future payments under this Policy may not
be anticipated, alienated, pledged, encumbered, or subject to any charge or legal process, and if any attempt is made to do so, or a
person eligible for payments becomes bankrupt, the payments under the Policy of the person affected may be terminated by the
Administrator who, in his or her sole discretion, may cause the same to be held if applied for the benefit of one or more of the
dependents of such person or make any other disposition of such benefits that he or she deems appropriate.
10.    Nonguarantee of Employment. Officers covered by the Policy are at-will employees, and nothing contained in this Policy shall
be construed as a contract of employment between the Officer and the Corporation (or, where applicable, a subsidiary or affiliate of
the Corporation), or as a right of the Officer to continued employment, or to remain as an Officer, or as a limitation on the right of
the Corporation (or a subsidiary or affiliate of the Corporation) to discharge Officer at any time, with or without cause.
11.    Benefits Unfunded and Unsecured. The payments under this Policy are unfunded, and the interest under this Policy of any
Officer and such Officer’s right to receive payments under this Policy shall be an unsecured claim against the general assets of the
Corporation.
12.    Applicable Law. All questions pertaining to the construction, validity, and effect of the Policy shall be determined in
accordance with the laws of the United States and, to the extent not preempted by such laws, by the laws of the state of California.
13.    Arbitration. With the exception of any request for specific performance, injunctive or other equitable relief, any dispute or
controversy of any kind arising out of or related to this Policy, Officer’s employment with the Corporation (or with the employing
subsidiary), the termination thereof or any claims for benefits shall be resolved exclusively by final and binding arbitration in
accordance with the Commercial Arbitration Rules of the American Arbitration Association then in effect. Provided, however, that
in making their determination, the arbitrators shall be limited to accepting the position of the Officer or the position of the
Corporation, as the case may be. The only claims not covered by this Section 132 are claims for benefits under workers’
compensation or unemployment insurance laws; such claims will be resolved under those laws. The place of arbitration shall be San
Francisco, California. Parties may be represented by legal counsel at the arbitration but must bear their own fees for such
representation. The prevailing party in any dispute or controversy covered by this Section 13, or with respect to any request for
specific performance, injunctive or other equitable relief, shall be
11

entitled to recover, in addition to any other available remedies specified in this Policy, all litigation expenses and costs, including
any arbitrator or administrative or filing fees and reasonable attorneys’ fees. Such expenses, costs and fees, if payable to Officer,
shall be paid within 60 days after they are incurred. Both the Officer and the Corporation specifically waive any right to a jury trial
on any dispute or controversy covered by this Section 13. Judgment may be entered on the arbitrators’ award in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
15.    Reimbursements and In-Kind Benefits. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Policy, all reimbursements and in-kind
benefits provided under this Policy shall be made or provided in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 409A, including,
where applicable, the requirement that (i) the amount of expenses eligible for reimbursement and the provision of benefits in kind
during a calendar year shall not affect the expenses eligible for reimbursement or the provision of in-kind benefits in any other
calendar year; (ii) the reimbursement for an eligible expense will be made on or before the last day of the calendar year following the
calendar year in which the expense is incurred (or by such earlier time set forth in this Policy); (iii) the right to reimbursement or
right to in-kind benefit is not subject to liquidation or exchange for another benefit; and (iv) each reimbursement payment or
provision of in-kind benefit shall be one of a series of separate payments (and each shall be construed as a separate identified
payment) for purposes of Code Section 409A.
15.    Separate Payments. Each payment and benefit under this Policy shall be a “separate payment” for purposes of Code Section
409A.
12

APPENDIX A
PARTICIPATING EMPLOYERS
PG&E Corporation
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
PG&E Corporation Support Services, Inc.
PG&E Corporation Support Services II, Inc.

EXHIBIT 21
Significant Subsidiaries
Parent of Significant Subsidiary
Name of Significant Subsidiary
Jurisdiction of Formation of
Subsidiary
Names under which Significant
Subsidiary does business
PG&E Corporation
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
CA
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
PG&E
Pacific Gas and Electric Company
None

EXHIBIT 23.1
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement No. 333-236629-01 on Form S-3, Registration Statement No. 333-253630-01 on Form S-
3/ASR, and Registration Statement Nos. 333-129422, 333-176090, 333-195902, 333-206457, 333-239544, and 333-256896 on Form S-8 of our reports dated
February 10, 2022, relating to the financial statements of PG&E Corporation and the effectiveness of PG&E Corporation’s internal control over financial reporting
appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K of PG&E Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2021.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
San Francisco, California
February 10, 2022

EXHIBIT 23.2
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement No. 333-236629 on Form S-3 and Registration Statement No. 333-253630 on Form S-
3/ASR of our reports dated February 10, 2022, relating to the financial statements of Pacific Gas and Electric Company and the effectiveness of Pacific Gas and
Electric Company’s internal control over financial reporting appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the year
ended December 31, 2021.
/s/ DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP
San Francisco, California
February 10, 2022

EXHIBIT 24
POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each of the undersigned Directors of PG&E Corporation hereby constitutes and appoints JOHN R. SIMON, BRIAN M. WONG, SUJATA PAGEDAR, J. ELLEN
CONTI, LISA CRAWFORD, and JENNY KAN, and each of them, as his or her attorneys in fact with full power of substitution to sign and file with the Securities
and Exchange Commission in his or her capacity as such Director of said corporation the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021
required by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and any and all amendments and other filings or documents related thereto, and hereby
ratifies all that said attorneys in fact or any of them may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have signed these presents this 10th day of February 2022.
/s/ RAJAT BAHRI
/s/ ARNO L. HARRIS
Rajat Bahri
Arno L. Harris
/s/ CHERYL F. CAMPBELL
/s/ MICHAEL R. NIGGLI
Cheryl F. Campbell
Michael R. Niggli
/s/ KERRY W. COOPER
/s/ PATRICIA K. POPPE
Kerry W. Cooper
Patricia K. Poppe
/s/ JESSICA L. DENECOUR
/s/ DEAN L. SEAVERS
Jessica L. Denecour
Dean L. Seavers
/s/ MARK E. FERGUSON, III
/s/ WILLIAM L. SMITH
Mark E. Ferguson, III
William L. Smith
/s/ ROBERT C. FLEXON
/s/ BENJAMIN F. WILSON
Robert C. Flexon
Benjamin F. Wilson
/s/ W. CRAIG FUGATE
W. Craig Fugate

POWER OF ATTORNEY
Each  of  the  undersigned  Directors  of  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric  Company  hereby  constitutes  and  appoints  JOHN  R.  SIMON,  BRIAN  M.  WONG,  SUJATA
PAGEDAR, J. ELLEN CONTI, LISA CRAWFORD, and JENNY KAN, and each of them, as his or her attorneys in fact with full power of substitution to sign and
file with the Securities and Exchange Commission in his or her capacity as such Director of said corporation the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2021 required by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and any and all amendments and other filings or documents related
thereto, and hereby ratifies all that said attorneys in fact or any of them may do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have signed these presents this 10  day of February 2022.
/s/ RAJAT BAHRI
/s/ ARNO L. HARRIS
Rajat Bahri
Arno L. Harris
/s/ CHERYL F. CAMPBELL
/s/ MICHAEL R. NIGGLI
Cheryl F. Campbell
Michael R. Niggli
/s/ KERRY W. COOPER
/s/ PATRICIA K. POPPE
Kerry W. Cooper
Patricia K. Poppe
/s/ JESSICA L. DENECOUR
/s/ DEAN L. SEAVERS
Jessica L. Denecour
Dean L. Seavers
/s/ MARK E. FERGUSON, III
/s/ WILLIAM L. SMITH
Mark E. Ferguson, III
William L. Smith
/s/ ROBERT C. FLEXON
/s/ BENJAMIN F. WILSON
Robert C. Flexon
Benjamin F. Wilson
/s/ W. CRAIG FUGATE
/s/ ADAM L. WRIGHT
W. Craig Fugate
Adam. L. Wright
th

EXHIBIT 31.1
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, Patricia K. Poppe, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 of PG&E Corporation;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.    The registrant's other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a.    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly
during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter  (the  registrant’s  fourth  quarter  in  the  case  of  an  annual  report)  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant's other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 10, 2022
/s/ PATRICIA K. POPPE
 
Patricia K. Poppe
 
Chief Executive Officer

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, Christopher A. Foster, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 of PG&E Corporation;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.    The registrant's other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a.    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly
during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter  (the  registrant’s  fourth  quarter  in  the  case  of  an  annual  report)  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant's other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 10, 2022
/s/ CHRISTOPHER A. FOSTER
 
Christopher A. Foster
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer

EXHIBIT 31.2
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, Adam L. Wright, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 of Pacific Gas and Electric Company;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.    The registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a.    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly
during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter  (the  registrant’s  fourth  quarter  in  the  case  of  an  annual  report)  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 10, 2022
 /s/ ADAM L. WRIGHT
 
Adam L. Wright
 
Executive Vice President, Operations and Chief Operating Officer

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, Marlene M. Santos, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 of Pacific Gas and Electric Company;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.    The registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a.    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly
during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter  (the  registrant’s  fourth  quarter  in  the  case  of  an  annual  report)  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 10, 2022
/s/ MARLENE M. SANTOS
 
Marlene M. Santos
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Customer Officer

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, Jason M. Glickman, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 of Pacific Gas and Electric Company;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.    The registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a.    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly
during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter  (the  registrant’s  fourth  quarter  in  the  case  of  an  annual  report)  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: November 1, 2021
/s/ JASON M. GLICKMAN
 
Jason M. Glickman
 
Executive Vice President, Engineering, Planning, and Strategy

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER
PURSUANT TO SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION RULE 13a-14(a)
I, David S. Thomason, certify that:
1.    I have reviewed this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021 of Pacific Gas and Electric Company;
2.    Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3.    Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.    The registrant's other certifying officers and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a.    Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly
during the period in which this report is being prepared;
b.    Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  the  reliability  of  financial  reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
c.    Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant's disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of the
disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d.    Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter  (the  registrant’s  fourth  quarter  in  the  case  of  an  annual  report)  that  has  materially  affected,  or  is  reasonably  likely  to  materially  affect,  the
registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.    The registrant's other certifying officers and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant's
auditors and the audit committee of registrant's board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a.    All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant's ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b.    Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant's internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 10, 2022
/s/ DAVID S. THOMASON
 
David S. Thomason
 
Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Controller

EXHIBIT 32.1
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of PG&E Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“Form 10-K”), I, Patricia K.
Poppe, Chief Executive Officer of PG&E Corporation, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
(1) the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2) the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations
of PG&E Corporation.
 
/s/ PATRICIA K. POPPE
 
Patricia K. Poppe
 
Chief Executive Officer
February 10, 2022

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of PG&E Corporation for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“Form 10-K”), I, Christopher A.
Foster, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of PG&E Corporation, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to
Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
(1) the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2) the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations
of PG&E Corporation.
 
/s/ CHRISTOPHER A. FOSTER
 
Christopher A. Foster
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
February 10, 2022

EXHIBIT 32.2
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“Form 10-K”), I,
Adam L. Wright, Executive Vice President, Operations and Chief Operating Officer of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C.
Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
(1) the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2) the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
 
/s/ ADAM L. WRIGHT
 
Adam L. Wright
                               
Executive Vice President, Operations and Chief Operating Officer
February 10, 2022

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“Form 10-K”), I,
Marlene M. Santos, Executive Vice President and Chief Customer Officer of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350,
as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
(1) the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2) the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
/s/ MARLENE M. SANTOS
 
Marlene M. Santos
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Customer Officer
February 10, 2022

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“Form 10-K”), I,
Jason M. Glickman, Executive Vice President, Engineering, Planning, and Strategy of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C.
Section 1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
(1) the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2) the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
/s/ JASON M. GLICKMAN
 
Jason M. Glickman
 
Executive Vice President, Engineering, Planning, and Strategy
February 10, 2022

CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER
PURSUANT TO 18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350
In connection with the accompanying Annual Report on Form 10-K of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for the year ended December 31, 2021 (“Form 10-K”), I,
David S. Thomason, Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Controller of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, hereby certify pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section
1350, as adopted pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that:
(1) the Form 10-K fully complies with the requirements of section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934; and
(2) the information contained in the Form 10-K fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of
Pacific Gas and Electric Company.
 
/s/ DAVID S. THOMASON
 
David S. Thomason
 
Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Controller
February 10, 2022
