 
 
NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER 
TROPICAL CYCLONE REPORT 
 
 
HURRICANE HELENE 
 
(AL092024) 
 
24–27 September 2024 
 
Andrew B. Hagen, John P. Cangialosi, Marc Chenard1, 
Laura Alaka, and Sandy Delgado  
National Hurricane Center 
17 February 20262 
 
GOES-16 INFRARED IMAGE OF HELENE AT 0200 UTC 27 SEPTEMBER 2024 PRIOR TO LANDFALL IN FLORIDA.  
IMAGE COURTESY OF NOAA/NESDIS/STAR. 
 
Helene made landfall in the Florida Big Bend region as a category 4 hurricane (on 
the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale).  The storm brought catastrophic inland flooding, 
extreme winds, deadly storm surge, and numerous tornadoes that devastated portions of 
the southeastern United States and southern Appalachians.  Helene is responsible for at 
least 250 fatalities in the United States (including at least 175 direct deaths), making it the 
deadliest hurricane in the contiguous U.S. since Katrina in 2005.  Helene also produced 
tropical storm conditions and minor damage across portions of Mexico and Cuba. 
                                                 
1 NOAA/NWS/NCEP Weather Prediction Center, College Park, MD 
2 This version updates the fatality count by removing one direct fatality that is no longer classified as associated with 
Helene, and also adds one indirect fatality.  These changes are based on new data provided by North Carolina and are 
also reflected in that state’s fatality count.  Previous updates: 8 April 2025 to add a direct fatality in North Carolina and 
remove an erroneous rainfall observation in Tennessee (EMBT1), which resulted in a change to the highest rainfall 
amount in Tennessee; 21 March 2025 to update casualty statistics for North Carolina and remove an erroneous rainfall 
observation (BLAN7) in North Carolina.  Original report dated 19 March 2025. 

Hurricane Helene     2 
 
Hurricane Helene 
 
24–27 SEPTEMBER 2024 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
SYNOPTIC HISTORY ....................................................................................................... 3 
METEOROLOGICAL STATISTICS .................................................................................. 5 
Winds and Pressure ....................................................................................................... 5 
Highest Measured Wind Gusts by State ......................................................................... 8 
Highest Measured Wind Gusts by State ......................................................................... 9 
Storm Surge ................................................................................................................... 9 
Rainfall and Flooding .................................................................................................... 12 
Highest Rainfall Totals by State ................................................................................... 14 
Highest Rainfall and Record River Crests by North Carolina County ........................... 15 
Tornadoes .................................................................................................................... 16 
CASUALTY AND DAMAGE STATISTICS ..................................................................... 17 
Direct Deaths by State and Type .................................................................................. 17 
Total Deaths by State ................................................................................................... 18 
FORECAST AND WARNING CRITIQUE ....................................................................... 27 
GENESIS ........................................................................................................................ 27 
TRACK ........................................................................................................................... 28 
INTENSITY ..................................................................................................................... 28 
WIND WATCHES AND WARNINGS ............................................................................. 29 
STORM SURGE WATCHES AND WARNINGS ............................................................ 29 
RAINFALL FORECASTS AND FLOODING OUTLOOKS ............................................. 30 
IMPACT-BASED DECISION SUPPORT SERVICES (IDSS) AND PUBLIC COMMUNICATION
 ........................................................................................................................................ 31 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .............................................................................................. 32 
ADDITIONAL NWS RESOURCES ............................................................................... 105 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     3 
 
Hurricane Helene 
 
24–27 SEPTEMBER 2024 
SYNOPTIC HISTORY 
 
Helene originated from a Central American Gyre (CAG)3 that developed on 20 September.  
During 20–22 September, the system had a large low-level cyclonic circulation (Fig. 1a) and 
closed cyclonic flow (Fig. 1b) with peak winds occurring over a broad region, well away from the 
center (Fig. 1c).  The large gyre was initially centered over Central America, and it brought heavy 
rains to portions of Nicaragua and Honduras as it moved slowly northward.  By 1200 UTC 23 
September, the large circulation straddled Central America and the northwestern Caribbean Sea 
as deep convection began to organize near a mid-level vorticity maximum about 130 n mi south 
of Grand Cayman.  However, the broad nature of the system meant it initially lacked the well-
defined low-level center necessary to be a tropical cyclone.  The National Hurricane Center (NHC) 
initiated potential tropical cyclone advisories at that time since the system was expected to 
become a tropical cyclone and bring tropical storm conditions to land areas within the next couple 
of days.   
The disturbance moved slowly northwestward over the northwestern Caribbean Sea 
during the next 12 to 24 h while deep convection gradually increased.  Satellite and aircraft data 
indicate that a well-defined low-level center formed by 1200 UTC 24 September, marking the 
formation of a tropical storm when the system was located about 175 n mi south of the western 
tip of Cuba.  At the time of genesis, Helene was already producing 40-kt winds.  The “best track” 
chart of Helene’s path is given in Fig. 2, with the wind and pressure histories shown in Figs. 3 and 
4, respectively.  The best track positions and intensities are listed in Table 14. 
Later that day, deep convection consolidated near the center and banding increased.  
Consequently, Helene steadily strengthened in conducive environmental conditions of low wind 
shear, high moisture, and very warm sea surface temperatures.  Helene became a 55-kt tropical 
storm by 0600 UTC 25 September when the center was located about 50 n mi east of Cozumel, 
Mexico, and became a hurricane 6 h later while located just east of Cancun.  Although Helene 
did not make landfall on the Yucatan Peninsula, Helene’s large wind field brought tropical-storm-
force winds to the far northeastern portions of the Yucatan Peninsula, including the Cancun and 
Cabo Catoche areas, and also brought tropical storm conditions to portions of western Cuba. 
                                                 
3 A Central American gyre (CAG) is a broad lower-tropospheric cyclonic circulation occurring near Central 
America.  For more information please refer to Papin, P., L. F. Bosart, R. D. Torn, 2017: A Climatology of 
Central 
American 
Gyres. 
Mon. 
Wea. 
Rev., 
145, 
1983-2000. 
http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/10.1175/MWR-D-16-0411.1  
4 A digital record of the complete best track, including wind radii, can be found on line at 
ftp://ftp.nhc.noaa.gov/atcf. Data for the current year’s storms are located in the btk directory, while previous 
years’ data are located in the archive directory. 

Hurricane Helene     4 
 
Helene entered the Gulf of America later that day as a category 1 hurricane and turned 
northward on the western side of a subtropical ridge centered over the western Atlantic.  Satellite 
and aircraft data indicate that Helene developed a secondary wind maximum farther from the 
center from late 25 September through early 26 September, which caused the intensity to level 
off.  However, the wind field expanded significantly during this time, with tropical-storm-force 
winds extending outward up to 360 n mi from the center in the northeastern quadrant.  After the 
outer wind maximum began to contract and Helene developed a better-defined inner core, the 
hurricane rapidly intensified on 26 September over the very warm Gulf waters while accelerating 
north-northeastward between the ridge and a deep-layer cut-off low centered over the Tennessee 
Valley.  During this time, the inner core of the hurricane contracted further, but the outer wind field 
remained very large.  Although aircraft reconnaissance reported the presence of an eye since 
about 0600 UTC 26 September, Helene lacked a clear eye in geostationary satellite images for 
most of the morning.  Later, a relatively clear eye was able to maintain itself on geostationary 
imagery beginning around 1800 UTC that day until landfall 9 h later.  Helene intensified into a 
105-kt major hurricane by 1800 UTC 26 September when the eye was located about 150 n mi 
west-southwest of Tampa, Florida.  The cyclone continued to rapidly strengthen and reached a 
peak intensity of 120 kt just 6 h later when it was located about 80 n mi south-southwest of the 
coast of the Florida Big Bend region.  The category 4 hurricane maintained its intensity until it 
made landfall about 10 n mi southwest of Perry, Florida, around 0310 UTC 27 September, making 
it the strongest landfalling hurricane in the Florida Big Bend region since reliable records began 
around 1900. 
 
Helene was moving extremely quickly when it made landfall in Florida, with a forward 
motion of 27 kt toward the north-northeast (Fig. 5).  The hurricane then turned northward shortly 
after moving inland as it started to interact with the mid- to upper-level low located over the Ohio 
Valley, but its fast forward motion continued while it moved across Georgia.  As a result of the 
fast forward motion, Helene’s strong winds, especially in gusts, penetrated far inland.  Surface 
and radar data indicate that Helene remained a hurricane as the center moved inland over 
southern Georgia, but the structure of the eye degraded, and Helene is estimated to have 
weakened to a 60-kt tropical storm around 0900 UTC 27 September when the center was located 
about 30 n mi east of Macon, Georgia.  The center of the system quickly approached the Georgia-
South Carolina-North Carolina border region by 1200 UTC that day, when widespread destruction 
from flooding, landslides and strong wind gusts was occurring across the southern Appalachians.  
The fast forward speed of the cyclone as it began to pivot around the cut-off low resulted in a 
widespread area of hurricane-force wind gusts primarily east of the center, especially in areas of 
elevated terrain in the southern Appalachians.  Hurricane-force wind gusts spread as far east as 
coastal portions of Georgia and southern South Carolina, and as far northwest as the mountains 
of western North Carolina. 
 
The storm turned northwestward during the afternoon hours (local time) on 27 September 
as it merged with the cut-off low to its west.  This interaction and the loss of deep convection 
caused Helene to become post-tropical by 1800 UTC that day as it moved into southern Kentucky, 
with maximum sustained winds of around 40 kt.  During the next day or so, the post-tropical low 
made a slow cyclonic loop and dissipated shortly after 1800 UTC 28 September over north-central 
Tennessee. 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     5 
 
METEOROLOGICAL STATISTICS 
 
Observations in Helene (Figs. 3 and 4) include subjective satellite-based Dvorak 
technique intensity estimates from the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch (TAFB) and the 
Satellite Analysis Branch (SAB), objective Advanced Dvorak Technique (ADT) estimates and 
Satellite Consensus (SATCON) estimates from the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological 
Satellite Studies/University of Wisconsin-Madison. Observations also include flight-level, stepped 
frequency microwave radiometer (SFMR), and dropwindsonde observations from ten flights of the 
53rd Weather Reconnaissance Squadron of the U.S. Air Force Reserve Command and six flights 
from NOAA’s Aircraft Operations Center (Fig. 6).  These flights provided a total of 38 center “fixes” 
during Helene’s lifecycle.  In addition, there were two surveillance flights conducted by the NOAA 
G-IV jet.  Data and imagery from NOAA polar-orbiting satellites including the Advanced 
Microwave Sounding Unit (AMSU), the NASA Global Precipitation Mission (GPM), the European 
Space Agency’s Advanced Scatterometer (ASCAT), Defense Meteorological Satellite Program 
(DMSP) satellites, and the Time-Resolved Observations of Precipitation structure and storm 
Intensity with a Constellation of Smallsats (TROPICS) satellites, among others, were also useful 
in constructing the best track of Helene.  In addition, radar data from the United States, the 
Cayman Islands, Mexico and Cuba provided important information on Helene.  Saildrone 
observations, as well as observations from unmanned aircraft system (UAS) flights operated by 
NOAA (not shown in Figs. 3 or 4) were also helpful in analyzing Helene’s wind field. 
Ship reports of winds of tropical storm force associated with Helene are given in Table 2, 
and selected surface observations from land stations and data buoys are given in Table 3.  A 
supplemental file containing a larger selection of surface and buoy observations is available for 
download on the NHC website at www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/supplemental/helene.zip.  This file 
also contains rainfall reports from National Weather Service Cooperative (COOP) stations and 
the Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHs) sites.  A map of selected 
peak wind gusts across the eastern United States is shown in Figure 7. 
 
Winds and Pressure 
Helene rapidly intensified as it accelerated north-northeastward over the Gulf of America 
on 26 September, reaching an estimated peak intensity of 120 kt at 0000 UTC 27 September.  
The estimated peak intensity is based on a peak 700-mb flight-level wind of 134 kt measured by 
the Air Force Reserve Hurricane Hunters at 2346 UTC 26 September and a peak 750-mb flight-
level wind of 139 kt measured by the NOAA Hurricane Hunters at 0035 UTC 27 September.  Both 
observations correspond to approximately 120-kt winds at the surface using standard reduction 
factors.  A sustained wind of 69 kt with a gust of 93 kt was measured by NOAA buoy 42036 in the 
northeastern Gulf of America when it was in the western eyewall of Helene at 2254 UTC                        
26 September.  The buoy reported a minimum pressure of 949 mb at 2310 UTC.  Around the time 
of peak intensity over the northeastern Gulf, satellite-based Synthetic Aperture Radar data 
captured the extent of Helene’s inner-core wind field (Fig. 8). 

Hurricane Helene     6 
 
 
At the time of the aforementioned flight-level wind observations, dropsonde data indicated 
that Helene’s central pressure was around 941 mb.  A later dropsonde at 0214 UTC 27 September 
measured 941 mb with 27-kt winds, about 1 h prior to landfall.  The lowest pressure measured on 
land was 942.8 mb at 0312 UTC at a Texas Tech StickNet site situated about halfway between 
the landfall point and Perry, Florida.  Taking into account the dropsonde data and the 
wind/pressure trace from the StickNet observation (Fig. 9), the landfall central pressure is 
analyzed to be 939 mb.   
 
As previously mentioned, the size of Helene’s wind field was quite large for most of its 
existence.  In fact, comparing Helene’s 34- and 50-kt wind field to other hurricanes at similar 
latitudes (while Helene was over the southeastern Gulf of America) over the past 20 years 
indicates that it was larger than about 90 percent of systems of similar strength and location. 
 
Mexico and Cuba 
 
Tropical storm conditions were observed over portions of the eastern Yucatan Peninsula 
of Mexico, including in the Cancun area, as well as on the islands of Cozumel and Isla Mujeres 
when Helene’s center passed less than 50 n mi to the east of those areas.  A weather station in 
Isla Mujeres measured winds of 46 kt with a gust to 60 kt at 1845 UTC 25 September.  The station 
recorded a minimum pressure of 989 mb at 1745 UTC, while the center of Helene was located 
about 45 n mi north-northeast of the station. 
 
Tropical storm conditions also occurred across portions of western Cuba.  Cayo Largo, a 
barrier island off Cuba’s southern coast, recorded 29-kt sustained winds with gusts to 49 kt on 25 
September.  Later, 32 kt winds with gusts to 50 kt were observed in Havana.  A gust to 55 kt was 
measured in Santa Lucia, Pinar del Rio. 
 
Florida, Georgia, South Carolina and North Carolina 
 
Helene brought life-threatening wind gusts (Fig. 7) much farther inland across the 
southeastern United States than other hurricanes due to its fast forward motion (Fig. 5) and large 
size.  The strongest low-elevation sustained wind measured on land was 64 kt at a Texas Tech 
StickNet site about 5 n mi southwest of Live Oak, Florida at 0359 UTC 27 September.  Given that 
the anemometer height of this observation was only 2.25 m above ground level (AGL) and that it 
occurred about 50 minutes after landfall and 35 n mi inland, much stronger winds undoubtedly 
occurred at the 10 m level closer to the coast.  A standard adjustment of that wind observation to 
10 m using the wind profile power law5 yields an estimated sustained wind of 79 kt.  Hurricane-
force winds spread across portions of northern Florida and southern Georgia near and to the east 
of the path of Helene’s center.  Some of the highest wind reports in Georgia include a 
WeatherStem site in Lowndes County, Georgia, located 5 to 10 n mi south-southeast of Valdosta 
that measured winds of 53 kt with a gust of 83 kt (anemometer height 7 m AGL) at 0420 UTC.  A 
                                                 
5 More information on the wind profile power law can be found at the following citation: Hsu, S. A., Meindl, 
E. A., & Gilhousen, D. B., 1994: Determining the Power-Law Wind-Profile Exponent under Near-Neutral 
Stability Conditions at Sea, J. Appl. Meteor. Climatol., 33(6), 757-765. 

Hurricane Helene     7 
 
University of Georgia Weather Net station located in Coffee County, Georgia, measured a wind 
gust of 80 kt at 0615 UTC that day.  Bacon County Airport in Alma, Georgia, recorded 49-kt 
sustained winds with a peak gust of 87 kt at 0703 UTC.  In addition to the winds, many areas in 
Georgia and the eastern Florida panhandle set their all-time record lowest minimum pressures6. 
Outside of the sustained hurricane-force wind area, sustained winds over 50 kt with 
hurricane-force gusts impacted large swaths of eastern Georgia as well as southern and western 
portions of South Carolina.  These winds were particularly damaging due to the large gust factor 
(1.5 to 2.0) that was observed with Helene, meaning that the ratio of the strength of the wind gusts 
to sustained winds was much larger than is typical.  A wind gust to 71 kt was recorded at Augusta, 
Georgia, Regional Airport at 1005 UTC.  Wind gusts in the 70–79 kt range were also measured 
by weather stations in Towns, Chatham, and Echols counties in Georgia.  A WeatherFlow station 
on Jekyll Island, Georgia, measured winds of 53 kt with a gust to 68 kt at 0612 UTC, and 
Savannah Light located along the Georgia coast measured sustained winds of 54 kt with a gust 
to 68 kt at 0754 UTC (Fig. 7). 
In South Carolina, the strongest observed sustained wind was 48 kt with a gust of 67 kt at 
0845 UTC in Laurens, which is located about 15–20 n mi south of the Greenville/Spartanburg 
area.  Sustained winds of 46 and 47 kt occurred along the coast in Charleston Harbor and 
Beaufort County, respectively.  Gusts to 65 kt were measured in Beaufort, South Carolina, while 
gusts as high as 63 kt were measured by weather stations farther inland in South Carolina.  It is 
important to note that many of the weather stations along Helene’s path in Georgia and South 
Carolina stopped reporting before the peak conditions occurred.  NWS Weather Forecast Offices 
conducted ground surveys of damage which suggests wind gusts likely exceeded 70 kt in a large 
area from the Florida Panhandle, through eastern Georgia, and into central and western South 
Carolina.  Tree and structural damage suggest wind gusts may have exceeded 90 kt in some of 
these areas. 
In North Carolina, while the strongest observed winds were measured at sites located 
within high topography of the southern Appalachians, strong winds also spread elsewhere across 
much of the western and central portions of the state.  Sustained wind observations of 70 and     
55 kt were recorded at Mt. Mitchell and Frying Pan Mountain, respectively, around 1200 UTC 27 
September, noting that these observations were at locations over 5000 ft in elevation.   Similar 
wind speeds likely affected many of the mountainous areas in western North Carolina.  Peak 
gusts measured at those stations were 92 and 76 kt, respectively.  A wind gust to 88 kt was 
recorded near Banner Elk.  Many mountain peaks in western North Carolina suffered extensive 
tree falls and damage due to these wind gusts.  Farther east, a wind gust of 57 kt was recorded 
at Charlotte Douglas International Airport.  Sustained winds to tropical storm force with gusts to 
52 kt were also observed in Southport near the coast.  The highest measured wind gusts in each 
state are listed in the table at the top of the next page. 
 
 
 
                                                 
6 https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/research/roth/AllTimeWhenRecordLowSLPs.gif  

Hurricane Helene     8 
 
Highest Measured Wind Gusts by State 
State 
County 
Location 
Wind Gust (kt) 
Florida 
Taylor 
Perry 
86 
Florida 
Suwannee 
Dowling Park 
86 
Florida 
Taylor 
Athena 
84 
Georgia 
Bacon 
Alma 
87 
Georgia 
Lowndes 
Lake Park 
83 
Georgia 
Coffee 
Douglas 
80 
South Carolina 
Laurens 
Laurens 
67 
South Carolina 
Beaufort 
Beaufort 
65 
South Carolina 
Anderson 
Anderson 
63 
South Carolina 
Aiken 
Aiken 
63 
South Carolina 
Pickens 
Sassafras Mountain 
63 
North Carolina 
Yancey 
Mt. Mitchell 
92 
North Carolina 
Watauga 
Banner Elk 
88 
North Carolina 
Haywood 
Frying Pan Mountain 
76 
   
   
 
Virginia, West Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, Ohio, Indiana and Illinois 
 
Helene produced sustained winds of tropical storm force with gusts over 50 kt across 
portions of east Tennessee, southwestern Virginia, southwestern West Virginia and Kentucky on 
27 September.  Virginia Highland Airport in Abingdon, Virginia, recorded sustained winds of            
34 kt with a gust to 43 kt, while Twin County Airport near Woodlawn measured a 55-kt gust.  A 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) station in Tazewell measured 36-kt winds with a gust 
to 56 kt.  In Tennessee, a gust of 52 kt was measured in the mountains of the northeastern part 
of the state near Unicoi.  In West Virginia, Huntington Tri-State Airport in Wayne County measured 
a gust of 61 kt, while a CWOP station in Monroe County measured a 50-kt gust.  In Kentucky, 
Blue Grass Airport in Lexington measured sustained winds of 39 kt with a gust of 56 kt. 
After Helene became post-tropical, gale-force winds continued across portions of Ohio, 
Indiana and Illinois through the remainder of the afternoon and evening hours of 27 September.  
In Ohio, Wilmington Air Park recorded winds of 38 kt at 1935 UTC, with a gust to 59 kt.  In Indiana, 
Indianapolis International Airport measured sustained winds of 41 kt with a gust of 59 kt.  In east-

Hurricane Helene     9 
 
central Illinois, a wind observation of 37 kt and a gust to 57 kt was measured at Coles County 
Memorial Airport around 0200 UTC 28 September.  Surface observations indicate that Helene’s 
sustained winds dropped below gale force by 0600 UTC 28 September.  See the table below for 
the highest measured wind gusts in each state related to Helene.  The Ohio, Indiana and Illinois 
observations occurred after Helene became post-tropical. 
Highest Measured Wind Gusts by State 
State 
County 
Location 
Wind Gust (kt) 
Virginia 
Grayson 
Grayson Highlands 
57 
West Virginia 
Wayne 
Huntington 
61 
Kentucky 
Fayette 
Lexington 
56 
Kentucky 
Wolfe 
Pine Ridge 
56 
Tennessee 
Unicoi 
Unicoi 
52 
Ohio 
Clinton 
Wilmington 
59 
Indiana 
Marion 
Indianapolis 
59 
Illinois 
Coles 
Mattoon 
57 
  
 
Storm Surge7 
 
Helene produced a catastrophic storm surge with significant impacts to coastal 
communities along a large portion of Florida’s Gulf Coast.  Figure 10 shows the NHC storm surge 
analysis, which represents the maximum inundation during Helene.  In the Big Bend region, storm 
surge inundation of 12 to 16 ft AGL occurred from just west of Keaton Beach through 
Steinhatchee, where small coastal communities were devastated.  Significant storm surge and 
wave impacts extended as far south as Naples, bringing dangerous storm surge to densely 
populated areas such as Tampa Bay and Sarasota.  The large size of Helene’s wind field 
exacerbated the storm surge impacts over an extensive area. 
                                                 
7 Several terms are used to describe water levels due to a storm. Storm surge is defined as the abnormal 
rise of water generated by a storm, over and above the predicted astronomical tide, and is expressed in 
terms of height above normal tide levels. Because storm surge represents the deviation from normal water 
levels, it is not referenced to a vertical datum. Storm tide is defined as the water level due to the 
combination of storm surge and the astronomical tide, and is expressed in terms of height above a vertical 
datum, i.e. the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) or Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW). 
Inundation is the total water level that occurs on normally dry ground as a result of the storm tide, and is 
expressed in terms of height above ground level. At the coast, normally dry land is roughly defined as areas 
higher than the normal high tide line, or Mean Higher High Water (MHHW). 

Hurricane Helene     10 
 
 
Figure 11 shows reflectivity data from the Tampa Bay (TBW) Doppler radar highlighting 
the storm structure near the time of landfall, overlaid with the available in situ maximum water 
level observations relative to Mean Higher High Water (MHHW, i.e. an approximation for 
inundation at the immediate coastline).  Observations in Figure 11 include the NOAA tide gauges 
and U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) water level sensors that were deployed in the days prior to 
landfall.  Note that the deployed USGS water level sensor data are wave-filtered (i.e., storm tide 
only) and measured relative to the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) and then 
converted to MHHW using the vertical transformation tool (https://vdatum.noaa.gov/) provided by 
the National Geodetic Survey (NGS) Office of Coast Survey (OCS) and Operational 
Oceanographic Products and Services (CO-OPS) of NOAA. 
 
Peak storm surge inundation levels of 12 to 16 ft AGL occurred from just west of Keaton 
Beach to south of Steinhatchee (Fig. 10) as observed by the deployed USGS water level sensor 
network in this remote area.  Three water level sensors were placed just south of Keaton Beach 
near Fish Creek; two of these sensors reported maximum water levels greater than 13.5 ft above 
MHHW (Fig. 11), while the third was mounted to a pavilion that was destroyed.  Of the reporting 
sensors, one was placed on a dock along a wave-protected waterway, while the other was located 
on the immediate coast and recorded significant waves on top of the storm tide.  Aerial imagery 
collected by the NOAA Remote Sensing Division shows that many homes were removed from 
foundations leaving only the slab and stilts where the elevated home once was.  Entire homes 
appear to have been picked up by the storm surge and moved to remote wetlands8.  On-the-
ground National Weather Service (NWS) survey crews also found significant damages in Dekle 
and Keaton Beach and identified a high confidence stilled high water mark of 13.8 ft AGL inside 
a brick building displaced from the immediate coast.  The mark was also recorded relative to 
NAVD88 (17.0 ft NAVD88) and converted to 15.3 ft above MHHW, slightly higher than the in situ 
USGS data. 
 
In Steinhatchee, a USGS streamgage located approximately two miles from the mouth of 
the Steinhatchee River reported 9.6 ft above MHHW prior to failing (not shown in Figure 11).  A 
post-storm survey by the USGS field crew found a high water mark of 14.25 ft above NAVD88 
(converts to 12.6 ft above MHHW) near the sensor, approximately 4.5 ft higher than the maximum 
water level recorded during Hurricane Idalia in August 2023.  Additionally, NWS survey crews 
found a high confidence stilled high water mark of 11.25 ft above the building slab in the second 
story of a condominium located downstream of the sensor.  This high water mark measured                
17.8 ft above NAVD88, which converts to 16.1 ft above MHHW.  The immediate coastline between 
Keaton Beach and the mouth of the Steinhatchee River likely received some of the strongest 
onshore winds and highest storm surge due to the location and structure of the eyewall, and 
based on high water marks collected, storm surge inundation up to 16 ft AGL is estimated to have 
occurred (Fig. 10). 
 
North and west of Keaton and Dekle Beach, NWS survey crews found a high water mark 
measuring 10.4 ft above the building slab in an elevated home in Spring Warrior Fish Camp (14.7 
ft NAVD88/12.9 ft MHHW).  A gradient of storm surge exists west of this location across the storm 
                                                 
8 https://storms.ngs.noaa.gov/storms/helene/index.html#17.08/29.822441/-83.592399 

Hurricane Helene     11 
 
track, however, the western portion of the Big Bend still experienced a dangerous storm surge 
due to Helene’s large wind field and the concave coastline despite mostly offshore winds.  
Maximum storm surge inundation of 6 to 9 ft AGL occurred west of Spring Warrior Creek to the 
Econfina River (Fig. 10), where the region is mostly remote evergreen forests/wetlands lacking 
structures to identify high water marks.  Storm surge inundation of 5 to 7 ft AGL occurred from 
the Econfina River westward to the Ochlockonee River, where a deployed USGS water level 
sensor at Shell Point Beach in Wakulla County measured 6.53 ft above MHHW.  The storm surge 
penetrated well inland, and NWS survey crews collected high water marks of 2 to 3 ft AGL in St. 
Marks.  Farther to the west, 3 to 5 ft AGL of storm surge inundation occurred from Ochlockonee 
River to Indian Pass (Fig. 10), where the NOS tide gauge at Apalachicola measured 4.33 ft above 
MHHW.  West of Indian Pass, water levels were elevated to 1 to 3 ft AGL, with the NOS tide 
gauges at Panama City and Panama City Beach measuring 3.02 and 3.26 ft above MHHW, 
respectively. 
 
East of the landfall location, significant storm surge impacts extended well away from the 
storm center.  Maximum storm surge inundation of 8 to 12 ft AGL occurred from south of 
Steinhatchee through Cedar Key, including Horseshoe Beach (Fig. 10).  A deployed USGS water 
level sensor at Suwannee River measured 12.18 ft above MHHW (Fig. 11).  Moreover, the NOS 
tide gauge at Cedar Key9 measured 9.30 ft above MHHW, the highest recorded water level since 
the station started reporting in 1914.  This measurement also breaks the previous record held by 
Hurricane Idalia in August 2023 (6.89 ft above MHHW).  A nearby deployed USGS water level 
sensor reported a similar water level of 8.84 ft above MHHW. 
 
Maximum storm surge inundation of 6 to 9 ft AGL occurred from south of Cedar Key to 
the Anclote River.  USGS deployed water level sensors at the mouth of the Crystal River and on 
Pine Island (Hernando County) measured 9.0 ft and 8.84 ft above MHHW, respectively (Fig. 11).  
In Pasco County, a deployed USGS water level sensor measured 7.60 ft above MHHW, and was 
a protected sensor, with minimal wave impacts.  NWS survey crews found significant impacts to 
communities along the rivers such as Homosassa Springs, Yankeetown, and Crystal River. 
Maximum storm surge inundation of 5 to 7 ft AGL occurred from the Anclote River 
southward to Longboat Key (Fig. 10).  In Pinellas County, deployed USGS water sensors located 
along exposed barrier islands measured water levels of 7.23 ft (Fred Howard Park), 6.75 ft 
(Clearwater Bach), and 7.26 ft (Madeira Beach) above MHHW, with significant waves on top.  
Nearby, the NOS tide gauge at Clearwater10 (station record back to 1973) measured 6.67 ft above 
MHHW (Fig. 11), surpassing the previous record from the Superstorm of March 1993.  Farther 
south in Manatee County, a deployed USGS water sensor located on Longboat Key measured a 
wave-filtered storm tide of 6.68 ft above MHHW.  Widespread high water marks were observed 
by NWS survey crews along this very populated region of the Florida coast, with stilled waterlines 
inside many homes. 
                                                 
9 Data courtesy of NOAA’s National Ocean Service (NOS) Center for Operational Oceanographic Products 
& Services (CO-OPS) 
10 Data courtesy of NOAA’s National Ocean Service (NOS) Center for Operational Oceanographic Products 
& Services (CO-OPS) 

Hurricane Helene     12 
 
A USGS Hydrologic Imagery Visualization and Information System (HIVIS) camera 
captured the dangerous storm surge at Madeira Beach in coastal Pinellas County.  Figure 12 
shows the evolution of beach images: A) the beach a day prior to the landfall, B), C) and D) show 
the evolution in the afternoon and evening prior to landfall.  The storm surge continued as 
darkness fell, and the last image E) shows the scene days after landfall when water levels 
subsided and the camera provided a clear picture.  Image E) highlights the significant beach 
erosion that occurred, exposing a groin that is in place to maintain and trap sand.  Significant 
erosion and sediment transfer occurred along a large portion of the Florida Peninsula, and 
communities were forced to dig roads and structures out of the sand. 
Within Tampa Bay, maximum storm surge inundation of 5 to 7 ft AGL occurred.  The NOS 
tide gauge at East Bay measured 7.2 ft above MHHW.  Elsewhere, NOS tide gauges measured 
water levels relative to MHHW of 6.83 ft at Old Port Tampa, 6.31 ft at St. Petersburg, and 6.04 ft 
at Port Manatee.  The St. Petersburg tide station has the longest record in Tampa Bay, dating 
back to 1947.  The maximum water level of 6.31 ft above MHHW during Helene surpassed the 
previous record of 3.97 ft during Hurricane Elena (1985)11.  Additionally, 4 to 6 ft AGL occurred 
from Venice to south of Englewood where a deployed USGS water level sensor measured            
5.71 ft above MHHW near the Venice Fishing Pier. 
Maximum storm surge inundation of 3 to 5 ft AGL occurred from south of Englewood to 
Bonita Beach including Charlotte Harbor.  The NOS tide gauge on the Calossahatchee River in 
Fort Myers measured 5.12 ft above MHHW.  South of Bonita Beach, maximum storm surge 
inundation of 2 to 4 ft AGL occurred in areas such as Naples, Marco Island, and Everglades City.  
The NOS tide gauge in Naples Bay measured 4.02 ft above MHHW.  In the Florida Keys 1 to 2 ft 
of storm surge inundation occurred as NOS tide gauges at Key West and Vaca Key reported 1.57 
and 1.40 ft above MHHW, respectively. 
Elsewhere, Helene produced minor elevated water levels along the U.S. East Coast, 
where the NOS tide gauges at Fort Pulaski, Georgia and Charleston, South Carolina, reported 
water levels of 2.34 and 2.26 ft above MHHW, respectively.  In Mexico, Helene produced water 
levels of 1 to 2 ft above normal tides along the east coast of the Yucatan Peninsula as supported 
by the tide gauge measurements at Isla Mujeres. 
 
Rainfall and Flooding 
 
United States 
Helene, combined with its interaction with the baroclinic cut-off low over the southeastern 
United States, produced a prolonged period of heavy rainfall from 25–27 September, spanning 
from the Florida Panhandle northward into the southern Appalachians, where historic rainfall 
totals resulted in catastrophic flooding and widespread landslides.  The large-scale weather 
                                                 
11 Data courtesy of NOAA’s National Ocean Service (NOS) Center for Operational Oceanographic Products 
& Services (CO-OPS) 

Hurricane Helene     13 
 
pattern over the central to eastern United States favored heavy rainfall well ahead of Helene (Fig. 
13), leading to a predecessor rain event (PRE)12 that enhanced rainfall totals and exacerbated 
flooding impacts.  In the lower levels of the atmosphere, a stationary front was analyzed from the 
central Gulf Coast northward towards the Tennessee Valley and southern Appalachians from 25–
27 September (Fig. 13 middle panels).  Strong low-level convergence along and east of the front 
was enhanced across the southern Appalachians where southeasterly winds resulted in additional 
orographically driven upward vertical motion.  These factors contributed to a favorable setup for 
heavy rainfall well ahead of the center of Helene.  The rainfall from the PRE resulted in saturated 
soil and increased stream and river levels in advance of the arrival of the core of Helene. 
Rainfall amounts of 20 to 30 inches occurred over a large area within the mountainous 
region of western North Carolina.  Pockets of rainfall amounts of 10 to 15 inches occurred over a 
larger area stretching from southwestern Virginia to northwestern South Carolina, as well as 
portions of Georgia and Florida.  Widespread rainfall totals of 5 to 10 inches stretched from 
portions of the Florida Panhandle northward across Georgia and into the western Carolinas and 
southwestern Virginia (Fig. 14).  The rainfall maximum over Florida into southern Georgia was 
west of Helene’s track due to interactions with a surface front and a mid- and upper-level low 
pressure area.  The maximum accumulations shifted along and east of track into the southern 
Appalachians, where orographic effects were maximized.  As Helene continued to move inland 
and became post-tropical, rainfall totals of 3 to 6 inches were observed across portions of the 
Tennessee and Ohio Valleys. 
 
The highest observed rainfall total was in Busick, North Carolina, where 30.78 inches was 
recorded from 1200 UTC 25 September to 1200 UTC 28 September.  An NWS Cooperative 
Observer Program (COOP) observer near Celo, North Carolina measured 26.65 inches of rain.  
Both of those sites are located in Yancey County.  Farther south, a rainfall total of 29.98 inches 
was measured in Transylvania County, a short distance north of the South Carolina border.  A 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) site at Sunfish Mountain in Greenville 
County, South Carolina, measured 21.66 inches of rain.  Available observations indicate that 
rainfall amounts in excess of 18 inches occurred across portions of Transylvania, Henderson, 
Buncombe, Polk, McDowell, Yancey, Mitchell, Burke, Avery and Watauga Counties in North 
Carolina, as well as in northern Pickens and northern Greenville Counties in South Carolina.  The 
NOAA National Water Center (NWC) produced a map of 3-day Annual Exceedance Probabilities 
which details just how rare some of these rainfall totals were (Fig. 15).  A large area stretching 
from northwestern South Carolina into western North Carolina and southwestern Virginia received 
3-day rainfall totals that had less than a 1 in 1000 (<0.1%) chance of occurring in any given year.   
A few other notable rainfall maxima occurred with Helene.  Amounts as high as 12 to 13 
inches were observed within the Atlanta metro area, which has just a 0.2% to 0.5% chance of 
occurring in any given year.  A swath of around 12 to 13 inches also fell across east-central 
Georgia to just north of Augusta.  Over the Florida Panhandle, a maximum of 14.39 inches fell in 
Sumatra to the west of Tallahassee.  The highest rainfall total observed in each state affected are 
listed in the table at the top of the next page. 
                                                 
12 Galarneau, T. J., L. F. Bosart, and R. S. Schumacher, 2010: Predecessor Rain Events ahead of Tropical 
Cyclones.  Mon. Wea. Rev., 138, 3272-3297, https://doi.org/10.1175/2010MWR3243.1  

Hurricane Helene     14 
 
Highest Rainfall Totals by State 
State 
County 
Location 
Rainfall (inches) 
North Carolina 
Yancey 
Busick 
30.78 
South Carolina 
Greenville 
Sunfish Mountain 
21.66 
Georgia 
Rabun 
3.5 mi NE Dillard 
14.64 
Florida 
Liberty 
Sumatra 
14.39 
Tennessee 
Johnson 
Trade 
10.98 
Virginia 
Grayson 
5.3 mi SW Galax 
10.89 
Ohio 
Scioto 
Rosemount 
8.51 
Alabama 
Houston 
1.6 mi NNE Pansey 
8.50 
Kentucky 
Henderson 
Henderson 
7.67 
Illinois 
Massac 
Ft. Massac St. Park 
7.47 
West Virginia 
Mercer 
Bluefield 
6.11 
Indiana 
Clark 
2.6 mi E Henryville 
5.69 
 
 
A total of 34 flash flood emergencies were issued in association with Helene (Fig. 16).  
Two were issued around the Atlanta metro area, with the remaining 32 across the southern 
Appalachians, with a maximum density over western North Carolina.  An initial flash flood 
emergency was issued at 2154 UTC 26 September relating to a dam release in the Charlotte, 
North Carolina area, however the first weather-driven flash flood emergency was issued at 0739 
UTC 27 September as the core of Helene approached the western Carolinas.  The southern 
Appalachians were primed for flooding by the rainfall associated with the PRE ahead of Helene 
on 25-26 September.  Thus, when heavy rainfall rates as high as 2 to 3 inches per hour associated 
with the core of Helene moved over these areas on the morning of 27 September, catastrophic 
flash flooding occurred, triggering numerous flash flood emergencies.  Widespread landslides 
also occurred, with the USGS documenting over 2,000 landslides, with the majority located over 
western North Carolina (Fig. 17). 
 
Preliminary estimates are that at least 63 stream and river gauges exceeded their record 
flood levels during Helene, from northwestern South Carolina into southwestern North Carolina, 
northeastern Tennessee and southwestern Virginia (Fig. 18).  At least 22 of these gauges had a 
period of record of 50 or more years, with at least 14 having 100 years of records.  The French 
Broad River at Asheville, North Carolina, is a notable record, as the height of 24.8 ft exceeds a 
record of 23.1 ft from 1916.  The hydrograph shows a steady rise to minor flood stage during the 
night of 25 September into the next day (Fig. 19).  However, as the rainfall intensity and coverage 

Hurricane Helene     15 
 
expanded with the approach of Helene’s core, river levels rapidly rose from 10 ft at 2145 UTC 26 
September, to major flood stage of 18 ft around 1600 UTC 27 September, before peaking at 
record levels around 2200 UTC that day.  This is further evidence of how the rainfall in the days 
ahead of Helene’s passage helped set the stage for the catastrophic flooding impacts brought on 
by the core of Helene.  The Swannanoa River at Biltmore, North Carolina, reached a peak stage 
of 27.33 ft, far surpassing its previous record of 20.7 ft also set in 1916 (Fig. 20). 
The highest rainfall total measurement in select counties in the state of North Carolina is 
listed below, along with any available record river crests in that county. 
Highest Rainfall and Record River Crests by North Carolina County 
County 
Location of Rainfall 
Measurement 
Rainfall 
(inches) 
Record River Crests 
Yancey 
Busick 
30.78 
South Toe River near Celo (broke 
record by 8.7 ft - records back to 1957) 
Transylvania 
Connestee Falls 
29.98 
French Broad River at Blantyre (broke 
record by 1.3 ft - records back to 1901) 
Mitchell 
7 mi SW Spruce Pine 
23.31 
Cane Creek at Bakersville (broke record 
by 2.2 ft - records back to 2009) 
Avery 
Banner Elk 
22.85 
N/A 
Henderson 
5 mi SW Hendersonville 
21.70 
Mills River near Mills River (broke 
record by 2.0 ft - records back to 1928); 
French Broad River near Fletcher 
(broke record by 10.5 ft - records back 
to 2002); Bat Fork Creek (broke record 
by 4.7 ft - records back to 2009) 
McDowell 
4 mi NW Old Fort 
21.68 
Catawba River near Pleasant Gardens 
(broke record by 4.3 ft - records back to 
1981); NF Catawba River above US 
221 (broke record by 3.6 ft - records 
back to 2009) 
Watauga 
Foscoe 
21.60 
N/A 
Buncombe 
6 mi SE Black Mountain 
21.07 
Swannanoa River at Biltmore (broke 
record by 6.6 ft - records back to 1901); 
French Broad River at Asheville (broke 
record by 1.7 ft - records back to 1901); 
Ivy River near Barnardsville (broke 
record by 8.7 ft - records back to 2009) 
Polk 
Saluda 
18.24 
N/A 

Hurricane Helene     16 
 
Highest Rainfall and Record River Crests by North Carolina County 
County 
Location of Rainfall 
Measurement 
Rainfall 
(inches) 
Record River Crests 
Alleghany 
4 mi SSW Sparta 
17.37 
N/A 
Ashe 
9 mi SSE West Jefferson 
17.08 
N/A 
Jackson 
3 mi NE Cashiers 
15.97 
Tuckasegee River at Barker’s Creek 
(broke record by 1.1 ft - records back to 
2004) 
 
Nicaragua, Honduras, Mexico and Cuba 
From 21–24 September, heavy rainfall occurred across portions of Nicaragua and 
Honduras from Helene’s precursor disturbance.  After the system became a tropical cyclone, 
heavy rainfall occurred across portions of western Cuba as well as the Mexican states of Quintana 
Roo and Yucatan.  In Cuba, 8.60 inches (218.4 mm) of rain was measured in Herradura, Pinar 
del Rio.  In Mexico, the highest rainfall measurement occurred in Cancun, where 9.65 inches 
(245.2 mm) of rain fell over the 2-day period of 24–25 September.  A map of the rainfall in Mexico 
is shown in Figure 21.  At the time of this writing, no rainfall data has been received from 
Nicaragua. 
 
Tornadoes 
 
Helene produced 33 tornadoes in the United States while it was a tropical cyclone on 26–
27 September, and 6 additional tornadoes after it became post-tropical.  There were a few 
tornadoes in the southeastern United States on 25 September, but they were not associated with 
the circulation of Helene.  Of the 33 tornadoes that Helene produced while it was a tropical 
cyclone, 3 occurred in Florida, 3 in Georgia, 21 in South Carolina and 6 in North Carolina.  These 
included 1 EF-3 tornado, with the remaining tornadoes rated EF-0 and EF-1.  Of the 6 tornadoes 
that were observed after Helene became post-tropical, 3 were in North Carolina and 3 occurred 
in Virginia.  These included 1 EF-2 tornado, and the rest were rated EF-1.  Figure 22 shows the 
locations of all 39 tornadoes associated with Helene. 
 
One of Helene’s tornadoes was deadly.  Two people lost their lives inside a mobile home 
that was hit by an EF-1 tornado in Wheeler County, Georgia, during the evening of 26 September.  
This tornado was briefly on the ground, with a documented path length of only 0.6 n mi.  In South 
Carolina, a long-track EF-1 tornado occurred early on 27 September just after midnight local time, 
traveling through eastern Orangeburg and western Calhoun Counties.  Although it only produced 
tree damage without much damage to structures, the tornado is notable for its path length of 29 
n mi, its fast average forward speed of 49 kt, and its 800-yard width.  Earlier on 26 September, 
another EF-1 tornado in Cordova, South Carolina is now the widest documented tornado (1,100 
yards) in the entire U.S. tropical cyclone tornado database, which goes back to 1995.  Another 

Hurricane Helene     17 
 
EF-1 tornado in Sumter County, South Carolina, that occurred around 0932 UTC 27 September 
had a path width of about 1,000 yards.  In North Carolina, one EF-3 tornado occurred around 
1730 UTC 27 September in Nash County.  
After Helene became post-tropical, an EF-1 tornado occurred in Rockingham County, 
North Carolina and an EF-2 tornado occurred in Pittsylvania County, Virginia.  
 
CASUALTY AND DAMAGE STATISTICS 
 
Reports from official state government sources as well as media reports indicate that 
Helene is responsible for at least 175 direct13 deaths in the United States.  Storm surge caused 
14 of those fatalities - all in Florida.  Helene’s winds are responsible for 65 of the direct deaths - 
the most direct wind deaths from any tropical cyclone in the continental United States going back 
to at least 196314, according to data from Rappaport (2014) that covered the 1963–2012 period, 
and reports on U.S. hurricanes since that time available at NHC.  Of the 65 direct wind fatalities, 
61 were caused by falling trees during the storm.  A breakdown of direct wind fatalities by state 
are as follows: Georgia (26), South Carolina (24), North Carolina (8), Florida (4), Virginia (2) and 
Indiana (1).  Freshwater flooding, which includes landslides and debris flows, was responsible for 
at least 94 of the direct deaths: 77 in North Carolina, 15 in Tennessee and 2 in South Carolina.  
There were also 2 deaths caused by a tornado in Georgia that was associated with Helene, 
mentioned above.  As of this writing there are at least 5 individuals listed as missing from western 
North Carolina and eastern Tennessee.  A breakdown of direct deaths sorted by type and state 
is listed in the table below. 
Direct Deaths by State and Type 
State 
Wind 
Storm 
Surge 
Freshwater 
Flooding 
Tornado 
TOTAL 
Florida 
4 
14 
 
 
18 
Georgia 
26 
 
 
2 
28 
South Carolina 
24 
 
2 
 
26 
North Carolina 
8 
 
77 
 
85 
                                                 
13 Deaths occurring as a direct result of the forces of the tropical cyclone are referred to as “direct” deaths. 
These would include those persons who drowned in storm surge, rough seas, rip currents, and freshwater 
floods. Direct deaths also include casualties resulting from lightning and wind-related events (e.g., 
collapsing structures). Deaths occurring from such factors as heart attacks, house fires, electrocutions from 
downed powerlines, vehicle accidents on wet roads, etc., are considered “indirect” deaths. 
14 Rappaport, E. N. 2014: Fatalities in the United States from Atlantic Tropical Cyclones. Bull. Amer. Meteor. 
Soc., 95, 341-346. 

Hurricane Helene     18 
 
Direct Deaths by State and Type 
State 
Wind 
Storm 
Surge 
Freshwater 
Flooding 
Tornado 
TOTAL 
Tennessee 
 
 
15 
 
15 
Virginia 
2 
 
 
 
2 
Indiana 
1 
 
 
 
1 
TOTAL 
65 
14 
94 
2 
175 
 
At least 72 indirect fatalities are linked to Helene: 23 in South Carolina, 22 in North 
Carolina, 16 in Florida, 9 in Georgia, 1 in Tennessee and 1 in Virginia.  Many of the indirect 
fatalities were from medical issues, heart attacks, car accidents and incidents during post-storm 
cleanup.  In addition to the 175 direct and 72 indirect fatalities, 3 people died of unknown causes 
related to Helene, which brings the total number of Helene-related fatalities in the United States 
to 250.  Figure 23 shows a map depicting the locations of all known fatalities associated with 
Helene.  A breakdown of direct fatalities by type is depicted in Figure 24.  This figure shows that 
all the direct deaths occurred to the right of the path of Helene’s center.  The freshwater flooding 
fatalities were clustered in western North Carolina, eastern Tennessee and northwestern South 
Carolina.  The wind fatalities were more spread out, with the largest number occurring in Georgia 
and South Carolina within 150 n mi to the right of the path of Helene’s center.  A breakdown of 
the total deaths by state is shown in the table below. 
Total Deaths by State 
State 
Direct Deaths 
Indirect Deaths 
Unknown 
TOTAL 
Florida 
18 
16 
 
34 
Georgia 
28 
9 
 
37 
South Carolina 
26 
23 
1 
50 
North Carolina 
85 
22 
 
107 
Tennessee 
15 
1 
2 
18 
Virginia 
2 
1 
 
3 
Indiana 
1 
 
 
1 
Total 
175 
72 
3 
250 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     19 
 
Across the Southeast U.S., Helene caused at least 117 injuries, and at least 2700 people 
were rescued from high water.  About half of the rescues occurred due to storm surge along the 
west coast of Florida, and more than 1000 were due to freshwater flooding in western North 
Carolina.  
According to the NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI)15, Helene 
caused an estimated $78.7 billion in damage in the United States.  This makes Helene the 7th 
costliest U.S. hurricane (adjusted to 2024 values)16 behind Katrina, Harvey, Ian, Maria, Sandy, 
and Ida.  Most of this damage occurred in Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, 
eastern Tennessee and southwestern Virginia. 
An estimated 7.4 million customers17 (about 16.2 million people) lost power in the United 
States due to Helene between 26–28 September.  The maximum outage count at any given 
moment in time was about 4.79 million customers (Fig. 25).  Florida experienced the largest loss 
of power with ~1.69 million customers losing power.  South Carolina, Georgia and North Carolina 
experienced an estimated 1.59 million, 1.28 million and 1.18 million outages, respectively. 
More detailed information about the impacts and damage for each region affected by 
Helene are given below.  Maps showing U.S. counties by state can be found at: 
https://www.census.gov/geographies/reference-maps/2000/geo/state-county-outline-2000.html 
 
Florida 
 
Helene produced significant storm surge damage along Florida’s Gulf Coast from Taylor 
County southward to Collier County.  Near where the landfall occurred, Helene’s peak storm 
surge, estimated at 12–16 ft AGL, destroyed about 80 percent of the buildings in Keaton Beach 
and Steinhatchee (Fig. 26).  In Horseshoe Beach, storm surge destroyed roughly 70 percent of 
the town.  Notably, high evacuation rates in those areas resulted in no reported storm surge 
deaths.  In coastal Levy County, the towns of Cedar Key and Yankeetown were devastated by 
record-breaking storm surge.  Media reports18 indicate that about 25 percent of the homes in 
Cedar Key were destroyed, along with numerous businesses.  In Yankeetown, 20 people were 
rescued from their rooftops.  In Citrus County, storm surge inundated at least 300 homes in Crystal 
River and Homosassa Springs with water up to 5 ft deep inside homes, and crews rescued 85 
people and pets from the floodwaters. 
In Hernando County, at least 500 homes suffered major damage, mostly from storm surge 
flooding along the barrier islands and immediate coast, and 18 people were rescued from the 
floodwaters.  In Pasco County, first responders had to make 200 high water rescues from coastal 
areas due to storm surge, and at least 9,900 structures suffered damage, the majority of which 
were due to storm surge flooding in coastal parts of the county.  In Pinellas County, 12 people 
drowned in the surge.  Media reports indicate that 9 of these 12 victims were located on the barrier 
                                                 
15 https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/billions/events  
16 https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/billions/dcmi.pdf 
17 Estimate is based on PowerOutage.US storm summary. https://poweroutage.us/about/majorevents  
18 
https://www.palmbeachpost.com/story/news/2024/09/29/reality-of-hurricanes-devastation-setting-in-
along-with-relief/75430622007/  

Hurricane Helene     20 
 
islands on Pinellas County’s west coast from St. Pete Beach to Indian Rocks Beach, 2 were in 
St. Petersburg and 1 was in Dunedin.  Two storm-surge related fatalities were reported in 
Hillsborough County.  Helene destroyed at least 419 homes in Pinellas and Hillsborough Counties 
combined, and at least 18,512 structures suffered major damage, with at least 13,909 others 
reporting minor or moderate damage.   
 
In Manatee County, Anna Maria Island was heavily damaged by storm surge.  Media 
reports and estimates from emergency managers indicate that 90 to 95 percent of the structures 
on Bradenton Beach were destroyed by Helene’s storm surge.  At least 594 structures were 
destroyed in mainland Manatee County.  An additional 1,699 homes and commercial buildings 
reported major damage with 2,177 more reporting minor or moderate damage.  Helene’s storm 
surge damaged numerous structures in Sarasota County’s coastal areas, where dozens of 
rescues took place during the storm.  In Charlotte County, 8 structures were destroyed, 1,900 
others had major damage and 750 others had minor or moderate damage, and most of this was 
due to storm surge.  In Ft. Myers, at least 102 structures were damaged, with 52 of these reporting 
major damage.  To the left of Helene’s track, in Wakulla, Franklin and Gulf Counties, storm surge, 
freshwater flooding and wind caused minor to moderate structural damage. 
 
Helene’s winds caused extensive damage across Taylor, Dixie, Lafayette, Suwannee, 
Hamilton and Madison Counties including the cities of Perry, Cross City, Mayo, Live Oak, Jasper, 
and Madison.  Much of this area experienced the eastern eyewall of Helene, where the majority 
of structures suffered damage and numerous trees and powerlines were down, according to the 
emergency managers of those counties.  The strong winds extended to Atlantic coastal areas of 
northeastern Florida, and one person was killed in Duval County by a falling tree.  At least one 
home in Liberty County (where the highest rainfall total in Florida was recorded) had damage due 
to freshwater flooding, and many roads were flooded. 
 
Georgia 
 
Helene produced at least $5.5 billion in agricultural and timber losses in Georgia19, most 
of which was wind damage across southern and eastern portions of the state.  The most 
significant wind damage occurred over the counties along and to the east of the path of Helene’s 
center including Lowndes, Echols, Lanier, Clinch, Ware, Atkinson, Coffee, Bacon, Jeff Davis, 
Telfair, Appling, Toombs, Montgomery, Wheeler, Treutlen, Laurens, Johnson and Washington.  
Within the aforementioned counties, Helene’s winds were directly responsible for 12 fatalities, 
while a tornado in Wheeler County killed two additional people.  At least 82 injuries were reported 
there (77 of those occurred in Lowndes County - in and around the city of Valdosta - mainly from 
trees falling on homes) (Fig. 27).  Hundreds of homes and buildings were destroyed, with tens of 
thousands of others damaged.  In Coffee County, where gusts to 80 kt were recorded, 80-85% of 
the homes in the county were damaged.  In Echols County, many roofs were damaged by both 
high winds and fallen trees, and about 1,000 power poles were snapped.  In Telfair County, large 
trees and powerlines were down on most streets.  In Toombs County, the town of Lyons was 
heavily damaged. 
                                                 
19 https://extension.uga.edu/topic-areas/timely-topics/helene-report.html  

Hurricane Helene     21 
 
Significant wind damage was also reported in other nearby southern Georgia counties.  
Candler County had widespread downed trees and powerlines, and 100% of the county was 
without power.  In Cook County, many trees fell on homes and businesses, with many roads 
blocked.  In Jefferson County, 24 homes were destroyed and $75 million worth of timber was lost, 
while power was knocked out to the entire county.  In Pierce County, a firefighter was killed in the 
line of duty when a tree fell onto his truck while responding to calls during Helene.  Numerous 
trees fell on residences in Pierce County.  Wayne County reported widespread trees and 
powerlines down. 
Hurricane-force wind gusts extended eastward to the coast of Georgia, causing numerous 
injuries and damaging well over a thousand homes/structures in Georgia’s six coastal counties 
including Glynn and Chatham, home to the cities of Brunswick and Savannah, respectively.  In 
the six coastal counties, 223 structures sustained major damage with an additional 19 
homes/buildings destroyed. 
Widespread hurricane-force wind gusts on the east side of Helene associated with the 
decaying eyewall moved northward into Richmond, McDuffie and Columbia Counties, in the 
greater Augusta area.  In that area, Helene’s winds were responsible for killing 11 people - all 
from trees falling onto homes.  At least 362 homes/buildings were destroyed in this three-county 
area, while 3,000 others suffered major damage, and 3,500 others experienced minor to moderate 
damage. 
 
The greater Atlanta area experienced serious freshwater flooding issues during the 
predawn and early morning hours of 27 September.  Media sources and reports from emergency 
managers indicate that floodwaters entered at least 200 homes/buildings in the greater Atlanta 
area along with numerous vehicles.  Dozens of people were rescued from the floodwaters by first 
responders.  The National Weather Service issued two flash flood emergencies along with several 
other flash flood warnings, as shown in Figure 16.  No casualties were reported in the greater 
Atlanta area. 
 
South Carolina 
 
In South Carolina, the mountainous regions in the northwest part of the state and the 
western portion of the Piedmont suffered the most damage, due to the widespread hurricane-
force and near-hurricane-force wind gusts and scattered areas that experienced major flooding.  
Areas along and to the northwest of a line from Charlotte, North Carolina to Columbia, South 
Carolina through Aiken, South Carolina to Augusta, Georgia suffered significant damage from 
wind, as well as flash flooding and river flooding.  The South Carolina Forestry Commission 
reported total timber damage of $83 million across a 20-county area, primarily in western and 
northwestern parts of the state. 
In Greenville County, home to a population of over half a million people, 50 
homes/buildings were destroyed, 650 suffered major damage and at least 1,350 others incurred 
minor to moderate damage.  The majority of this damage was due to falling trees caused by strong 
wind gusts.  There were four direct wind deaths in the county, all from falling trees.  Flood damage 
to homes occurred as well, especially along the Saluda River, where the nearest river gauge site 
above Old Easley Road exceeded its all-time record river level.  The city of Spartanburg also 

Hurricane Helene     22 
 
reported significant damage with 170 structures suffering major damage and an additional 269 
structures with minor to moderate damage.  The majority of these structures were damaged due 
to falling trees, but 35 were due to flooding.  There were five direct deaths in Spartanburg County 
- four due to the wind knocking down trees and one due to freshwater flooding. 
In Anderson County, hurricane-force wind gusts produced wind damage and knocked 
down trees (Fig. 28).  In that county, 53 structures were destroyed, 642 had major damage, and 
an additional 1,297 had minor or moderate damage.  While most of the damage was from strong 
wind gusts knocking down trees, multiple homes and structures were inundated with water along 
the Saluda River from Powdersville to Pelzer.  There were 3 direct deaths in Anderson County - 
two due to the wind knocking down trees onto homes and one due to freshwater flooding in a 
vehicle.  Farther south, in Laurens, Greenwood, Newberry and Saluda Counties, a large number 
of structures were damaged, and 9 people were killed by falling trees.  Along the Georgia border 
in Aiken and Edgefield Counties, 46 homes/buildings were destroyed, 391 suffered major 
damage, and an additional 1,126 structures incurred minor or moderate damage.  Four direct 
wind deaths occurred in Aiken County due to falling trees.  In Lexington and Richland Counties, 
which includes the Columbia area, damage was significant, but not quite as widespread as farther 
upstate.  In these two counties combined, 21 structures were destroyed, 112 others suffered 
major damage, and at least 161 other homes/buildings reported minor to moderate damage due 
to a combination of wind and freshwater flood damage.  One person in Richland County was killed 
by a falling tree. 
Strong winds also produced damage along coastal areas from Charleston to the Georgia 
border, and over the southern inland areas west of Charleston to the Georgia border.  Additionally, 
21 tornadoes were reported across the state over a wide area, stretching from near Hilton Head 
northward to near Sumter.  These tornadoes caused significant tree damage.  
 
North Carolina and eastern Tennessee 
 
Rainfall associated with Helene and its predecessor rain event resulted in catastrophic 
flooding impacts across western North Carolina and eastern Tennessee, particularly in the 
mountainous regions, where landslides and debris flows destroyed numerous homes, roads, 
bridges, electrical infrastructure and water treatment plants.  Helene is the most devastating 
natural disaster in western North Carolina’s history.  In addition to the 85 direct and 22 indirect 
fatalities in North Carolina, at least 21 injuries were reported in the state, and the Coast Guard 
rescued at least 865 people in western North Carolina, mostly from flood-waters.  Media reports 
indicate that the storm damaged or destroyed more than 125,000 housing units across western 
North Carolina.  The North Carolina Forest Service estimated 822,000 acres of damaged 
timberland, which resulted in $214 million in damages to North Carolina forests.  In extreme 
examples, trees on entire mountainsides were blown down in the higher elevations of North 
Carolina.  Many people in remote areas were cut off due to landslides, fallen trees and debris 
flows, which destroyed numerous roads and bridges in many smaller mountain communities.  
Many residents did not have access to clean water or electricity for a long period of time after 
Helene’s passage. 

Hurricane Helene     23 
 
In Buncombe County, flash flooding, river flooding and landslides were directly responsible 
for at least 36 deaths.  Landslides killed 15 people in the Fairview area.  In the towns of 
Swannanoa and Black Mountain, at least 9 people drowned in the Swannanoa River’s 
floodwaters, where multiple homes, businesses and roads were destroyed.  At least 6 of the 
deaths occurred in the city of Asheville, and the exact locations of the other 6 deaths are unknown.  
More than 490 water rescues were performed across the county.  Historic river flooding was 
particularly damaging to the lower-lying areas of Asheville along the French Broad and 
Swannanoa Rivers (Fig. 29).  In the historic Biltmore Village, located on the south bank of the 
intersection of where the Swannanoa River flows into the French Broad River, lower-lying 
buildings were severely inundated with deep water or swept away.  Asheville’s historic River Arts 
district, located 1 n mi north of the Biltmore Estate along the French Broad River, was largely 
destroyed (Fig. 30).  In addition, significant flooding was reported along the Ivy River in 
Barnardsville, where multiple structures were inundated.  In the southeast part of the county, 
flooding from the Broad River impacted several structures and multiple roads.  At least 300 
landslides occurred in the county.  Helene caused extensive damage to Asheville’s water 
treatment infrastructure, and clean water was not restored to the city until 18 November, 53 days 
after Helene passed through the area.  Power was restored to more than half of Asheville’s 
customers within a week, although media reports indicate that 25,000 Asheville customers were 
still without power two weeks after Helene.  Tens of thousands of trees were knocked down across 
the county, with hundreds down on homes due to a combination of strong wind gusts and debris 
flows.  Media reports indicate that more than 560 structures were destroyed and at least 901 
structures sustained major damage in the county, with an additional 8,920 homes/buildings 
incurring minor or moderate damage. 
Another area that was devastated was the Chimney Rock and Lake Lure area of 
Rutherford County, where numerous landslides and debris flows destroyed the majority of 
buildings, homes and businesses.  In addition to the landslides, catastrophic flash flooding along 
the Broad River was responsible for portions of the damage that occurred in these communities.  
This was the highest ever crest of the Broad River in this area by several feet and the most severe 
flooding in recorded history for the area.  Bridges were wiped out and roads were completely 
washed away, essentially cutting off communities.  Much of the debris from these communities 
piled into the waters of Lake Lure (Fig. 31).  Tens of thousands of trees are estimated (by county 
emergency managers and the NWS) to have fallen due to a combination of strong wind gusts and 
debris flows.  Three direct deaths occurred - two from falling trees due to wind and one from 
freshwater flooding.  Numerous water rescues were reported, with hundreds of homes and 
buildings destroyed. 
More than 20 inches of rain was reported in portions of Henderson County.  Catastrophic 
flash flooding occurred along the Rocky Broad River and its tributary Reedy Patch Creek, and 
numerous homes were swept away along both streams.  Major flooding also occurred along Mud 
Creek and Bat Fork, with numerous businesses and other structures inundated in the 
Hendersonville area (Fig. 32).  Eight direct deaths occurred in Henderson County (five in 
Hendersonville from freshwater flooding and three from landslides in the Bat Cave area), along 

Hurricane Helene     24 
 
with numerous water rescues.  According to media reports and county officials20, roughly 300 
homes/buildings in the county were destroyed, with about 1,400 others incurring major damage.  
At least 86 landslides were documented in the county, and numerous roads were damaged or 
washed out.  Hundreds of trees were down on homes due to strong wind gusts.  Impacts in 
Transylvania County were also significant.  Dozens of homes were damaged in Rosman with 
some structures destroyed after being inundated with several feet of water from the French Broad 
River.  Flooding also occurred along the Davidson River area of Pisgah National Forest, where 
several water rescues occurred. 
 
Madison and Yancey Counties, located along the Tennessee border, experienced 
devastating damage from Helene.  In Madison County, aerial drone footage shows floodwaters 
from the French Broad River inundating the majority of buildings in Downtown Marshall (Fig. 33).  
Farther downstream, the town of Hot Springs was also devastated, where floodwaters from the 
river destroyed numerous businesses and critical infrastructure.  Water, sewer, electricity and 
communication systems were heavily impacted.  The French Broad River at Hot Springs set a 
record crest, surpassing the level from the Great Flood of 1916 by 0.3 ft.  Four people died in 
Madison County, along with numerous water rescues reported.  Hundreds of homes and buildings 
were either destroyed or sustained major damage.  In Yancey County, which includes Busick 
where the largest storm-total rainfall occurred, rivers and their tributaries inundated hundreds of 
homes, with some structures completely destroyed.  More than 200 landslides occurred, 
damaging or destroying numerous roads (Fig. 34).  Media sources21 indicate that about 1,400 
homes/buildings were destroyed in the county while 2,300 others were severely damaged, with 
an additional 2,000 structures incurring minor to moderate damage.  The Coast Guard performed 
numerous water rescues.  There were ten direct fatalities in Yancey County, eight from flooding, 
one in a landslide, and one in a vehicle. 
 
Farther north along the Tennessee border, Mitchell, Avery and Watauga Counties are 
home to the cities of Spruce Pine, Bakersville, Banner Elk, Newland and Boone.  Some rivers, 
creeks and streams in Mitchell County rose to their highest levels in recorded history, and 
numerous water rescues took place.  The highest reported rainfall in the county was 23.31 inches.  
Over 200 landslides were documented in the southern part of Mitchell County, near the McDowell 
County line.  Very strong wind gusts knocked down an estimated 100,000 trees in Mitchell County.  
Several bridges and roads were completely wiped out and washed away, cutting off several small 
communities from the outside world.  One direct death in Mitchell County was due to drowning 
from the floodwaters of the North Toe River.  In Avery County, where up to 22.85 inches of rain 
was recorded, numerous homes and businesses in Downtown Newland were inundated and 
damaged by floodwaters from the North Toe River, with several structures swept away.  Dozens 
of landslides occurred in this area, damaging or destroying multiple structures and killing 3 people.  
Two additional fatalities in Avery County are attributed to flooding.  In Watauga County, flash 
flooding occurred in Downtown Boone, where water was deep enough to enter some homes and 
businesses.  Several streets in Beech Mountain were washed out and destroyed by floodwaters.  
                                                 
20 https://www.hendersonvillelightning.com/news/14600-for-homeless-helene-victims-fema-housing-lags-
behind-
demand.html#:~:text=Left%20in%20Helene's%20wake%20after,businesses%20that%20escaped%20stor
m%20damage.  
21 
https://wlos.com/news/local/we-are-yancey-strong-over-7700-structures-yancey-county-affected-
hurricane-helene-damaged-destroyed-storm  

Hurricane Helene     25 
 
Multiple vehicles became stranded on the flooded roads (Fig. 35).  There were at least 220 
rescues in Watauga County (mostly in vehicles).  A total of 118 buildings were destroyed, 479 
with major damage and 538 with minor or moderate damage.  Among the damaged buildings 
include several at Appalachian State University due to flooding from Boone Creek, which 
inundated some of the classroom buildings. 
 
In McDowell, Burke, Caldwell and Cleveland Counties major flooding impacts occurred 
and damaging wind gusts knocked down many trees.  In the western half of McDowell County, 
rainfall amounts of 15–22 inches fell, and hundreds of landslides were documented.  The Catawba 
River near Pleasant Gardens surpassed its all-time record river level by more than 4 ft.  Dozens 
of structures were damaged or destroyed in the Old Fort area along with some being swept away, 
and there was one reported fatality.  Tens of thousands of trees are estimated to have fallen in 
McDowell County, with hundreds down on homes, vehicles and powerlines.  In Burke County, 
major flooding occurred along the Catawba River and its numerous tributaries (with some of the 
gauge sites recording record flooding), inundating numerous homes (with some swept away) and 
prompting swift water rescues.  Landslides washed out many roads, and nearly the entire county 
was left without power or water after the storm.  In Caldwell County, hundreds of structures and 
roads were inundated and damaged or destroyed, several landslides occurred, major flash 
flooding and river flooding occurred, and several homes had roof damage due to strong wind 
gusts.  In Cleveland County, numerous homes were inundated and damaged near Abes Mountain 
Road.  Widespread trees and powerlines were down across the county, including several on 
houses and vehicles in the Shelby area, and two people were killed by falling trees during the 
storm while they were outside. 
To the west of Asheville, significant damage occurred in Haywood County.  Floodwaters 
from the East Fork of the Pigeon River swept through the Cruso community, causing significant 
damage to structures, vehicles, and road infrastructure.  Record catastrophic flooding occurred 
on the Pigeon River from Canton and Clyde downstream to the Tennessee border.  Numerous 
buildings in Canton were inundated.  Around 600 homes were impacted by flooding in the county, 
with a couple of hundred of those destroyed.  Numerous vehicles were swept away or damaged, 
and hundreds of people were rescued.  Many roads and bridges were damaged or destroyed.  
This includes part of Interstate 40 along the North Carolina/Tennessee border, which was washed 
out and destroyed by overflowing waters from the Pigeon River, which parallels the interstate for 
several miles from Haywood County, North Carolina into Cocke County, Tennessee. 
In eastern North Carolina, an EF-3 tornado in Nash County damaged 11 buildings and 
caused 15 injuries and in Rockingham County an EF-1 tornado damaged at least 5 homes.  
In Tennessee’s Cocke County, the flooding on the Pigeon River affected the city of 
Newport, where the river gauge measured a river level more than 6 ft higher than the previous 
record crest that stood for over 120 years.  Numerous structures in and around the vicinity of 
Newport were destroyed or damaged.  Two people drowned in Cocke County near the Nolichucky 
River as their vehicle was swept away by floodwaters when they tried to escape their home.  The 
Nolichucky River at Lowland, located in Greene County, crested 9 ft above its previous all-time 
record. 
Severe flooding of the Nolichucky River also occurred upstream in Unicoi County, 
Tennessee where at least 9 people drowned in the city of Erwin.  Three of these fatalities were 

Hurricane Helene     26 
 
residents of North Carolina that were found in eastern Tennessee.  The Unicoi County Hospital 
flooded, leaving everything but the roof submerged.  Hospital staff evacuated all 70 people to the 
roof, including 11 patients.  Everyone was rescued by helicopter (Fig. 36), and nobody was 
injured. Interstate 26 in Unicoi County was closed for several weeks due to washouts from the 
Nolichucky River.  Two people drowned in the city of Embreeville in Washington County, which is 
just a couple of n mi downstream from Erwin along the Nolichucky River.  In this area, the river is 
estimated to have crested nearly 10 ft above its all-time record flood stage (Fig. 37).  Many homes 
were destroyed in Embreeville.  Many homes, structures, bridges and roadways were also wiped 
out farther downstream in Washington County.  
In Johnson County, which is the northeasternmost county in Tennessee, floodwaters 
damaged numerous structures in Trade, Mountain City and Laurel Bloomery.  Employees at 
Parkdale Plant were evacuated by helicopter.  A church near Midway was completely washed 
away by floodwaters from Roan Creek.  One person drowned in their vehicle.  Very strong wind 
gusts caused trees to fall on powerlines, and the power wasn’t restored for 3 weeks in some 
areas.  In Carter County, located in between Johnson and Unicoi Counties, flash flooding from 
the Doe River flooded homes, businesses and vehicles in the Valley Forge and Elizabethton 
areas.  A hospital in Elizabethton was evacuated.  Extremely strong wind gusts were reported 
higher up and caused many large trees to fall along the Appalachian Trail. 
 
Virginia and West Virginia 
Helene caused severe flooding (Fig. 38) and wind damage across southwestern Virginia.  
Some of the most severe damage and impacts occurred in Grayson, Pulaski, Smyth, Washington 
and Wythe counties.  In Pulaski County, flooding along the New River destroyed 12 homes and 
damaged 104 others (65 of those major damage).  In Smyth and Washington Counties, severe 
flooding necessitated over 100 swift water rescues, destroyed dozens of structures and damaged 
hundreds more.  Grayson County, which measured gusts to 57 kt and rainfall amounts around 11 
inches, reported over $61 million in agricultural losses.  Severe flooding damaged or destroyed 
many homes in Grayson County, and 3 people were injured.  An EF-2 tornado in Pittsylvania 
County, Virginia, damaged 30 structures, including a mobile home that was destroyed.  One injury 
occurred to an occupant in the mobile home. In total in Virginia, there were 2 direct deaths and at 
least 6 injuries. 
 
In West Virginia, strong wind gusts from Helene downed numerous trees and powerlines, 
causing damage to some homes and vehicles and knocking out power for many customers, 
especially for southern and southwestern portions of the state.  Major flooding was only an issue 
for extreme southern portions of the state, particularly in Mercer County, where floodwaters 
rushed through the streets into a few homes and structures, due to overflowing creeks.  The wind 
damage was comparatively more widespread across the state. 
 
Kentucky, Ohio, Indiana and Illinois 
 
In Kentucky, widespread wind gusts of 45–55 kt combined with wet ground conditions to 
knock down numerous trees, powerlines and power poles, especially in the eastern half of the 

Hurricane Helene     27 
 
state, leading to over 200,000 power outages.  There were several reports of trees falling onto 
homes, leading to isolated instances of structural damage across eastern Kentucky.  Strong to 
damaging wind gusts were also widespread on the north side of post-tropical Helene across much 
of southern and southwestern Ohio, where numerous trees and powerlines were brought down, 
including in Cincinnati.  The winds knocked out power to at least 120,000 customers in southern 
Ohio.  In Scioto County, flooding was also an issue, and media reports indicate that hundreds of 
homes were damaged by floodwaters, with a few homes swept away.  The strong winds then 
moved westward, affecting southern and central Indiana, causing numerous trees and powerlines 
to fall, with over 130,000 power outages.  Some of the trees fell on homes and vehicles, causing 
structural damage.  There was one fatality in Gibson County due to a tree falling on a home.  
Similar impacts from wind occurred in eastern Illinois during the evening of 27 September, with 
many trees and powerlines down (some on homes) and scattered power outages reported. 
 
Nicaragua, Honduras, Cayman Islands, Mexico and Cuba 
From 21–24 September, heavy rain fell across portions of Nicaragua and Honduras that 
was associated with Helene’s precursor disturbance.  Flooding from this rainfall caused damage 
in portions of Honduras with water entering some homes and structures.  According to media 
sources, flooding rains and heavy surf also led to minor damage in the Cayman Islands on 23–
24 September. 
 
Helene caused some impacts along the east coast of the Yucatan Peninsula in the 
Mexican state of Quintana Roo, including in the Cancun area as well as on the islands of Cozumel 
and Isla Mujeres.  In Isla Mujeres, where the strongest winds were recorded, there was significant 
damage.  Most of the island lost electricity and many trees fell.  Fallen trees and power poles 
caused some power outages on Cozumel and portions of Quintana Roo, where minor damage 
was reported to a few structures. 
 
No monetary damage estimates have been received from Mexico or Cuba. 
 
FORECAST AND WARNING CRITIQUE 
 
Genesis 
The genesis of Helene was adequately forecast (Table 4), but in general the system 
developed sooner than anticipated.  The disturbance from which Helene developed was 
introduced in the Tropical Weather Outlook (TWO) 6.5 days prior to genesis with a low chance 
(<40%) of development within 7 days.  The 2-day formation probabilities were introduced 48 h 
prior to genesis.  The probabilities reached the medium and high categories in the 7-day TWO 
126 h and 60 h before formation, respectively.  The lead times for the 2-day TWO were 42 h and 
30 h for the medium and high categories, respectively.  NHC initiated potential tropical cyclone 
advisories at 1500 UTC 23 September, about 21 hours before the system is shown to have 
become a tropical cyclone in the best track in order to issue watches and warnings with 

Hurricane Helene     28 
 
appropriate lead time for land areas in the northwestern Caribbean Sea.  All of the Graphical 
TWOs issued by NHC correctly captured the location where genesis occurred (Fig. 39). 
Track 
A verification of NHC official track forecasts for Helene is given in Table 5a.  The official 
track forecast errors were near the mean official errors for the previous 5-yr period at 12–48 h, 
and lower than the 5-yr means at 60–72 h, albeit for a small sample size.  The larger than average 
Climatology-Persistence (OCD5) track errors indicate Helene’s track was more difficult to forecast 
than normal.  All of the NHC track forecasts were tightly clustered and consistently highlighted 
the landfall threat to the Florida Big Bend and eastern Florida Panhandle areas (Fig. 40), however 
some of the earlier forecasts predicted landfall in the Florida Big Bend occurring a few hours 
sooner than what occurred.  Most of the NHC forecasts were biased slightly west for the landfall 
and overland portion of Helene’s actual track over the southeastern United States.  A 
homogeneous comparison of the official track errors with selected guidance models is given in 
Table 5b and depicted in Figure 41.  The official forecast errors were similar to the best-performing 
track models for the 12- and 24-h forecasts.  Some of the global models and consensus 
approaches outperformed the official forecast at time ranges of 36–60 h, including the Florida 
State Superensemble (FSSE) and the European Center for Medium Range Weather Forecasting 
(ECMWF) Model.  However, the official forecast errors were lower than most of the hurricane 
regional model forecasts. 
 
Intensity 
A verification of NHC official intensity forecasts for Helene is given in Table 6a.  Official 
intensity forecast errors were greater than the 5-yr means at 12–24 h and 48–60 h, but 
outperformed the 5-yr means at 36 and 72 h.  The very large Climatology-Persistence (OCD5) 
errors indicate that Helene’s intensity was much harder than average to forecast.  All but one 
NHC intensity forecast issued starting 78 h before landfall explicitly called for Helene to become 
a major hurricane prior to landfall in Florida.  Every NHC forecast from the first advisory correctly 
predicted that Helene would undergo rapid intensification in the Gulf of America, defined as a          
30 kt or greater increase in the maximum sustained wind speed within a 24-h period. Additionally, 
the second advisory (issued at 2100 UTC 23 September) on the potential tropical cyclone that 
became Helene marked the first time that NHC forecast a disturbance to become a major 
hurricane before the system became a tropical cyclone.   Figure 42 shows that the NHC intensity 
forecasts were consistent and fairly accurate.  Some of the earlier NHC forecasts indicated that 
the peak intensity would occur a bit earlier than what occurred. 
A homogeneous comparison of the official intensity errors with selected guidance models 
is given in Table 6b and depicted in Figure 43.  The NHC forecast outperformed all the available 
intensity models at ranges of 12–36 h and at 72 h, but was outperformed by a few of the intensity 
models at 48–60 h.  The statistical guidance and intensity consensus models were the best-
performing intensity models, followed by the regional hurricane models. 
 

Hurricane Helene     29 
 
Wind Watches and Warnings 
 
Coastal wind watches and warnings associated with Helene are given in Table 7.  Coastal 
and inland tropical cyclone wind watches and warnings are illustrated in Figure 44, colored by 
highest warning type.  A verification discussion of select coastal watches and warnings is provided 
below. 
 
In the United States, a Hurricane Watch was issued at 0900 UTC 24 September from 
north of Tampa Bay to Indian Pass, Florida, which includes the Florida Big Bend and the landfall 
location, 57 h in advance of the arrival of tropical-storm-force winds.  At 2100 UTC 24 September 
a Hurricane Warning was issued for the Gulf Coast of Florida from the Anclote River to Mexico 
Beach, about 45 h before the onset of tropical-storm-force winds.  Farther south, from the Tampa 
Bay area southward to Englewood, Florida, a Hurricane Watch was issued with 54 h of lead time 
and a Tropical Storm Warning was issued 42 h prior to the onset of tropical-storm-force winds.  
Portions of this area experienced sustained winds over 50 kt with gusts to hurricane force, so the 
Hurricane Watch with the concurrent Tropical Storm Warning was warranted.  For the southwest 
coast of Florida between Flamingo and Bonita Beach, the Tropical Storm Watch provided 57 h of 
lead time and the Tropical Storm Warning had 39 h of lead time.  For the Lower Florida Keys, 
Tropical Storm Watches and Warnings were issued 48 and 30 h before the onset of conditions, 
respectively. 
 
The northeast coast of Florida had 48 h of lead time for the Tropical Storm Watch and      
36 h notice for the Tropical Storm Warning.  The coast of Georgia had 51 and 33 h notice for their 
Tropical Storm Watch and Warning, respectively.  A Tropical Storm Watch was issued for the 
coast of South Carolina from the Georgia border to the South Santee River about 43 h prior to 
the onset of tropical-storm-force winds, and a Tropical Storm Warning was issued there 37 h in 
advance. 
 
Storm Surge Watches and Warnings 
 
Storm surge watches and warnings associated with Helene are given in Table 8.  A Storm 
Surge Watch was first issued at 0300 UTC 24 September for the southwest coast of Florida from 
Bonita Beach to Flamingo.  The watch was extended northward and westward to Indian Pass, 
including Tampa Bay and Charlotte Harbor, at 0900 UTC that day.  The entire watch area from 
Flamingo to Indian Pass was upgraded to a Storm Surge Warning at 2100 UTC that day.  A Storm 
Surge Watch was issued from Mexico Beach to Indian Pass at 1500 UTC 25 September, and was 
upgraded to a warning 6 h later.  Figure 45 shows the Storm Surge Warning in effect at 2100 UTC 
25 September, with the observations overlaid.  No changes were made until water levels receded 
after landfall. 
 
Storm surge observations indicate greater than 3 ft of inundation occurred through the 
storm surge warning area (Fig. 45).  In Tampa Bay, based on the timing of when tropical-storm-
force winds first reached the area (1500 UTC 26 September), the lead times for the storm surge 
watch and warning were 60 and 36 h, respectively.  Lead times in the Big Bend were 3 to 6 h 
longer, with tropical-storm-force winds spreading throughout the entire Big Bend by 2100 UTC   
26 September. 

Hurricane Helene     30 
 
 
The initial peak storm surge forecast was for 10 to 15 ft AGL somewhere between 
Ochlockonee River and Chassahowitzka (issued at 0900 UTC 24 September).  The peak forecast 
was increased and adjusted slightly westward as the forecast evolved, ultimately resulting in a 
forecast of 15 to 20 ft AGL somewhere between Carrabelle and Suwannee River at 2100 UTC  
25 September, approximately 30 h prior to landfall.  The NHC storm surge analysis of 12 to 16 ft 
AGL falls within this forecast area.  The peak storm surge forecast in Tampa Bay remained steady 
at 5 to 8 ft AGL from the first issuance of the Storm Surge Watch, and the NHC storm surge 
analysis of 5 to 7 ft AGL verifies this forecast.  Similarly, the peak storm surge in Fort Myers and 
Charlotte Harbor was 3 to 5 ft AGL from the first issuance of the Storm Surge Watch, and the 
NHC storm surge analysis verifies this forecast. 
 
Rainfall Forecasts and Flooding Outlooks 
The PRE that occurred ahead of Helene on 25-26 September was challenging to forecast 
due to uncertainty in the forecast position and strength of the upper-level low pressure area and 
surface front, and how these features interacted with Helene.  The Weather Prediction Center 
(WPC) forecast first indicated that heavy rainfall could occur over portions of the Southeast U.S. 
and southern Appalachians well ahead of Helene with about 3 days of lead time, when a Slight 
risk was issued in the Excessive Rainfall Outlook (ERO) 22.  However, initially the heaviest rain 
with this PRE was forecast too far west, with the forecast shifting east with the update issued on 
the afternoon of 24 September and again the next morning, when a Moderate risk was issued in 
the ERO (Fig. 46). 
Rainfall forecasts for when Helene moved inland proved to have more skill and lead time.  
Initial forecasts on days 5 and 6 depicted a heavy rainfall risk over the southeastern U.S., but 
were too slow moving the heaviest rain inland.  WPC forecasts correctly sped up the timing with 
4 days of lead time, and by 2 to 3 days out, rainfall amounts continued to trend upwards closer to 
observed values.  Figure 47 shows the WPC forecast rainfall evolution in the days leading up to 
the event. 
For the discussion that follows, lead time will be defined as the number of hours before 
the first weather-driven flash flood emergency over the southern Appalachians, which was issued 
at 0739 UTC 27 September.  The first Slight risk in the WPC ERO was issued early on the morning 
of 23 September, with 96 h of lead time.  There was a mention of a heavy rainfall and flooding 
risk over the southeastern United States in the first NHC Public Advisory for the potential tropical 
cyclone that became Helene at 1500 UTC that day.  Wording was enhanced with the 2100 UTC 
Public Advisory (83 h of lead time) to mention that some of the flooding could be considerable.  
The ERO was upgraded to a Moderate risk around 0800 UTC 24 September (72 h of lead time) 
as confidence increased on the timing and track of Helene moving into the Southeast U.S.  At 
that time, there was still uncertainty regarding the magnitude of the PRE ahead of Helene, and 
the degree of overlap between the rainfall associated with the PRE and core of Helene.  Around 
2100 UTC that day (59 h of lead time), a WPC Excessive Rainfall Discussion (ERD) mentioned 
this was a “higher-end Moderate risk, with increasing potential of eventually needing a High risk 
                                                 
22 The ERO forecasts the probability that rainfall will exceed flash flood guidance within 25 miles of a point.  
More information on the WPC ERO can be found at: www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/html/fam2.shtml#excessrain 

Hurricane Helene     31 
 
upgrade.”  At about the same time, the first mention of landslide potential was introduced into the 
Helene Public Advisory and Key Messages.  Forecasters upgraded to a High risk around          
0800 UTC 25 September (48 h of lead time) as it continued to become more apparent that the 
rainfall from the PRE and core of Helene would indeed have significant overlap, increasing 
confidence of a catastrophic event.  This is the 3rd longest High risk lead time for a tropical cyclone 
since 2017.  Wording was enhanced even further in the 2100 UTC Public Advisory on 25 
September (34 h of lead time): “This rainfall will likely result in catastrophic and potentially life-
threatening flash and urban flooding, along with significant river flooding.  Landslides are possible 
in areas of steep terrain.”  At about the same time, a rare, coordinated NOAA news release23 was 
posted on the noaa.gov website about the inland flood threat: “We urge the news media to 
continue focusing the public’s attention on the major impacts from the inland flooding expected 
along the path of Helene well after landfall.”   
 
IMPACT-BASED DECISION SUPPORT SERVICES (IDSS) AND 
PUBLIC COMMUNICATION 
 
The NHC began communication with emergency managers on 23 September as Helene 
was forming in the northwestern Caribbean Sea.  Sixteen decision support briefings were 
provided to emergency managers and coordinated through the FEMA Hurricane Liaison Team 
embedded at the NHC.  These briefings included video-teleconferences with FEMA HQ, FEMA 
Region 4, the states of Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, Tennessee, the state and 
counties of Florida, the Seminole Tribe of Florida, and the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians.  Briefing 
support continued through 27 September as Helene moved inland over the southeast United 
States.  Additionally, in coordination with the Florida Division of Emergency Management and the 
NHC Storm Surge Unit, the Hurricane Liaison Team directly supported several counties along the 
west coast of Florida with evacuation planning and decision making.  The NHC’s Tropical Analysis 
and Forecast Branch provided 13 decision-support briefings to the U.S. Coast Guard Districts 7 
and 8 during Helene. 
NHC activated the television media pool on 24 September and continued through 27 
September, providing 145 interviews with national, local and international outlets.  Of those 
interviews, 30 were in Spanish.  NHC provided 9 live stream broadcasts on YouTube and 
Facebook during this event.  Five short-content videos in the form of “reels” were posted to the 
NHC Instagram and Facebook accounts, reaching 1.3 million plays.  In addition, a total of 141 
manual social media posts were provided on Facebook, Instagram and X, with total engagements 
of over 301,906. 
The WPC, NWC and NOAA ramped up their IDSS and public communication of the inland 
flood threat in the days leading up to Helene’s landfall.  Figure 48 provides a sample of some of 
WPC’s forecast messaging in the days leading up to landfall. 
                                                 
23 
https://www.noaa.gov/news-release/communities-need-to-prepare-for-catastrophic-life-threatening-
inland-flooding-from-helene-even-well  

Hurricane Helene     32 
 
NHC began communicating the significant inland wind threat Helene posed during the 
morning of 25 September in the Key Messages as well as in public communications with the 
media and on social media.  That afternoon, NHC began forecasting higher-than-normal gust 
factors for the inland forecast points over the southeastern U.S. in the Forecast/Advisory (TCM) 
product. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
Maria Torres, Michael Spagnolo and Dr. Chris Landsea supplied the input for the IDSS 
section.  Dr. Lisa Bucci furnished Figs. 5, 6, 40 and 42.  Dr. Philippe Papin provided Figs. 1, 13, 
39, and some of the input for the synoptic history section, while Andrew Penny set up the graphics 
used to generate some of the figures.  Dr. Wallace Hogsett generated the wind watch/warning 
figure.  The meteorological services of Mexico, Cuba and Honduras provided much of the data 
from those countries. The National Weather Service Forecast offices in Key West, Miami, 
Melbourne, Tampa, Jacksonville, and Tallahassee, Florida; Atlanta, Georgia; Charleston, 
Columbia, and Greenville/Spartanburg, South Carolina; Wilmington, NC; Morristown and 
Nashville, Tennessee; Blacksburg, Virginia; Charleston, West Virginia; Birmingham, Alabama; 
and Wilmington, Ohio delivered meteorological and impact data for their areas of responsibility, 
while the National Data Buoy Center, National Ocean Service, and United States Geological 
Survey contributed much of the coastal, oceanic and tide gauge data used in this report.  NWC 
created Figure 16.  The South Carolina, North Carolina and Tennessee State Climate Offices also 
put together reports on Helene’s impacts and observations.  The Texas Tech University Hurricane 
Research Team provided data from its portable StickNet stations, while the University of Georgia 
and North Carolina State University provided data from their sites.  WeatherFlow and 
WeatherSTEM station observations were also used in this report.  Josh Morgerman of iCyclone 
provided some surface observations from Florida.  Richard Mosier of the Storm Prediction Center 
shared the tornado statistics, while David Roth of the Weather Prediction Center rendered the 
rainfall graphic and much of the rainfall data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     33 
 
Table 1. 
Best track for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
23 / 1200 
17.2 
81.7 
1004 
30 
disturbance 
23 / 1800 
17.8 
81.9 
1004 
35 
“ 
24 / 0000 
18.2 
82.2 
1002 
35 
“ 
24 / 0600 
18.6 
82.8 
1001 
35 
“ 
24 / 1200 
19.2 
83.7 
999 
40 
tropical storm 
24 / 1800 
19.4 
84.6 
997 
45 
“ 
25 / 0000 
19.7 
85.2 
990 
50 
“ 
25 / 0600 
20.3 
85.9 
985 
55 
“ 
25 / 1200 
21.1 
86.2 
979 
65 
hurricane 
25 / 1800 
22.0 
86.5 
978 
70 
“ 
26 / 0000 
22.8 
86.7 
973 
70 
“ 
26 / 0600 
23.6 
86.5 
970 
75 
“ 
26 / 1200 
24.7 
85.8 
963 
85 
“ 
26 / 1800 
26.6 
85.0 
958 
105 
“ 
27 / 0000 
28.7 
84.3 
941 
120 
“ 
27 / 0310 
30.0 
83.7 
939 
120 
“ 
27 / 0500 
30.8 
83.5 
947 
95 
“ 
27 / 0600 
31.3 
83.3 
957 
80 
“ 
27 / 0900 
32.9 
83.1 
967 
60 
tropical storm 
27 / 1200 
34.4 
83.2 
973 
45 
“ 
27 / 1800 
36.8 
84.9 
983 
40 
low 
28 / 0000 
38.1 
86.6 
985 
40 
“ 

Hurricane Helene     34 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
28 / 0600 
37.4 
88.1 
992 
30 
“ 
28 / 1200 
36.6 
87.6 
997 
25 
“ 
28 / 1800 
37.1 
87.0 
1000 
20 
“ 
29 / 0000 
 
 
 
 
dissipated 
27 / 0310 
30.0 
83.7 
939 
120 
maximum wind, 
minimum pressure 
and landfall 10 miles 
SW of Perry, FL 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     35 
 
Table 2. 
Selected ship reports with winds of at least 34 kt for Hurricane Helene, 24–27  
 
 
September 2024. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Ship call 
sign 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Wind dir/ 
speed (kt) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
25 / 1200 
DB5108 
21.2 
86.7 
360 / 40 
992.4 
25 / 1600 
DB5108 
21.2 
86.7 
350 / 55 
992.8 
26 / 1000 
C6CL6 
20.3 
85.6 
230 / 36 
1002.8 
26 / 1200 
KCHV 
26.1 
79.9 
130 / 38 
1005.9 
26 / 1900 
WDBH 
24.8 
80.3 
150 / 48 
1004.9 
27 / 0400 
9HA206 
29.9 
77.3 
120 / 40 
1008.8 
27 / 0500 
9HA567 
26.2 
79.0 
190 / 35 
 
27 / 0600 
9HA537 
27.6 
79.4 
180 / 60 
1005.0 
27 / 0700 
3FLO4 
26.1 
79.2 
190 / 45 
 
27 / 0700 
OYAU2 
27.4 
79.6 
210 / 38 
1003.6 
27 / 0800 
9HA537 
27.7 
79.6 
180 / 50 
1004.0 
27 / 0900 
WTEA 
32.8 
79.9 
*** / 49 
997.9 
27 / 1000 
WTEA 
32.8 
79.9 
*** / 54 
998.1 
27 / 1400 
KRU 
33.0 
78.2 
150 / 45 
1004.2 
27 / 1600 
VGWM 
42.1 
81.2 
060 / 36 
 
27 / 1600 
WTDL 
35.7 
75.3 
150 / 38 
1013.4 
27 / 1600 
VRVC3 
31.9 
80.0 
180 / 38 
1002.0 
27 / 1700 
WNTL 
33.9 
76.7 
150 / 40 
1005.6 
27 / 1800 
VCPK 
41.9 
82.6 
060 / 42 
 
27 / 1900 
THLO1 
41.8 
83.2 
050 / 35 
1007.6 
28 / 0240 
CHII2 
42.0 
87.5 
030 / 38 
 
28 / 0300 
CFJ830 
41.9 
82.1 
040 / 40 
 
28 / 0500 
CHII2 
42.0 
87.5 
050 / 38 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     36 
 
Table 3. 
Selected surface observations for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024. 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
Buoys 
41004 - NOAA  
(32.50N, 79.10W) 
27/0950 
1000.1 
27/0900 
35 
(4 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
41008 - NOAA 
(31.40N, 80.87W) 
27/0700 
993.8 
27/0740 
42 
(4 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 
41009 - NOAA 
(28.51N, 80.19W) 
27/0200 
1001.8 
26/1434 
44 
(1 min, 4 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
41010 - NOAA 
(28.88N, 78.47W) 
27/0753 
1006.1 
27/0625 
38 
(1 min, 4 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
41029 - CORMP 
(32.80N, 79.62W) 
27/1008 
998.2 
27/0908 
35 
(3 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
41033 - CORMP 
(32.28N, 80.41W) 
27/1008 
993.9 
27/1008 
34 
(3 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
41066 - CORMP 
(32.54N, 79.66W) 
27/1008 
998.0 
27/0908 
35 
(3 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
41069 - CORMP 
(29.29N, 80.80W) 
27/0408 
999.3 
27/0208 
37 
(3 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
42013 - COMPS 
(27.17N, 82.92W) 
26/2205 
991.2 
26/2005 
46 
(8 min, 3 m) 
67 
 
 
 
 
42023 - COMPS 
(26.01N, 83.09W) 
26/1905 
995.2 
26/1835 
43 
(8 min, 3 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
42026 - COMPS 
(25.17N, 83.48W) 
26/1635 
995.2 
26/1405 
41 
(8 min, 3 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
42036 - NOAA 
(28.50N, 84.51W) 
26/2310 
949.4 
26/2254 
69 
(1 min, 4 m) 
93 
 
 
 
 
42056 - NOAA 
(19.82N, 84.98W) 
25/0130 
990.9 
25/1004 
37 
(1 min, 4 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Saildrone  
1057 (29.02N, 84.38W) 
27/0038 
954.1 
27/0039 
67 
(1 min) 
93 
 
 
 
 
1083 (28.25N, 84.63W) 
26/2238 
951.8 
26/2231 
63 
(1 min) 
95 
 
 
 
 
CAYMAN ISLANDS 
Grand Cayman 
MWCR) (19.30N, 
81.35W) 
24/0730 
1005.0 
24/1114 
21 
39 
 
 
 
 
CUBA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cayo Largo (MUCL) 
(21.62N, 81.55W) 
25/0950 
1005 
25/1508 
29 
49 
 
 
 
 
Havana  
(23.14N, 82.34W) 
 
 
 
32 
50 
 
 
 
 
Herradura  
(22.51N, 83.41W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.60 
Santa Lucia 
(22.67N, 83.96W) 
 
 
 
 
55 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     37 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
MEXICO 
Cancun (21.32N, 
86.81W) 
25/1325 
991.0 
25/1340 
31 
63 
 
 
 
9.65 
Isla Mujeres  
(21.25N, 86.74W) 
25/1745 
989.0 
25/1845 
46 
60 
 
 
 
 
WeatherFlow Sites 
Cancun (XCNN)  
(21.06N, 86.78W) 
25/1251 
992.0 
25/1121 
32 
47 
 
 
 
 
Cozumel (XCOZ) 
(20.53N, 86.94W) 
25/1056 
995.0 
25/1336 
35 
45 
 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES 
Florida 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Clearwater (KPIE) 
(27.91N, 82.69W) 
26/2348 
991.2 
27/0029 
44 
(2 min, 10 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 
Jacksonville (KNIP) 
(30.23N, 81.67W) 
27/0453 
991.1 
27/0514 
41 
(2 min, 10 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Perry (KFPY) 
(30.07N, 83.58W) 
27/0320 
948.2 
27/0315 
48 
(2 min, 10 m) 
86 
 
 
 
 
Sarasota (KSRQ) 
(27.40N, 82.56W) 
26/2013 
993.6 
26/2014 
44 
(2 min, 10 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
St. Petersburg 
(KSPG) (27.76N, 
82.63W) 
26/2207 
990.2 
26/2347 
48 
(2 min, 8 m) 
71 
 
 
 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Lake Lamonia 2.7 E 
(LAIF1) (30.64N, 
84.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.58 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
St. Augustine 
(SAUF1) (29.86N, 
81.26W) 
27/0500 
995.0 
27/0300 
48 
(8 min, 16 m 
61 
 
 
 
 
Venice (VENF1) 
(27.07N, 82.45W) 
26/2100 
995.1 
26/2130 
48 
(10 min, 12 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Apalachicola 
(APCF1) (29.72N, 
84.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
4.28 
5.18 
4.33 
 
Cedar Key (CKYF1) 
(29.14N, 83.03W) 
27/0148 
980.2 
27/0148 
56 
(4 m) 
73 
10.34 
10.84 
9.3 
 
Clearwater Beach 
(CWBF1) (27.98N, 
82.83W) 
26/2306 
989.2 
26/2354 
48 
(2 min, 7 m) 
64 
7.29 
7.62 
6.67 
 
East Bay (EBEF1) 
(27.92N, 82.42W) 
 
 
 
 
 
7.84 
8.05 
7.2 
 

Hurricane Helene     38 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
Ft. Myers (FMRF1) 
(26.65N, 81.87W) 
 
 
 
 
 
5.57 
5.39 
5.12 
 
Naples Bay N 
(NBNF1) (26.14N, 
81.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
4.66 
4.71 
4.02 
 
Old Port Tampa 
(OPTF1) (27.86N, 
82.55W) 
 
 
 
 
 
7.29 
7.62 
6.83 
 
Panama City 
(PACF1) (30.15N, 
85.66W) 
 
 
 
 
 
2.66 
3.8 
3.02 
 
Panama City Beach 
(PCBF1) (30.21N, 
85.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
2.92 
4.12 
3.26 
 
Port Manatee 
(PMAF1) (27.64N, 
82.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
6.43 
6.62 
6.04 
 
St. Petersburg 
(SAPF1) (27.76N, 
82.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
6.77 
7.09 
6.31 
 
Josh Morgerman, iCyclone Sites 
Hampton Springs 
(30.09N, 83.66W) 
27/0316 
944.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Perry (30.09N, 83.57W) 
27/0331 
947.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WeatherFlow Sites 
Egmont Channel 
(XEGM) (27.61N, 
82.76W) 
26/2214 
990 
26/2344 
51 
(1 min, 12 m) 
70 
 
 
 
 
Tampa Bay (XTAM) 
(27.77N, 82.57W) 
26/2329 
993 
27/0034 
50 
(5 min, 15 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
WeatherSTEM Sites 
Athena (29.99N, 
83.49W) 
27/0312 
945.2 
27/0252 
 
84 
(2 m) 
 
 
 
 
Dowling Park 
(2205W) (30.25N, 
83.24W) 
27/0400 
959.7 
27/0350 
61 
86 
 
 
 
 
Fish Creek (2003W) 
(29.77N, 83.58W) 
27/0256 
950.6 
27/0210 
 
72I 
(6 m) 
 
 
 
 
Horseshoe Beach 
(29.44N, 83.29W) 
27/0151 
971.6 
27/0210 
 
73 
(6 m) 
 
 
 
 
Jacksonville 
(1483W) (30.39N, 
81.44W) 
27/0510 
992.2 
27/0340 
53 
70 
 
 
 
 
Live Oak (2208W) 
(30.40N, 83.01W) 
27/0420 
968.9 
27/0420 
47 
70 
 
 
 
 
Madison (1623W) 
(30.45N, 83.42W) 
27/0413 
951.4 
27/0413 
58 
(3 m) 
70 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     39 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
Stuart Beach 
(1534W) (27.20N, 
80.17W) 
26/2350 
1003.1 
26/1310 
51 
63 
 
 
 
 
Florida Automated Weather Network (FAWN) Sites 
Mayo (MAYFL)  
(30.08N, 83.24W) 
27/0345 
963 
27/0400 
47 
(15 min, 9 m) 
80 
 
 
 
 
Florida Coastal Monitoring Program Sites 
Fish Creek (T6) 
(29.76N, 83.49W) 
 
 
26/2242 
55 
(1 min, 5 m) 
78 
 
 
 
 
Texas Tech StickNet Sites 
Hampton Springs 
(102) (30.04N, 83.68W) 
27/0312 
942.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Live Oak (329)  
(30.21N, 83.09W) 
27/0359 
964.4 
27/0359 
64 
(1 min, 2 m) 
79 
 
 
 
 
Mayo (328)  
(30.09N, 83.24W) 
27/0352 
961.3 
27/0412 
56 
(1 min, 2 m) 
80 
 
 
 
 
Perry (325) 
(30.02N, 83.53W) 
27/0325 
946.3 
27/0307 
45 
(1 min, 2 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
West Lake (336) 
(30.49N, 83.16W) 
27/0424 
958.3 
27/0424 
59 
(1 min, 2 m) 
73 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Sanborn (SNDF1) 
(30.07N, 84.59W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.26 
Sumatra (SURF1) 
(30.02N, 84.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.39 
Wilma (WHSF1) 
(30.18N, 84.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.47 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Alford 0.6 SSE (FL-
JK-2) (30.69N, 85.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.72 
Midway 6.9 SW (FL-
LN-18) (30.42N, 
84.54W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.30 
Deployed USGS Water Level Sensors 
FLCIT35742 (28.91N, 
82.69W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.33 
9.0 
 
FLDIX25020 (29.39N, 
83.20W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.69 
12.18 
 
FLHER35741 
(28.57N, 82.66W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.9 
8.44 
 
FLLEV35745 
(29.14N, 83.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.39 
8.84 
 
FLPAS35743 
(28.29N, 82.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.79 
7.6 
 
FLPIN26405 (28.15N, 
82.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.39 
7.23 
 

Hurricane Helene     40 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
FLPIN31148 (27.98N, 
82.83W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.7 
6.75 
 
FLPIN36348 (27.80N, 
82.80W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.02 
7.26 
 
FLPIN36349 (27.62N, 
82.74W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.19 
6.6 
 
FLSAR25010 
(27.36N, 82.62W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.22 
6.68 
 
FLSAR26282 
(27.07N, 82.45W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.28 
5.71 
 
FLTAY35738 
(29.79N, 83.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.33 
13.68 
 
FLTAY35739 
(29.80N, 83.59W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.41 
13.74 
 
FLWAK29937 
(30.06N, 84.29W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.16 
6.53 
 
NWS High Water Mark Observations 
HWM1 (29.83N, 
83.59W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.0 
15.3 
 
HWM2 (29.67N, 
83.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.8 
16.1 
 
HWM3 (29.92N, 
83.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.7 
12.9 
 
USGS Streamgauges 
Steinhatchee River 
at Steinhatchee 
(2324170) (29.67N, 
83.38W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.25 
12.5 
 
Georgia 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Alma (KAMG)  
(31.54N, 82.51W) 
27/0630 
973.9 
27/0703 
49 
(2 min, 10 m) 
87 
 
 
 
 
Augusta (KAGS) 
(33.36N, 81.96W) 
27/0940 
976.3 
27/1005 
45 
(2 min, 10 m) 
71 
 
 
 
 
Moody AFB (KVAD) 
(30.98N, 83.19W) 
27/0455 
962.3I 
27/0440 
38I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
60I 
 
 
 
 
Reidsville (KRVJ) 
(32.06N, 82.15W) 
27/0635 
982.5I 
27/0635 
41I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
69I 
 
 
 
 
Savannah (KSAV) 
(32.13N, 81.20W) 
27/0815 
989.5 
27/0815 
47 
(2 min, 10 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Brasstown Bald 
(BRBG1) (34.87N, 
83.81W) 
 
 
27/0949 
43 
75 
 
 
 
 
Canton-Etowah 
River (CNNG1) 
(34.24N, 84.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.07 

Hurricane Helene     41 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
Darien 7 NNE 
(MERG1) (31.45N, 
81.36W) 
27/0730 
990.2 
27/0730 
51 
 
 
 
 
 
St. Simons Island 
(BRNG1) (31.13N, 
81.40W) 
 
 
27/0645 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Fort Pulaski 
(FPKG1) (32.04N, 
80.90W) 
27/0748 
993.6 
27/0836 
37 
(3 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Public/Other 
Baxley (BXYG1) 
(31.71N, 82.39W) 
 
 
27/0638 
35 
63 
 
 
 
 
WeatherFlow Sites 
Jekyll Island (XJEK) 
(31.05N, 81.41W) 
 
992.7 
27/0612 
53 
(1 min, 10 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Savannah Light 
(XSEL) (32.01N, 
80.81W) 
27/0838 
987.7 
27/0758 
54 
(1 min, 11 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
WeatherSTEM Sites 
Lake Park (1771W) 
(30.65N, 83.23W) 
27/0441 
957.7 
27/0420 
53 
(7 m) 
83 
 
 
 
 
Texas Tech StickNet Sites 
Lake Park (215) 
(30.65N, 83.11W) 
27/0445 
958.2 
27/0515 
47 
(1 min, 2 m) 
67 
 
 
 
 
Quitman (446) 
(30.80N, 83.49W) 
27/0455 
946.8 
27/0431 
46 
(1 min, 2 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Valdosta (330) 
(30.83N, 83.25W) 
27/0508 
949.3 
27/0429 
51 
(1 min, 2 m) 
72 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Brasstown (BRSG1) 
(34.81N, 83.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.18 
Clayton 4 NE 
(TULG1) (34.91N, 
83.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.44 
Louisville (LOUG1) 
(32.99N, 83.38W) 
 
 
27/0903 
 
65 
 
 
 
 
McRae (MRAG1) 
(32.09N, 82.88W) 
 
 
27/0703 
36 
(2 min) 
65 
 
 
 
 
Waycross (OKEG1) 
(31.25N, 82.40W) 
 
 
27/0604 
36 
62 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program Stations (CWOP) 
Montgomery 
(F7647) (31.94N, 
81.10W) 
27/0743 
991.5 
27/0804 
49 
70 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     42 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
University of Georgia Weather Network Sites 
Baxley (31.75N, 
82.44W) 
27/0700 
974.4 
27/0645 
34 
(3 m) 
67 
 
 
 
 
Douglas (UGA52) 
(31.49N, 82.79W) 
27/0615 
968.6 
27/0615 
40 
(3 m) 
80 
 
 
 
 
Lake Park  
(30.67N, 83.12W) 
27/0500 
964.3 
27/0515 
37 
(3 m) 
78 
 
 
 
 
Vidalia (UGA58) 
(32.14N, 82.35W) 
 
975.0 
27/0724 
35 
(2 min) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Dillard 3.5 NE (GA-
RB-1) (34.99N, 
83.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.64 
Martinez 1.3 SE 
(GA-RC-18) (33.51N, 
82.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.17 
McDonough 3.6 E 
(GA-HY-21) (33.44N, 
84.08W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.64 
South Carolina 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Anderson (KAND) 
(34.50N, 82.71W) 
27/1125 
974.6 
27/1050 
39 
(2 min, 10 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Beaufort (KNBC) 
(32.48N, 80.72W) 
27/0856 
993.9 
27/0835 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
65 
 
 
 
 
Charleston (KCHS) 
(32.90N, 80.04W) 
27/0950 
996.2 
27/0900 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Columbia (KCAE) 
(33.94N, 81.12W) 
27/1015 
989.2 
27/1015 
38 
(2 min, 10 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Greenville (KGMU) 
(34.85N, 82.35W) 
27/1132 
979.1 
27/1055 
36I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
56I 
 
 
 
 
Greer (KGSP) 
(34.91N, 82.21W) 
27/1145 
979.4 
27/1140 
38 
(2 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Orangeburg (KOGB) 
(33.46N, 80.85W) 
27/1015 
992.2 
27/1055 
38 
(2 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Sunfish Mountain 
(SFMS1) (35.05N, 
82.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.66 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Charleston (CHTS1) 
(32.78N, 79.92W) 
27/1000 
997.5 
27/1006 
46 
(19 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Myrtle Beach 
(MROS1) (33.66N, 
78.92W) 
27/1300 
1000.7 
27/1448 
41 
(8 min, 7 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     43 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
Public/Other 
Laurens (34.46N, 
82.11W) 
27/1055 
979.8 
27/0845 
48 
67 
 
 
 
 
St. Phillips Island 
(SSXXG)  (32.30N, 
80.58W 
27/0854 
994.2 
27/0924 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
WeatherFlow Sites 
Beaufort (XBUF) 
(32.34N, 80.59W) 
27/0741 
993.5 
27/0906 
42 
(1 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Calibogue Sound 
(XCLB) (32.11N, 
80.84W) 
27/0756 
991.9 
27/0846 
43 
(1 min, 6 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Folly Beach (XFSE) 
(32.64N, 79.97W) 
27/0932 
998 
27/0757 
44 
58 
 
 
 
 
WeatherSTEM Sites 
Aiken (1347W) 
(33.57N, 81.73W) 
27/0950 
985.1 
27/1010 
42 
63 
 
 
 
 
Beaufort (1190W) 
(32.42N, 80.69W) 
27/0850 
994.6 
27/0820 
43 
56 
 
 
 
 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Joscassee 8 WNW 
(JOCS1) (34.99N, 
83.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19.69 
Table Rock 
(388472) (35.02N, 
82.69W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.48 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
White Hall (COBS1) 
(32.68N, 80.71W) 
 
 
27/0849 
30 
57 
 
 
 
 
North Carolina State University ECONet Sites 
Sassafras Mountain 
(SASS) (35.07N, 
82.78W) 
27/1148 
974.5 
27/1038 
42 
(1 min, 10 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Anderson 5 NW 
(SC-AN-50) (34.57N, 
82.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.41 
Edgefield 10.5 N 
(SC-ED-5) (33.94N, 
81.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.17 
McCormick 13E 
(SC-ED-18) (33.88N, 
82.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.08 
Salem 0.8 SW (SC-
OC-78) (34.88N, 
82.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.06 

Hurricane Helene     44 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
Salem 1.9 NE (SC-
OC-92) (34.91N, 
82.95W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.86 
Salem 3.1 WNW 
(SC-OC-4) (34.91N, 
83.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.22 
Slater-Marietta 6.4 
NW (SC-GV-81) 
(35.11N, 82.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.48 
Sunset 4.4 ENE 
(SC-PC-53) (35.01N, 
82.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.39 
Tamassee 0.9 NW 
(SC-OC-95) (34.89N, 
83.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.24 
North Carolina 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Charlotte (KCLT) 
(35.22N, 80.94W) 
27/1252 
994.2 
27/1052 
30 
(2 min, 10 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Jefferson (KGEV) 
(36.43N, 81.42W) 
27/1325 
993.8 
27/1305 
34I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
46I 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Wrightsville Beach 
(JMPN7) (34.21N, 
77.79W) 
27/1942 
1004.4 
27/1718 
36 
(8 min, 15 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
WeatherSTEM Sites 
Charlotte (1412W) 
(35.20N, 80.80W) 
27/1210 
994.2 
27/1050 
36 
 
 
 
 
 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Celo 2 S (CELN7) 
(35.83N, 82.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26.65 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Busick (BSKN7) 
(35.74N, 82.22W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30.78 
Citizen Weather Observer Program Stations (CWOP) 
Banner Elk (E9464) 
(36.20N, 81.85W) 
27/1200 
990.2I 
27/1200 
50I 
88I 
 
 
 
 
Southport (F6543) 
(33.76N, 77.95W) 
27/1201 
1004.4 
27/1115 
43I 
50I 
 
 
 
 
North Carolina State University ECONet Sites 
Frying Pan 
Mountain (FRYI) 
(35.39N, 82.77W) 
27/1209 
975.1 
27/1152 
55 
(1 min) 
76 
 
 
 
 
Mt. Mitchell (MITC) 
(35.76N, 82.27W) 
 
 
27/1227 
70I 
(1 min, 10 m) 
92I 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     45 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Banner Elk 1 W 
(NC-AV-13) (36.16N, 
81.89W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22.85 
Black Mountain 5.5 
SE (NC-BC-115) 
(35.55N, 82.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.07 
Boone 4 ENE (NC-
WT-79) (36.22N, 
81.60W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.19 
Connestee Falls 1 
SW (NC-TR-30)  
(35.14N, 82.74W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29.98 
Foscoe 1 WSW 
(NC-WT-11) (36.15N, 
81.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.60 
Hendersonville 5 
SW (NC-HN-14) 
(35.28N, 82.53W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.70 
Hendersonville 6 
SSW (NC-HN-25) 
(35.24N, 82.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.01 
Linville Falls (NC-
AV-7) (35.95N, 81.95W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.82 
Old Fort 4 NW (NC-
MD-8) (35.68N, 
82.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.68 
Sapphire 5 SW (NC-
TR-29) (35.06N, 
83.01W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.51 
Spruce Pine 7 SW 
(NC-ML-10) (35.84N, 
82.14W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.31 
Swannanoa 3 WNW 
(NC-BC-25) (35.62N, 
82.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.22 
Tennessee 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Alcoa (KTYS)  
(35.82N, 83.99W) 
27/1400 
980.9 
27/1725 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Bryson City 13 N 
(NFGT1) (35.61N, 
83.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.40 
Trade (TRAT1)  
(36.35N, 81.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     46 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Mt. Leconte 
(406328) (35.66N, 
83.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.20 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Unicoi (UNIT1) 
(36.20N, 82.39W) 
 
 
27/1516 
20 
(6 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Virginia 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Abingdon (KVJI) 
(36.68N, 82.03W) 
27/1455 
986.6 
27/1315 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Hillsville (KHLX) 
(36.77N, 80.82W) 
27/1515 
995.1 
27/1455 
32I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
55I 
 
 
 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Troutdale 4 S 
(TRTV2) (36.62N, 
81.38W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.75 
Public/Other 
Grayson Highlands 
(DY006) (36.64N, 
81.52W) 
27/1420 
994.9 
27/1220 
30 
57 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program Stations (CWOP) 
Tazewell (F0183) 
(37.10N, 81.34W) 
27/1630 
993.9 
27/1530 
36 
56 
 
 
 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Fries 7 WSW (VA-
GR-4) (36.70N, 
81.10W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.81 
Galax 5.3 SW (VA-
GR-6) (36.61N, 
80.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.89 
Marion 2.4 ENE 
(VA-SM-4) (36.85N, 
81.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.78 
West Virginia 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Bluefield (KBLF) 
(37.30N, 81.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.11 
Huntington (KHTS) 
(38.37N, 82.56W) 
27/1735 
988.0 
27/1700 
32 
(2 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Public/Other 
Lockbridge  
(37.83N, 80.85W) 
 
 
 
 
57 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     47 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Bluefield 5 NNW 
(WV-MC-15) (37.32N, 
81.27W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.68 
Kentucky 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Hebron (KCVG) 
(39.04N, 84.67W) 
27/2100 
989.7 
27/2000 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Lexington (KLEX) 
(38.03N, 84.61W) 
27/1930 
986.0 
27/1700 
39 
(2 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
WeatherSTEM Sites 
Bowling Green 
(0683W) (36.99N, 
86.45W) 
27/2040 
985.4 
27/2130 
34 
39 
 
 
 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Greenup 6 W (KY-
GP-6) (38.58N, 82.93) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.55 
Henderson 0.4 SSW 
(KY-HS-1) (37.83N, 
87.58W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.67 
Ohio 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Cincinnati (KLUK) 
(39.11N, 84.42W) 
27/2000 
989.8 
27/1930 
31 
(2 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Dayton (KFFO) 
(39.83N, 84.05W) 
27/2035 
994.9 
27/2124 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Springboro (KMGY) 
(39.59N, 84.22W) 
27/2012 
992.6 
27/2012 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Springfield (KSGH) 
(39.84N, 83.84W) 
27/2110 
995.3 
27/2130 
36 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Wilmington (KILN) 
(39.43N, 83.78W) 
27/1950 
990.5 
27/1935 
38I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
59I 
 
 
 
 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Piketon (336630) 
(39.07N, 83.02W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.92 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Rosemount 0.3 W 
(OH-SC-4) (38.79N, 
82.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.51 
Indiana 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Columbus (KBAK) 
(39.27N, 85.90W) 
27/2245 
990.2 
27/2045 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     48 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
Indianapolis (KIND) 
(39.73N, 86.28W) 
27/2320 
993.2 
27/2245 
41 
(2 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
New Castle (KUWL) 
(39.88N, 85.33W) 
27/2215 
995.3 
27/2155 
36 
(2 min, 10 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Evansville 9 WSW 
(IN-VN-37) (37.93N, 
87.69W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.19 
Henryville 2.6 E (IN-
CK-35) (38.54N, 
85.72W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.69 
Illinois 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Lawrenceville 
(KLWV) (38.76N, 
87.60W) 
28/0105 
989.8 
27/2335 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Mattoon (KMTO) 
(39.48N, 88.28W) 
28/0050 
996.8 
28/0200 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Cairo (CIRI2)  
(37.00N, 88.16W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.91 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Ft. Massac St Park 
(113120) (37.14N, 
88.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.47 
Alabama 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Auburn (KAUO) 
(32.62N, 85.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.13 
Citizen Weather Observer Program Stations (CWOP) 
Huntsville (AR191) 
(34.74N, 86.53W) 
 
 
28/0338 
28 
37 
 
 
 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Eufaula 7 S (AL-BR-
7) (31.81N, 85.17W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.28 
Pansey 2 NNE (AL-
HS-23) (31.18N, 
85.17W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.50 
 
a  Date/time is for sustained wind when both sustained and gust are listed. 
b  Except as noted, sustained wind averaging periods for C-MAN and land-based reports are 2 min; buoy averaging 
periods are 8 min. 
c  Storm surge is water height above normal astronomical tide level. 

Hurricane Helene     49 
 
d  For most locations, storm tide is water height above the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).  Storm 
tide is water height above Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW) for NOS stations in Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, 
and Barbados. 
e  Estimated inundation is the maximum height of water above ground.  For some USGS storm tide pressure sensors, 
inundation is estimated by subtracting the elevation of the sensor from the recorded storm tide.  For other USGS 
storm tide sensors and USGS high-water marks, inundation is estimated by subtracting the elevation of the land 
derived from a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) from the recorded and measured storm tide.  For NOS tide gauges, 
the height of the water above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW) is used as a proxy for inundation. 
I Incomplete Data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     50 
 
Table 4. 
For Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024, the number of hours in advance of 
formation associated with the first NHC Tropical Weather Outlook forecast in the 
indicated likelihood category. Note that the timings for the “Low” category do not 
include forecasts of a 0% chance of genesis. 
 
Hours Before Genesis 
48-Hour Outlook 
168-Hour Outlook 
Low (<40%) 
48 
156 
Medium (40%-60%) 
42 
126 
High (>60%) 
30 
60 
 
 
 
 
Table 5a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) track 
forecast errors (n mi) for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024. Mean errors 
for the previous 5-yr period are shown for comparison. Official errors that are 
smaller than the 5-yr means are shown in boldface type. 
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
22.8 
40.6 
52.4 
59.9 
55.5 
45.9 
 
 
OCD5 
62.6 
157.9 
267.4 
432.6 
581.1 
630.2 
 
 
Forecasts 
11 
9 
7 
5 
3 
1 
 
 
OFCL (2019-23) 
23.9 
36.5 
49.3 
63.4 
79.2 
93.4 
132.9 
190.4 
OCD5 (2019-23) 
45.7 
97.1 
153.0 
205.4 
254.9 
297.8 
372.7 
439.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     51 
 
Table 5b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected track forecast guidance models (in n mi) 
for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024. Errors smaller than the NHC official 
forecast are shown in boldface type. The number of official forecasts shown here 
will generally be smaller than that shown in Table 5a due to the homogeneity 
requirement. 
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
24.3 
43.3 
57.4 
68.8 
64.4 
45.9 
 
 
OCD5 
66.5 
165.3 
281.4 
448.5 
555.4 
630.2 
 
 
GFSI 
21.3 
39.7 
56.3 
71.9 
73.1 
16.0 
 
 
HWFI 
31.5 
55.6 
88.2 
110.5 
98.8 
38.1 
 
 
HMNI 
33.2 
56.5 
67.6 
86.3 
80.9 
99.6 
 
 
HFAI 
30.7 
48.7 
60.7 
69.8 
63.1 
66.2 
 
 
HFBI 
22.9 
37.8 
56.0 
78.4 
73.6 
60.2 
 
 
EGRI 
27.2 
43.2 
44.7 
47.5 
81.9 
162.8 
 
 
EMXI 
27.5 
41.3 
43.3 
52.5 
46.1 
56.0 
 
 
CMCI 
31.5 
55.7 
69.3 
68.5 
53.1 
49.8 
 
 
CTCI 
23.9 
37.9 
39.7 
67.9 
101.5 
158.8 
 
 
TVCA 
25.0 
41.8 
52.1 
62.8 
60.1 
65.6 
 
 
TVCX 
25.1 
42.5 
51.3 
62.8 
58.3 
57.8 
 
 
GFEX 
24.0 
39.2 
45.6 
57.5 
53.9 
30.0 
 
 
TVDG 
25.0 
41.9 
50.1 
61.3 
56.6 
62.4 
 
 
HCCA 
25.7 
45.0 
56.0 
66.9 
54.5 
30.4 
 
 
FSSE 
22.3 
37.7 
48.7 
57.6 
45.7 
53.6 
 
 
AEMI 
24.6 
40.6 
58.1 
81.3 
85.8 
48.0 
 
 
TABS 
47.8 
68.7 
74.0 
85.9 
93.0 
170.6 
 
 
TABM 
38.2 
55.6 
61.6 
79.6 
94.6 
140.2 
 
 
TABD 
33.3 
50.0 
76.0 
122.2 
152.1 
108.1 
 
 
Forecasts 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
1 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     52 
 
Table 6a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) intensity 
forecast errors (kt) for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024.  Means errors 
for the previous 5-yr period are shown for comparison.  Official errors that are 
smaller than the 5-yr means are shown in boldface type. 
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
7.7 
8.3 
6.4 
11.0 
18.3 
0.0 
 
 
OCD5 
11.9 
19.9 
30.7 
40.0 
31.0 
24.0 
 
 
Forecasts 
11 
9 
7 
5 
3 
1 
 
 
OFCL (2019-23) 
5.0 
7.3 
8.5 
9.7 
10.4 
10.9 
12.9 
15.5 
OCD5 (2019-23) 
6.6 
10.2 
13.1 
15.6 
17.2 
18.6 
21.8 
22.6 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     53 
 
Table 6b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected intensity forecast guidance models (in kt) 
for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024. Errors smaller than the NHC official 
forecast are shown in boldface type. The number of official forecasts shown here 
will generally be smaller than that shown in Table 6a due to the homogeneity 
requirement. 
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
8.5 
8.8 
6.7 
12.5 
17.5 
0.0 
 
 
OCD5 
12.6 
19.1 
29.8 
34.5 
28.5 
24.0 
 
 
HWFI 
12.0 
8.9 
12.5 
21.2 
23.0 
4.0 
 
 
HMNI 
12.3 
10.2 
12.8 
14.0 
17.5 
5.0 
 
 
HFAI 
13.3 
11.5 
11.0 
16.2 
9.5 
9.0 
 
 
HFBI 
12.7 
12.5 
8.0 
25.2 
3.5 
8.0 
 
 
DSHP 
10.3 
13.4 
9.7 
8.8 
20.5 
3.0 
 
 
LGEM 
9.9 
10.4 
8.2 
7.5 
15.5 
3.0 
 
 
ICON 
10.8 
10.4 
9.7 
12.8 
19.0 
4.0 
 
 
IVCN 
10.9 
9.9 
9.3 
15.0 
15.5 
5.0 
 
 
IVDR 
11.4 
9.4 
9.5 
16.2 
16.5 
5.0 
 
 
CTCI 
11.0 
10.9 
12.5 
12.8 
19.0 
3.0 
 
 
GFSI 
15.7 
13.8 
19.8 
25.0 
29.5 
7.0 
 
 
EMXI 
15.4 
20.4 
28.0 
32.5 
39.0 
8.0 
 
 
HCCA 
10.7 
11.4 
12.0 
15.2 
14.0 
7.0 
 
 
FSSE 
11.6 
13.4 
10.5 
11.5 
14.0 
5.0 
 
 
Forecasts 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
1 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     54 
 
Table 7. 
Coastal wind watch and warning summary for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 
September 2024. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
23 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Tulum to Rio Lagartos, Mexico 
23 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Cuban provinces of Artemisa, Pinar del 
Rio and Isle of Youth 
23 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Tulum to Cabo Catoche, Mexico 
23 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Pinar del Rio, Cuba 
23 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Florida Keys from Dry Tortugas to 
Seven Mile Bridge 
24 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Grand Cayman 
24 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Bonita Beach to Flamingo, FL 
24 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Indian Pass to Englewood, FL 
24 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Walton/Bay County line to Indian Pass, 
FL 
24 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Englewood to Flamingo, FL 
24 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Dry Tortugas to Seven Mile Bridge, FL 
24 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Seven Mile Bridge to Channel 5 Bridge, 
FL 
24 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Grand Cayman 
24 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Tulum to Cabo Catoche, Mexico 
24 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Mexico Beach to Anclote River, FL 
24 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Dry Tortugas to Channel 5 Bridge, FL 
24 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Anclote River to Flamingo, FL 
24 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Walton / Bay County Line to Mexico 
Beach, FL 
24 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Palm Beach / Martin County Line, FL to 
Savannah River 
25 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Palm Beach / Martin County Line to 
Flagler / Volusia County Line, FL 

Hurricane Helene     55 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
25 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Lake Okeechobee, FL 
25 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Anclote River, FL to FL / GA border 
25 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
FL / GA border to South Santee River, 
SC 
25 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Anclote River, FL to Altamaha Sound, 
GA 
25 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Okaloosa / Walton County Line to 
Mexico Beach, FL 
25 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Anclote River, FL to South Santee River, 
SC 
25 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
South Santee River to SC / NC border 
25 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Anclote River, FL to SC / NC border 
26 / 0300 
All Warnings discontinued 
Mexico 
26 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Pinar del Rio, Cuba 
26 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Cuba 
27 / 0600 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Florida Keys and Dry Tortugas 
27 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
All 
27 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
All 
27 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Okaloosa / Walton County Line to 
Mexico Beach, FL 
27 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Suwannee River to Flagler / Volusia 
County Line, FL 
27 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Lake Okeechobee, FL 
27 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Indian Pass to Suwannee River, FL 
27 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Flagler / Volusia County Line, FL to 
Altamaha Sound, GA 
27 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Altamaha Sound, GA to Savannah River 
27 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
All 

Hurricane Helene     56 
 
Table 8. 
Storm Surge watch and warning summary for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 
2024. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
24 / 0300 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Bonita Beach to Flamingo, FL 
24 / 0900 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Indian Pass to Bonita Beach, FL, 
including Charlotte Harbor and Tampa 
Bay 
24 / 2100 
Storm Surge Warning issued 
Indian Pass to Flamingo, FL, including 
Charlotte Harbor and Tampa Bay 
25 / 1500 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
west of Indian Pass to Mexico Beach, 
FL 
25 / 2100 
Storm Surge Warning issued 
west of Indian Pass to Mexico Beach, 
FL 
27 / 0900 
Storm Surge Warning 
discontinued 
west of Indian Pass to Mexico Beach, 
FL 
27 / 0900 
Storm Surge Warning 
discontinued 
south of Bonita Beach to Flamingo, FL 
27 / 1200 
Storm Surge Warning 
discontinued 
middle of Longboat Key to Bonita 
Beach, FL, including Charlotte Harbor 
27 / 1500 
Storm Surge Warning 
discontinued 
all 

Hurricane Helene     57 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Central American Gyre (CAG) diagnostic plots for the pre-Helene disturbance valid at 1200 UTC 21 September. Panel 
(a) shows 850 mb tangential wind (shaded, m s-1), and earth relative 850 mb wind (barbs, kt). Tangential wind is 
calculated based on the large-scale (500–1000 km averaged) circulation max (location denoted by blue dot). Larger 
blue circles denote the radii of 500 and 1000 km from the circulation max. Panel (b) depicts a line plot of the arc averaged 
850 mb tangential wind (red line, m s-1) at all location segments (in degrees) around the circulation max of the CAG 
candidate. Panel (c) depicts a line plot of 850 mb azimuthally averaged tangential wind (red line, m s-1) extending out in 
distance from the circulation max of the CAG candidate. For more information on how these criteria verify the presence 
of a CAG see http://www.pppapin.com/README_CAGs.pdf 

Hurricane Helene     58 
 
 
Figure 2. 
Best track positions for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024. Tracks over the United States and during the post-tropical 
stage are partially based on analyses from the NOAA Weather Prediction Center.

Hurricane Helene     59 
 
 
Figure 3. 
Selected wind observations and best track maximum sustained surface wind speed curve for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 
September 2024. Aircraft observations have been adjusted for elevation using 90%, 80%, and 75% adjustment factors for 
observations from 700 mb, 850 mb, and 925 mb, respectively. Dropwindsonde observations include actual 10 m winds (sfc), 
as well as surface estimates derived from the mean wind over the lowest 150 m of the wind sounding (LLM). Advanced Dvorak 
Technique estimates represent the Current Intensity at the nominal observation time. SATCON intensity estimates are from the 
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies. Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC, and solid vertical lines 
correspond to landfalls. 

Hurricane Helene     60 
 
 
Figure 4. 
Selected pressure observations and best track minimum central pressure curve for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024. 
Advanced Dvorak Technique estimates represent the Current Intensity at the nominal observation time. SATCON intensity 
estimates are from the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies. KZC P-W refers to pressure estimates derived 
using the Knaff-Zehr-Courtney pressure-wind relationship. Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC, and solid vertical 
lines correspond to landfalls. 

Hurricane Helene     61 
 
 
Figure 5. 
Histogram of tropical cyclone forward speed (mph) at landfall averaged over the 12-h period leading up to landfall for storms 
making landfall along the coast of the northern half (north of 24°N) of the Gulf of America (1851-2023). 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     62 
 
 
 
Figure 6. 
Air Force Reserve and NOAA Hurricane Hunter aircraft flight tracks (red) from reconnaissance missions into Helene.  The black 
markers denote center fixes, and the blue triangles indicate dropsonde locations.  The color coding of the flight tracks is based 
on the observed flight-level wind speed with the color legend to the right of the map representing the color associated with the 
various wind speeds in knots.  Dropsondes with no flight tracks are from the NOAA G-IV aircraft. 

Hurricane Helene     63 
 
 
Figure 7. 
Selected surface or near-surface wind gust observations (kt) associated with Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024.  A 
large number of sites, especially over Georgia and South Carolina, stopped reporting before the peak winds arrived.

Hurricane Helene     64 
 
 
 
Figure 8. 
Synthetic aperture radar image showing the estimated surface wind field in Hurricane 
Helene over the northeastern Gulf.  Data is from the Canadian RADARSAT-2 valid at 2338 
UTC 26 September 2024. 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     65 
 
 
Figure 9. 
Pressure and wind traces from Texas Tech StickNet observation site 102 placed near 
Hampton Springs, FL between 1800 UTC 26 September and 1200 UTC 27 September.  
The grey dots are raw 3-sec gusts, 1-min moving mean (pink dots), and 10-min moving 
mean (black dots).  A local roughness length time history was constructed based on the 
turbulence intensity derived from the raw 10-Hz measurements.  This roughness length 
was used to standardize the wind speed to 10 m, 1-min, open exposure (roughness length 
= 0.03 m) as shown by the blue dots in the wind speed trace.  Credit: Texas Tech 
University Hurricane Research Team.

Hurricane Helene     66 
 
 
 
Figure 10. 
Analyzed storm surge inundation (feet above ground level) along the coast of Florida from 
Hurricane Helene.  Helene’s track is overlaid (black line). 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     67 
 
 
Figure 11. 
Maximum water levels (ft above MHHW) during Hurricane Helene measured by the NOS 
tide gauge network and deployed USGS water level sensors, overlaid with TBW radar 
reflectivity at 0259 UTC 27 September. 

Hurricane Helene     68 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. 
USGS Hydrologic Imagery Visualization and Information System (HIVIS) camera captured 
the dangerous storm surge at Madeira Beach in coastal Pinellas County.

Hurricane Helene     69 
 
 
Figure 13. 
ECMWF Reanalysis v5 (ERA-5) and satellite analysis showing formation of Predecessor Rainfall Event (PRE) prior to Helene’s 
landfall.  Top panels show 300–200 mb layer mean Potential Vorticity (shading, PVU), Integrated Vapor Transport (shaded, kg 
m-1 s-1), 850 mb relative vorticity (thick black contours, >6x10-5 s-1), and sea level pressure (thin black contours, every 2 mb).  
Bottom panels show GOES-16 water vapor channel 9 (shaded, °C).  Panels ordered by date: (left) 0000 UTC 25 September, 
(middle) 1200 UTC 26 September, and (right) 1200 UTC 27 September.  Frontal features adapted from the WPC surface 
analysis archive: https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/html/sfc-zoom.php, and additional features are denoted to highlight trough 
interaction with Helene and tropical moisture.

Hurricane Helene     70 
 
 
 
Figure 14. 
Analysis of storm total rainfall (inches) for Hurricane Helene. Courtesy of David Roth of 
the NOAA Weather Prediction Center. 

Hurricane Helene     71 
 
 
Figure 15. 
Annual 3 day exceedance probabilities associated with Helene.  High resolution image 
found here: https://www.weather.gov/media/owp/oh/hdsc/docs/202409_Helene.pdf  

Hurricane Helene     72 
 
 
Figure 16. 
Map of all flash flood warnings issued ahead of and as Helene moved inland.  The green 
polygons represent the 34 Flash Flood Emergencies that were issued.  The red line is the 
track of Helene based on the operational position estimates.

Hurricane Helene     73 
 
 
Figure 17. 
Plot of more than 2,000 landslides associated with Helene as observed by the USGS.  The red circles are flagged landslides, 
which 
include 
those 
that 
impacted 
rivers, 
roads 
and 
structures. 
 
Interactive 
image 
can 
be 
found 
at: 
https://usgs.maps.arcgis.com/apps/dashboards/01b4f51fc0b64002bf7722a9acfc181d 

Hurricane Helene     74 
 
 
Figure 18. 
Plot of sites that observed record river flooding during and just after Helene.  The red 
circles indicate the 22 sites that have a period of record of at least 50 years.  It should be 
noted that some of this data is still preliminary and subject to change.

Hurricane Helene     75 
 
 
 
Figure 19. 
USGS river gauge measurements on the French Broad River at Asheville, NC. 

Hurricane Helene     76 
 
 
 
Figure 20. 
USGS river gauge measurements on the Swannanoa River at Biltmore, NC. 

Hurricane Helene     77 
 
 
Figure 21. 
Rainfall accumulations (mm) in Mexico from 24–25 September, including the effects of Helene.  Not all of the rainfall shown is 
directly due to Helene.  Helene’s track is based on operational location and intensity estimates.  Image courtesy of CONAGUA, 
the national meteorological service of Mexico.

Hurricane Helene     78 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22. 
Map of NWS confirmed tornadoes spawned by Hurricane Helene. 

Hurricane Helene     79 
 
 
Figure 23. 
All fatalities (direct and indirect both included) associated with Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024.  The size of the dot 
corresponds with the number of deaths that occurred in that county. 

Hurricane Helene     80 
 
 
Figure 24. 
Direct fatalities color-coded by hazard type associated with Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024.  (Note: The freshwater 
flooding category includes deaths that were caused by landslides/debris flows.)

Hurricane Helene     81 
 
 
 
Figure 25. 
Power outage map for 1840 UTC 27 September.  Photo credit: PowerOutage.us

Hurricane Helene     82 
 
 
 
Figure 26. 
A home in Keaton Beach, FL was gutted due to Helene’s 12–16 ft storm surge there.  The majority of homes in Keaton Beach 
were either gutted or washed away.  Photo courtesy of Alicia Devine and the Tallahassee Democrat. 

Hurricane Helene     83 
 
 
 
Figure 27. 
A home furniture shop in Valdosta, GA is destroyed by Helene’s winds.  Photo courtesy of Getty Images and taken from BBC. 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     84 
 
 
 
Figure 28. 
A large oak tree that fell on a home in Anderson, SC on 27 September 2024.  Photo courtesy of Ken Ruinard and the Anderson 
Independent Mail via USA Today Network.

Hurricane Helene     85 
 
 
 
Figure 29. 
Flooding from the Swannanoa and French Broad rivers in Biltmore Village in Asheville, NC after Helene swept through on 27 
September 2024.  Image courtesy of Colby Rabon and the Carolina Public Press. 

Hurricane Helene     86 
 
 
 
Figure 30. 
Catastrophic flooding from the French Broad River in Asheville’s River Arts District in the aftermath of Helene on 27 September 
2024.  Image courtesy of Colby Rabon and the Carolina Public Press.

Hurricane Helene     87 
 
 
 
Figure 31. 
Trees from landslides on the surrounding mountains and debris from the cities of Lake Lure and Chimney Rock were carried 
into Lake Lure on 27 September.  Image courtesy of James Broyhill and Fox News. 
 

Hurricane Helene     88 
 
 
 
Figure 32. 
Cars in a flooded area at a used tire dealer along Business Highway 25 in Hendersonville, NC on 28 September 2024.  Photo 
courtesy of Ken Ruinard and USA Today Network. 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     89 
 
 
 
Figure 33. 
Flooding in Downtown Marshall, NC from the French Broad River after Helene.  Photo courtesy of Old Marshall Jail Hotel, taken 
from the North Carolina State Climate Office. 

Hurricane Helene     90 
 
 
 
Figure 34. 
U.S. Route 19 in Yancey County is just one example of hundreds of roads that were washed out and destroyed in western 
North Carolina.  Photo courtesy of Josh Morgan and USA Today. 

Hurricane Helene     91 
 
 
 
Figure 35. 
Dangerous street flooding developed just outside of Boone, NC on 27 September 2024.  Photo courtesy of Jonathan Drake 
and Reuters. 

Hurricane Helene     92 
 
 
 
Figure 36. 
Flood waters from the Nolichucky River rage in Erwin, TN on 27 September 2024 as a helicopter rescues hospital staff and 
patients from the rooftop of Unicoi County Hospital.  Photo courtesy of Alderman Michael Baker and ABC News. 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     93 
 
 
 
Figure 37. 
USGS river gauge measurements on the Nolichucky River at Embreeville, TN.

Hurricane Helene     94 
 
 
 
Figure 38. 
Floodwaters rushing in front of a home in southwest Virginia shortly after Helene passed.  
Photo courtesy of Virginia Department of Emergency Management.

Hurricane Helene     95 
 
 
Figure 39. 
Composites of 7-day tropical cyclone genesis areas depicted in NHC’s Tropical Weather Outlooks prior to the formation of 
Hurricane Helene for (a) all probabilistic genesis categories, (b) the low (<40%) category, (c) medium (40–60%) category, and 
(d) high (>60%) category. The location of genesis is indicated by the black star.

Hurricane Helene     96 
 
 
 
Figure 40. 
NHC official track forecasts (blue lines) from 1200 UTC 23 August to 1800 UTC 27 August.  
The best track is depicted by the black line with symbols in red depicting positions typically 
at 6 h intervals.

Hurricane Helene     97 
 
 
 
Figure 41. 
Official forecast (OFCL - black line) and selected model forecast track errors for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 2024.  
The number of forecasts for each verifying forecast time period is in parentheses.

Hurricane Helene     98 
 
 
 
Figure 42. 
The official intensity forecasts (blue lines) from 1200 UTC 23 August to 1800 UTC 27 August.  The best track is depicted by the 
black line with black dots typically shown every 6 h. 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     99 
 
 
 
Figure 43. 
Official forecast (OFCL - black line) and selected model forecast intensity errors for Hurricane Helene, 24–27 September 
2024.  The number of forecasts for each verifying forecast time period is in parentheses.

Hurricane Helene     100 
 
 
Figure 44. 
Coastal and inland tropical cyclone wind watches and warnings (only highest severity 
shown) from Hurricane Helene.

Hurricane Helene     101 
 
 
 
Figure 45. 
The Storm Surge Warning (magenta) from 2100 UTC 25 September (Adv. 10) and 
maximum water levels measured from NOS tide gauges and deployed USGS water level 
sensors.  Water levels greater than 3 ft above MHHW are designated as a white “o” and 
water levels less than 3 ft above MHHW as a black “x”. 
 

Hurricane Helene     102 
 
 
Figure 46. 
Forecast evolution of the Weather Prediction Center’s Excessive Rainfall Outlook valid 1200 UTC 26 September to 1200 UTC 
27 September 2024.  The “practically perfect verification” is derived from a field of observations and attempts to depict what a 
perfect WPC Excessive Rainfall Outlook would have looked like.  The observations it incorporates include: local storm reports 
of flooding, flash flood guidance exceedance, annual recurrence interval exceedance and USGS river gauge flooding. 
 

Hurricane Helene     103 
 
 
 
Figure 47. 
Forecast evolution of the Weather Prediction Center’s 24 hour rainfall forecast valid 1200 UTC 26 September to 1200 UTC 27 
September 2024. 
 

Hurricane Helene     104 
 
 
 
Figure 48. 
WPC’s messaging timeline for Hurricane Helene rainfall. 
 
 

Hurricane Helene     105 
 
ADDITIONAL NWS RESOURCES 
 
Note that the storm overviews in these reports were generated using the preliminary Best Track data for Hurricane Helene. 
 
North Carolina State Climate Office article: 
https://climate.ncsu.edu/blog/2024/09/rapid-reaction-historic-flooding-follows-helene-in-western-nc/  
 
South Carolina State Climatology Office preliminary report: https://www.dnr.sc.gov/climate/sco/Publications/Helene-OFR.pdf  
 
Tennessee State Climate Office report: https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/57af2ac1866f42d58bedb2f3c2154f8b  
 
Blacksburg, VA Weather Forecast Office (WFO) StoryMap: https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/c0813e1b36c64563b52ba8f4fd9244b9  
 
Morristown, TN WFO report: https://www.weather.gov/mrx/Hurricane_Helene  
 
Nashville, TN WFO summary: https://www.weather.gov/ohx/hurricanehelene  
 
Charleston, WV WFO Summary: https://www.weather.gov/rlx/2024-September-27-Helene  
 
Wilmington, OH WFO Summary: https://www.weather.gov/iln/20240927  
 

Hurricane Helene     106 
 
Jacksonville, FL WFO StoryMap: https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/44b6406a60c445d49d31d470a8b0f233  
Impacts: https://www.weather.gov/media/jax/TropicalEventSummary/PSHJAX_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives(2).pdf  
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/jax/TropicalEventSummary/PSHJAX_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf  
 
Tampa Bay, FL WFO Impacts: 
https://www.weather.gov/media/tbw/TropicalEventSummary/PSHTBW_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives.pdf 
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/tbw/TropicalEventSummary/PSHTBW_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf 
 
Tallahassee, FL WFO Impacts: 
https://www.weather.gov/media/tae/TropicalEventSummary/PSHTAE_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives.pdf  
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/tae/TropicalEventSummary/PSHTAE_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf 
 
Key West, FL WFO Impacts: 
https://www.weather.gov/media/key/TropicalEventSummary/PSHKEY_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives.pdf 
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/key/TropicalEventSummary/PSHKEY_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf  
 
Miami, FL WFO Impacts: https://www.weather.gov/media/mfl/TropicalEventSummary/PSHMFL_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives(1).pdf  
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/mfl/TropicalEventSummary/PSHMFL_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf 
 
Melbourne, FL WFO Impacts: 
https://www.weather.gov/media/mlb/TropicalEventSummary/PSHMLB_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives.pdf  
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/mlb/TropicalEventSummary/PSHMLB_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf 

Hurricane Helene     107 
 
 
Charleston, SC WFO Summary: https://www.weather.gov/chs/HurricaneHelene2024  
Impacts: https://www.weather.gov/media/chs/TropicalEventSummary/PSHCHS_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives.pdf  
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/chs/TropicalEventSummary/PSHCHS_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf 
 
Columbia, SC WFO Impacts: 
https://www.weather.gov/media/cae/TropicalEventSummary/PSHCAE_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives.pdf 
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/cae/TropicalEventSummary/PSHCAE_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf 
 
Greenville/Spartanburg, SC WFO Summary: https://www.weather.gov/gsp/20240926-20240927_flood_eventSum  
Impacts: 
https://www.weather.gov/media/gsp/TropicalEventSummary/PSHGSP_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives.docx.pdf 
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/gsp/TropicalEventSummary/PSHGSP_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf 
 
Wilmington, NC WFO Summary: https://www.weather.gov/ilm/Helene2024  
Impacts: https://www.weather.gov/media/ilm/TropicalEventSummary/PSHILM_2024AL09_Helene_ImpactNarratives.pdf 
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/ilm/TropicalEventSummary/PSHILM_2024AL09_Helene_Summary.pdf 
 
Birmingham, AL WFO Impacts: 
https://www.weather.gov/media/bmx/TropicalEventSummary/PSHBMX_2024AL07_Helene_ImpactNarratives.pdf  
Summary: https://www.weather.gov/media/bmx/TropicalEventSummary/PSHBMX_2024AL07_Helene_Summary.pdf  
