 
 
NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER 
TROPICAL CYCLONE REPORT 
 
 
HURRICANE IAN 
 
(AL092022) 
 
23–30 September 2022 
 
Lisa Bucci, Laura Alaka, 
Andrew Hagen, Sandy Delgado, and Jack Beven   
National Hurricane Center 
12 March 20261 
 
 
GOES-16 GEOCOLOR IMAGE FROM 28 SEPTEMBER 2022 AT 1910 UTC NEAR THE TIME OF IAN’S LANDFALL IN 
SOUTHWESTERN FLORIDA. CREDIT: NOAA/NESDIS/STAR 
Ian made landfall in southwestern Florida at category 4 intensity (on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind 
Scale), producing catastrophic storm surge, damaging winds, and historic freshwater flooding across much of 
central and northern Florida.  Ian was responsible for over 150 direct and indirect deaths and over $112 billion 
in damage, making it the costliest hurricane in Florida’s history and the third-costliest in United States history.  
Ian also made landfall as a category 3 hurricane in western Cuba bringing widespread damage and loss of 
power to the entire island.  Ian made its final landfall as a category 1 hurricane in South Carolina.  
                                                
1 Original report dated 2 April 2023.  This version removes WeatherStem data that contained a mixture of measured 
and derived observations in the Florida surface observation section and in the supplemental data files. 

Hurricane Ian     2 
 
Table of Contents 
 
SYNOPTIC HISTORY ........................................................................ 3 
METEOROLOGICAL STATISTICS ................................................... 4 
Winds and Pressure ..................................................................................................... 5 
Cuba and Elsewhere in the Caribbean ....................................................................... 5 
Florida and Georgia .................................................................................................... 6 
North Carolina and South Carolina ............................................................................. 7 
Storm Surge ................................................................................................................. 8 
Cuba .......................................................................................................................... 8 
United States .............................................................................................................. 8 
Southwestern Florida ............................................................................................... 8 
Atlantic coastline .................................................................................................... 10 
Rainfall and Flooding .................................................................................................. 11 
Tornadoes .................................................................................................................. 12 
CASUALTY AND DAMAGE STATISTICS ...................................... 12 
FORECAST AND WARNING CRITIQUE ........................................ 14 
Genesis ...................................................................................................................... 14 
Track .......................................................................................................................... 14 
Intensity ...................................................................................................................... 15 
Storm Surge Forecasts and Warnings ........................................................................ 15 
Wind Watches and Warnings ...................................................................................... 17 
Impact-based Decision Support Services (IDSS) and Public Communication ............. 17 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ............................................................... 18 
TABLES .......................................................................................... 20 
FIGURES ......................................................................................... 41 
ADDITIONAL NWS RESOURCES .................................................. 72 
 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     3 
 
Hurricane Ian 
 
23–30 SEPTEMBER 2022 
 
SYNOPTIC HISTORY 
 
     
The origins of Ian can be traced back to a robust tropical wave that moved off the west 
coast of Africa from 14‒15 September.  The wave remained embedded in the monsoon trough 
and Inter-tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) as it moved slowly across the Atlantic for the next 
six days, with occasional bursts of disorganized convection.  The wave reached the Windward 
Islands on 21 September, and convective activity increased while the wave was over the 
southeastern Caribbean.  However, an equatorward outflow channel from Hurricane Fiona, 
located to the north of the disturbance, generated moderate-to-strong vertical wind shear which 
slowed organization.  Despite the continued shear, around 0600 UTC 23 September, infrared 
satellite imagery indicated that the system had enough organization of its associated deep 
convection and a sufficiently well-defined low-level circulation to designate the formation of a 
tropical depression when it was located about 130 n mi east-northeast of Aruba.  The “best track” 
chart of the tropical cyclone’s path is given in Fig. 1, with the wind and pressure histories shown 
in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively. The best track positions and intensities are listed in Table 12. 
A mid-level ridge building to the north of the depression caused the system to move on a 
general west-northwestward track away from the Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao island chain.  The 
cyclone became a tropical storm 18 h after genesis, at 0000 UTC 24 September, when it was 
located 335 n mi southeast of Jamaica, which coincided with the subtropical ridge turning Ian 
toward the west.  Moderate-to-strong vertical wind shear initially limited intensification of Ian, 
preventing alignment of the low- and mid-level centers while the storm moved over the Caribbean 
Sea south of Jamaica.  Early on 25 September, the storm turned northwestward, and later that 
day convection near Ian’s core started to coalesce.  Ian began its first period of rapid 
intensification at 1800 UTC 25 September when it moved around the southwestern periphery of 
the aforementioned ridge.   By 0600 UTC 26 September, Ian became a hurricane as it passed 
about 100 n mi south-southwest of Grand Cayman Island.  The storm continued to rapidly intensify 
over warm waters (30°C and higher) and in a low vertical wind shear environment as it turned 
northward towards Cuba.  Ian’s rapid intensification continued while it approached the 
southwestern coast of Cuba, and it became a major hurricane by 0600 UTC 27 September.  The 
storm made landfall a few hours later near La Coloma in the Pinar del Rio Province at 0830 UTC 
27 September as a 110-kt category 3 hurricane. 
Ian weakened only slightly while it passed over Cuba, and the center of the hurricane 
emerged over the southeastern Gulf of Mexico around 1400 UTC 27 September.  Atmospheric 
and oceanic conditions remained very conducive for additional strengthening as the storm moved 
                                                
2 A digital record of the complete best track, including wind radii, can be found on line at 
ftp://ftp.nhc.noaa.gov/atcf. Data for the current year’s storms are located in the btk directory, while previous 
years’ data are located in the archive directory. 

Hurricane Ian     4 
 
toward the north-northeast between the western side of a subtropical ridge and a broad trough 
over the eastern United States.  Shortly after entering the Gulf, an eyewall replacement cycle 
began.  This structural change resulted in a larger radius of maximum winds (RMW), an expanded 
overall wind field, and surprisingly, a slight increase in intensity once the eyewall replacement 
cycle completed.  At 0200 UTC 28 September, the eye of the 110-kt hurricane passed directly 
over the Dry Tortugas.  Ian intensified further later than morning and reached its peak intensity of 
140 kt (a category 5 hurricane) at 1200 UTC 28 September.     
Environmental conditions became less favorable soon thereafter, and Ian weakened 
slightly during the next several hours before it made landfall on the barrier island of Cayo Costa, 
Florida, at 1905 UTC 28 September with an intensity of 130 kt.  An hour and a half later, at 2035 
UTC, the center of Ian’s large eye made another landfall near Punta Gorda, Florida, with an 
estimated intensity of 125 kt.  The cyclone steadily weakened as it moved northeastward across 
the Florida peninsula late that day and overnight, and it became a tropical storm with maximum 
sustained winds of 60 kt by 1200 UTC 29 September, just as the center was emerging over the 
Atlantic waters near Cape Canaveral, Florida. 
Once over the western Atlantic Ian re-strengthened to a 65-kt hurricane by 1800 UTC  
29 September with much of its convection displaced to the north of the center while the hurricane 
interacted with a trough over the eastern United States.  Ian turned northward early on  
30 September and began to accelerate toward the coast of South Carolina.  The hurricane made 
its final landfall near Georgetown, South Carolina, with an intensity of 70 kt at 1805 UTC  
30 September. 
Shortly after landfall, Ian merged with a front over North Carolina, marking its transition to 
an extratropical cyclone by 0000 UTC 1 October as it moved inland.  By 1200 UTC that day, 
surface, radar, and satellite imagery indicated that Ian had dissipated, and a separate mid-latitude 
low had formed to the northeast. 
 
METEOROLOGICAL STATISTICS 
 
  
Observations in Ian (Figs. 2 and 3) include subjective satellite-based Dvorak technique 
intensity estimates from the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch (TAFB) and the Satellite 
Analysis Branch (SAB), objective Advanced Dvorak Technique (ADT) and AI-Enhanced 
Advanced Dvorak Technique (AiDT)3 estimates and Satellite Consensus (SATCON) estimates 
from the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies/University of Wisconsin-
Madison. Observations also include flight-level, stepped frequency microwave radiometer 
(SFMR), and dropwindsonde observations from a combined 28 flights of the 53rd Weather 
Reconnaissance Squadron of the U.S. Air Force Reserve Command and the NOAA Aircraft 
Operations Center.  The Air Force Reserve Hurricane Hunters made 14 flights into Ian and 
reported 37 center fixes. The NOAA Hurricane Hunters flew 8 missions into the storm with 16 
center fixes, and there were 6 synoptic surveillance missions flown by the NOAA G-IV jet.  Data 
                                                
3 Olander, T., A. Wimmers, C. Velden, and J. P. Kossin, 2021: Investigation of Machine Learning Using 
Satellite-Based Advanced Dvorak Technique Analysis Parameters to Estimate Tropical Cyclone 
Intensity. Wea. Forecasting, 36, 2161–2186, https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF-D-20-0234.1. 

Hurricane Ian     5 
 
and imagery from NOAA polar-orbiting satellites including the Advanced Microwave Sounding 
Unit (AMSU), the NASA Global Precipitation Mission (GPM), the European Space Agency’s 
Advanced Scatterometer (ASCAT), and Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) 
satellites, among others, were also useful in constructing the best track of Ian.  Data from the 
weather radars in the United States provided important information on Ian. 
Ship reports of winds of tropical storm force associated with Ian are given in Table 2, and 
selected significant storm surge observations given in Table 3.  A supplemental file containing a 
larger selection of surface and buoy observations is available for download on the NHC website 
at https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/supplemental/ian.xlsx. This file also contains rainfall reports 
from National Weather Service Cooperative (COOP) stations and the Community Collaborative 
Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) sites.   
 
Winds and Pressure 
Ian’s estimated peak intensity of 140 kt and minimum central pressure of 937 mb at  
1200 UTC 28 September are based on data from Air Force Reserve Unit and NOAA 
reconnaissance aircraft. During the missions, the maximum 10-second averaged flight-level 
winds reported in the hurricane’s core were 160 kt from a NOAA aircraft at 750 mb (an altitude of 
about 6800 ft) at 1013 UTC 28 September.  These flight-level winds support a surface intensity 
estimate of 136 kt. There were also multiple peak SFMR surface wind estimates from both Air 
Force and NOAA aircraft of 137-138 kt at 1030 UTC and 1013 UTC, respectively.  The SFMR 
data from the Air Force instrument was flagged as unreliable in the real-time products, but 
reprocessing in the post-storm analysis using an updated algorithm no longer flagged the peak 
values.  Due to extreme turbulence in the region where the maximum sustained winds were 
located in the western quadrant, the aircraft was only able to sample that part of Ian’s core once.  
A profile of the winds from the NOAA P-3 Tail Doppler Radar showed a shallow maximum of 
winds largely below the aircraft altitude with speeds exceeding 160 kt 500-1000 ft (150-300 m) 
above the surface (Fig. 4).  The combination of these data, and the consideration of potential 
undersampling from the SFMR4, support a peak intensity of 140 kt.  It should be noted that the 
NHC best track intensities typically have an uncertainty of around ±10%, and that there is very 
little practical difference between a 140-kt category 5 and a 135-kt category 4 hurricane. 
A dropsonde from an Air Force Reserve aircraft reported a pressure of 937 mb with a 
surface wind of 2 kt around 1200 UTC 28 September, and these data are the basis for the 
minimum pressure of 937 mb.   
Cuba and Elsewhere in the Caribbean 
An Air Force Reserve reconnaissance aircraft was in the storm until about 0400 UTC  
27 September, over 4 hours before landfall in Cuba.   The aircraft measured a peak 700-mb flight 
level wind speed of 101 kt (reducing to 91 kt) and SFMR retrievals of 97 kt.  Infrared satellite and 
Cuban radar imagery showed Ian’s eye became more distinct just before landfall, and objective 
satellite intensity estimates (ADT and AiDT) increased to 110-113 kt.  The more organized satellite 
                                                
4 Klotz, B. W., and D. S. Nolan, 2019: SFMR Surface Wind Undersampling over the Tropical Cyclone Life 
Cycle. Mon. Wea. Rev., 147, 247–268, https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-18-0296.1. 

Hurricane Ian     6 
 
and radar presentation and increasing satellite intensity estimates were the justification for the 
110 kt intensity at landfall in Cuba.  Ian’s estimated landfall pressure of 947 mb is based on an 
extrapolated pressure of 947 mb measured by a NOAA Hurricane Hunter aircraft at 1024 UTC. 
Ian brought hurricane conditions to portions of western Cuba.  The Instituto de 
Meteorología de Cuba reported a peak 10-minute sustained wind of 90 kt with a gust of 118 kt in 
San Juan y Martinez at 0755 UTC 27 September.  A conversion of the 10-minute wind yields an 
equivalent 1-minute sustained wind of 100‒110 kt5.  In Pinar del Rio, an observing station 
measured a 10-minute sustained wind of 89 kt with a 105-kt gust at 1112 UTC 27 September.  
The same station measured a minimum pressure of 956.7 mb at 0850 UTC 27 September.   
Based on the data available at the time this report was written, no sustained  
tropical-storm-force were reported in the Cayman Islands, Jamaica, or the Bahamas.  However, 
these islands did report wind gusts of tropical storm strength.   
Florida and Georgia 
The estimated intensity at the Dry Tortugas landfall is based on data from an Air Force 
Reserve aircraft that completed two passes through the center of Ian between 0205 and  
0323 UTC 28 September.  The peak 700-mb flight-level winds were 118 kt which reduces to 106 
kt at the surface.  The peak SFMR measurement was 99 kt.  Based on the flight-level wind 
reduction and accounting for undersampling of the SFMR, the intensity is estimated to be 110 kt.  
The central pressure of 952 mb is based on a dropsonde released from the same aircraft that 
measured a pressure of 952 mb with a surface wind of 5 kt. 
The estimated intensity at the Cayo Costa landfall is based on data from an Air Force 
Reserve aircraft.  At 1723 UTC 28 September a peak flight-level wind of 136 kt was reported 
(reducing to 122 kt) paired with an SFMR measurement of 121 kt.  When accounting for 
undersampling and the large radius of maximum wind (greater than 30 n mi), a correction factor 
can be applied to the SFMR observations that equates to 128 kt.  Therefore, Ian’s estimated 
intensity at the Cayo Costa landfall is 130 kt. 
The Air Force Reserve aircraft released a dropsonde in the center of Ian that measured a 
surface pressure of 939 mb (at 1807 UTC 28 September) with 6 kt of wind just above the surface 
about an hour before the Cayo Costa landfall.  At 1903 UTC, the same aircraft reported an 
extrapolated minimum central pressure of 942 mb (though this method tends to have higher 
uncertainty).  A blend of these data was the basis for the estimated central pressure of 941 mb at 
the Cayo Costa landfall. 
Ian’s landfall intensity in mainland southwestern Florida is estimated to be 125 kt.  
Because of instrument failure, no reliable surface observations exist from the coastal areas where 
the eyewall came on shore.  In addition, aircraft reconnaissance was no longer in the storm 
environment.  The highest reported sustained wind observation was an inland mobile 
meteorological tower, placed by the Florida Coastal Monitoring Program near the Punta Gorda 
airport, that measured peak sustained winds of 78 kt with a gust of 96 kt at 1959 UTC  
                                                
5 Harper, B. A., J. D. Kepert, and J. D. Ginger.  Guidelines for converting between various wind averaging 
periods in tropical 
cyclone conditions.  World Meteorological Organization. August 
2010.  
https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=290  

Hurricane Ian     7 
 
28 September.  Elsewhere, in Punta Gorda, Florida, an Automated Surface Observing Station 
(ASOS) reported sustained winds of 76 kt with a peak gust of 117 kt at approximately 2025 UTC  
28 September. However, this station stopped reporting wind observations shortly after the peak 
values were observed, and the data are incomplete.   
The lowest pressure reported in the third Florida landfall area was 951.2 mb at 2023 UTC 
28 September by Josh Morgerman (iCyclone) located in Punta Gorda.  On the same day, a Citizen 
Weather Observer Program (CWOP) station, also located in Punta Gorda, reported a minimum 
pressure of 951.6 mb at 2030 UTC.  These observations were on the northern side of the large 
eye and indicate the minimum central pressure of Ian was rising as it moved inland.  The minimum 
pressure is estimated to be 945 mb at landfall on the mainland of Florida. 
After making landfall in southwestern Florida, hurricane conditions penetrated inland over 
portions of the peninsula. However, many weather stations near the path of Ian’s center stopped 
transmitting observations prior to the arrival of the strongest winds.  A WeatherFlow station in 
New Smyrna Beach, Florida, reported sustained winds of 63 kt and a peak gust of 83 kt at  
0837 UTC 29 September.  This station was located about 80 n mi from the center of Ian and is 
the basis for the 65-kt intensity at 0600 UTC 29 September. 
A large portion of Florida experienced tropical-storm-force winds (Fig. 5).  These winds 
arrived in the Florida Keys late on 27 September and extended as far north as Islamorada as Ian 
passed to the west.  On the western side of Florida, there were sustained 35-kt winds as far north 
as Dunedin at 2005 UTC 28 September.  As Ian moved off shore of the east coast of Florida at 
1200 UTC 29 September, tropical-storm-force winds were reported as far north as Savannah, 
Georgia, and as far south as Pompano Beach, Florida. 
North Carolina and South Carolina 
An Air Force Reserve aircraft observed peak flight-level winds of 71 kt at 1355 UTC  
30 September (reducing to 64 kt at the surface) and maximum SFMR winds of 72 kt at 1334 UTC 
30 September.  The highest reported sustained wind close to the landfall location from an 
instrument with a complete dataset was 69 kt at 1753 UTC 30 September with a peak gust of  
73 kt from a WeatherFlow station (anemometer elevation 15 m) in Georgetown, South Carolina.  
These data support a landfall intensity of 70 kt. 
Sustained tropical-storm-force winds were measured both north and south of the landfall 
location along the coast (Fig. 5).  Inland, tropical-storm-force gusts were recorded along the track 
of Ian into northern portions of both North Carolina and South Carolina.    
A dropsonde released by an Air Force Reserve aircraft measured 982 mb with a 53-kt 
surface wind speed at 1641 UTC 30 September. The minimum pressure recorded from a surface 
station was 978.7 mb by a WeatherFlow station located in Murrells Inlet, South Carolina, at  
1934 UTC 30 September.  This station and the dropsonde data were used as the basis for the 
minimum central pressure estimate of 978 mb at the time of landfall.  

Hurricane Ian     8 
 
Storm Surge6 
 Cuba 
The Instituto de Meteorología de Cuba reported that Ian produced a significant storm 
surge along the southwest coast of Cuba. East of the landfall location, in La Coloma, the sea 
penetrated 300 m (0.2 mi) inland and water levels reached a height between 2.5 and 3 m (~8 and 
10 ft) (unknown reference level). Nearby in Playa Las Canas, water levels reached a height of  
2.6 m (8.5 ft). In Artemisa, located farther to the east, water levels reached a height of 1.75 m  
(5.7 ft). These areas also had significant inland penetration of the sea, up to 1500 m (0.93 mi) 
inland in Majana and Cajío, and up to 5000 m (3.1 mi) inland in Guanimar. Minor-to-moderate 
coastal flooding also occurred on the northwest coast of Cuba. 
United States  
Ian produced a catastrophic storm surge along the southwest coast of Florida, impacting 
the barrier islands near Fort Myers, as well as rivers and bays such as the Caloosahatchee River, 
Estero Bay, the Imperial River, and Naples Bay. Peak storm surge inundation levels of 10 to  
15 ft above ground level (AGL) occurred in Fort Myers Beach (Fig. 6). Ian made landfall in a region 
extremely vulnerable to storm surge, and the exact track, strong winds, and large storm size (e.g., 
20 n mi RMW at landfall) contributed to the widespread devastating impacts. Ian also produced a 
significant storm surge on the northeast coast of Florida as it passed over the state, and along 
the South Carolina coast where it made a final landfall.  
Several observing networks captured the storm surge event, including National Ocean 
Service (NOS) tide gauges (Fig. 7), deployed United States Geological Survey (USGS) water 
level sensors (Fig. 8), USGS stream gauges (not shown), and survey crews collecting post-storm 
high water marks (Fig. 9). Note that Mean Higher High Water (MHHW), an approximation for 
inundation at the immediate coastline, is reported herein at USGS sensors when a valid 
conversion from NAVD88 (a geodetic datum measured by the sensor) can be made using the 
NOAA VDatum conversion tool. These data were analyzed alongside the storm surge hindcast 
produced by the NHC Storm Surge Unit to create a final storm surge estimate. Figure 6 shows 
the NHC storm surge analysis, which represents the maximum inundation above ground level 
(AGL) during Hurricane Ian.  
 
SOUTHWESTERN FLORIDA 
Maximum inundation levels of 10 to 15 ft AGL occurred on Fort Myers Beach and Estero 
Island. A USGS water level sensor measured a wave-filtered water level of 12.70 ft above MHHW 
                                                
6 Several terms are used to describe water levels due to a storm. Storm surge is defined as the abnormal 
rise of water generated by a storm, over and above the predicted astronomical tide, and is expressed in 
terms of height above normal tide levels. Because storm surge represents the deviation from normal water 
levels, it is not referenced to a vertical datum. Storm tide is defined as the water level due to the 
combination of storm surge and the astronomical tide, and is expressed in terms of height above a vertical 
datum, i.e. the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) or Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW). 
Inundation is the total water level that occurs on normally dry ground as a result of the storm tide, and is 
expressed in terms of height above ground level. At the coast, normally dry land is roughly defined as areas 
higher than the normal high tide line, or Mean Higher High Water (MHHW). 

Hurricane Ian     9 
 
at Fort Myers Beach Pier (Fig. 8, Fig. 10), which was the highest water level measurement from 
this network. Nearby, a remote camera mounted by stormchaser Max Olson captured the 
evolution of the storm surge event on Fort Myers Beach. The camera was located less than 0.5 
miles to the east on Estero Blvd relative to the USGS water level sensor. A timeline of images 
taken from this video footage is shown in Figure 11: (a) The onset of storm surge inundating the 
streets, (b) rapidly moving water carrying large floating debris, (c) a home in the view of the 
camera floating off its foundation with large waves crashing over it, (d) waves splashing over the 
camera, mounted approximately 12 ft above the road, and (e) receding waters revealing a barren 
landscape approximately 6.5 hours after the first image. Figure 10 shows the USGS hydrograph 
and the photo timeline overlaid to help relate the sensor measurements to on-the-ground impacts. 
These observations provide a glimpse of the life-threatening and destructive power of the storm 
surge and waves that occurred throughout the area. In addition, both the USGS and the NWS 
surveyed extensive stillwater high water marks on the island (Fig. 9). The agencies used differing 
approaches: the USGS surveyed a wider area including inland impacts, and estimated the water 
level above ground, while the NWS heavily surveyed coastal areas for peak impacts, and 
estimated the water level above the high tide line (MHHW). NWS survey crews found the highest 
marks, approximately 15 ft above MHHW, inside the second story of beachfront structures (e.g. 
Fig. 12). 
Elsewhere, maximum inundation levels of 9 to 13 ft AGL occurred on the eastern portion 
of Sanibel Island. A USGS water level sensor measured a wave-filtered water level of 12.58 ft 
above MHHW on Sanibel Island (Fig. 8), and USGS surveyed widespread high water marks of  
6 to 9 ft AGL on the island (Fig. 9a). Significant structural damage was reported in these areas. 
For example, post-storm NOAA aerial imagery revealed large cuts, and portions of the Sanibel 
causeway were washed away by the storm surge (Fig. 13).  
There was a sharp gradient in the most severe storm surge across the track of Ian’s center. 
Figure 9a highlights a significant difference in the high water marks on the extreme eastern portion 
of Sanibel Island compared to Captiva. Additionally, a USGS water level sensor in Pirate Harbor, 
south of Punta Gorda, measured only 4.47 ft above MHHW, less than 30 miles from Sanibel 
Island and Fort Myers Beach. The majority of the sensors placed in Port Charlotte and Englewood, 
as well as northward through Tampa Bay, remained dry and did not measure storm surge due to 
offshore winds. Water levels in Tampa Bay receded below normal levels, where the NOS tide 
gauge at Old Port Tampa measured a minimum water level of 4.38 ft below Mean Lower Low 
Water (MLLW). 
Maximum inundation levels of 6 to 9 ft AGL occurred in Pine Island, Cape Coral, and other 
communities along the mouth of the Caloosahatchee River. A USGS water level sensor in Punta 
Rassa, located at the east end of the Sanibel Causeway, measured a wave-filtered water level of 
8.37 ft above MHHW. Two additional sensors in Matlacha and Cape Coral were lost/destroyed 
(Fig. 8). While only scattered high water marks were collected in these areas, the NHC storm 
surge hindcast suggests significant inundation occurred, especially along the immediate coast.   
Maximum inundation levels of 5 to 8 ft AGL occurred up the Caloosahatchee River in Fort 
Myers. The NOS tide gauge near downtown Fort Myers measured 7.26 ft above MHHW (Fig. 7) 
where storm surge reversed the direction of the river flow and flooded the streets of the city. The 
USGS stream gauge network also recorded the impressive push of surge up the river, but several 

Hurricane Ian     10 
 
gauges failed prior to recording a peak water level. Along the southern bank of the river in 
downtown Fort Myers, USGS surveyed a high water mark of 4.4 ft AGL (Fig. 9a).   
Maximum inundation levels of 8 to 12 ft AGL occurred in Estero, Bonita Beach, Bonita 
Springs, and North Naples. There were several USGS water level sensors that measured greater 
than 9 ft above MHHW from San Carlos Island southward through Delnor-Wiggins State Park in 
North Naples (Figure 5). Additional USGS stream gauges in the canals north and east of Estero 
Bay recorded significant inland surge, and USGS surveyed a high water mark of 8.3 ft AGL near 
Mullock Creek (Fig. 9a). Farther south in Bonita and North Naples, the most severe impacts were 
contained to the immediate coastline while inland high water marks ranged from 5 to 7 ft AGL. 
Maximum inundation of 6 to 9 ft AGL occurred in Naples. The NOS tide gauge on Naples 
Pier measured 6.18 ft above MHHW before the station was destroyed due to significant wave 
action or debris (Fig. 7). Similarly, the USGS water level sensor placed nearby was lost/destroyed 
(Fig. 8). The USGS water level sensor located on the Gordon River Bridge in Naples Bay 
measured 7.1 ft NAVD88 (no conversion to MHHW). High water marks collected near the sensor 
measured between 4 and 5 ft AGL, and there were reports of flooding at the Naples airport. 
Maximum inundation of 4 to 6 ft AGL occurred from Marco Island through Everglades City. 
Several USGS water level sensors measured 6 to 7 ft above MHHW (Fig. 8), and many of the 
USGS stream gauges along the Everglades reached the operational limit of the sensor prior to 
recording a peak water level. Only a few high water marks were collected, with a maximum of 4.7 
ft AGL on Marco Island (Fig. 9a). 
Storm surge inundation of 1 to 3 ft AGL occurred in the Florida Keys, with locally higher 
amounts of 2 to 4 ft AGL along extreme western Key West and the Dry Tortugas. The NOS tide 
gauge at Key West measured 2.46 ft above MHHW (Fig. 7), while eyewitness reports near the 
Southernmost Point buoy in Key West reported dangerous water levels on the ground.     
ATLANTIC COASTLINE 
Maximum inundation levels of 3 to 5 ft AGL occurred along the northeast coast of Florida 
from Volusia County to the Florida/Georgia border. USGS water level sensors placed along the 
northeast coast of Florida (not shown) recorded wave-filtered water levels of 3 to 6 ft above 
MHHW extending from Volusia County northward through St. Johns County. Several of these 
sensors remained dry and did not measure storm surge, while others are characteristically noisy, 
indicative of significant wave contamination. This evidence of wave contamination is further 
confirmed by post-storm NOAA aerial imagery that shows extensive beach erosion and damage 
to piers resulting from large and destructive breaking waves (not shown). Flooding of inland 
neighborhoods and intracoastal communities in Flagler and Volusia Counties was largely the 
result of heavy rainfall. Farther south along the coast of Brevard County, water levels reached 2 
to 4 ft AGL. 
Along the St. Johns River, water levels reached 2 to 4 ft AGL. The NOS tide gauge at 
Mayport, Florida, near the mouth of the St. Johns River, measured 2.48 ft above MHHW, while a 
gauge on the Buckman Bridge located south of downtown Jacksonville measured 3.06 ft above 
MHHW (Fig. 7).  

Hurricane Ian     11 
 
Maximum inundation of 2 to 4 ft AGL occurred along the Georgia coast northward to 
Charleston, South Carolina. The NOS tide gauges at Fort Pulaski, Georgia, and Charleston 
measured maximum water levels of 2.01 ft and 1.89 ft above MHHW, respectively (Fig. 7).   
Maximum inundation levels of 4 to 6 ft AGL occurred in Georgetown and Horry counties, 
South Carolina, just east of the landfall location. A tide gauge at Springmaid Pier, south of Myrtle 
Beach, measured a water level of 5.17 ft above MHHW (Fig. 7), and a USGS stream gauge near 
Georgetown captured the storm surge up the Pee Dee River, measuring 3.4 ft above MHHW. 
Additional high water marks collected in South Carolina by the NWS (not shown) were mostly 
qualitative, suggesting inundation up to 4 ft AGL in homes located in barrier island communities.  
The highest impact areas include Pawleys Island, Garden City, and Cherry Grove. South of Cape 
Fear, maximum inundation of 3 to 5 ft AGL occurred in coastal Brunswick County, North Carolina. 
Maximum inundation levels of 2 to 4 ft AGL occurred from Cape Fear to Cape Lookout, 
North Carolina, including the Cape Fear River. NOS tide gauges at Wilmington and Wrightsville 
Beach measured 2.98 ft and 3.54 ft above MHHW, respectively (Fig. 7). Farther up the coast, the 
tide gauge at Beaufort measured 2.84 ft above MHHW. Maximum inundation of 1 to 3 ft AGL 
occurred on the Outer Banks, and 2 to 4 ft AGL occurred in the rivers, such as the Neuse River. 
 
Rainfall and Flooding  
Ian produced widespread rainfall and flooding along its track with four areas of impacts: 
1) Florida, 2) Cuba, 3) the United States Mid-Atlantic states, and 4) the Bahamas (Fig. 14).  The 
full 
rainfall 
dataset 
is 
available 
for 
readers 
in 
a 
separate 
file 
at 
https://www.nhc.noaa.gov/data/tcr/supplemental/ian.xlsx. 
In Florida, Ian produced a wide swath of heavy rainfall that led to considerable and deadly 
freshwater flooding.  The highest storm total rainfall recorded was 26.95 inches in Grove City, 
Florida, located just north of the landfall location on the western side of the state.  Counties north 
of the track of Ian’s center (including Charlotte, Sarasota, Hardee, DeSoto, Polk, and Manatee) 
experienced significant flooding when the Peace, Myakka, and Alafia Rivers, and Horse Creek all 
crested to record levels (Fig. 15).   
In central and eastern Florida, rainfall totals of 10-20 inches caused major floods along 
the St. Johns River, Lake George, Crest Lake, the Little Wekiva River, and Dunns and Shingle 
Creek affecting Seminole, Orange, Lake, Putnam and Osceola Counties.  Rainfall totals reached 
a secondary peak as Ian neared the Atlantic Ocean and brought 21.49 inches to Daytona Beach.  
A dry slot led to lower rainfall totals south of the track of Ian’s center, though isolated totals of  
9+ inches were still recorded in Broward County. The relatively lower rainfall totals south of Ian’s 
track still resulted in flooded roadways in parts of Martin and St. Lucie Counties7.   
Rainfall totals in coastal regions of the Carolinas, Virginia, and Maryland ranged from 3 to 
over 10 inches, adding freshwater to the storm surge (in Horry and Georgetown counties in South 
Carolina).  In Charleston, South Carolina, 10.75 inches of rain was observed.  Farther inland along 
                                                
7 
https://www.tcpalm.com/story/weather/hurricanes/2022/10/01/hurricane-ian-treasure-coast-reported-
limited-flooding-wind-damage/10459252002/  

Hurricane Ian     12 
 
Ian’s track, rainfall totals generally ranged from under 2 to 6 inches and were accompanied by 
reports of streets flooding (such as in York County, South Carolina) and uprooted trees due to 
gusty winds in areas with saturated soils.   
Media outlets reported maximum rainfall totals of over 20 inches (over 500 mm) occurred 
in the western portion of Cuba.  The Instituto de Meteorología de Cuba surface stations in western 
Cuba reported rainfall totals ranging from 151.7 to 338 mm (6 to 13+ inches).  Severe flooding 
was also reported with this excessive rainfall. 
In the Bahamas, over 9 inches of total rainfall were recorded on both Great Abaco and 
Bimini Islands.  An interview with a local resident revealed some associated flooding, impassible 
roadways, and damaged buildings8. 
 
Tornadoes 
Ian produced 15 tornadoes in the United States.  Fourteen of the tornadoes occurred in 
Florida on 27‒28 September in Ian’s outer rain bands. The magnitude of the tornadoes ranged 
from EF 0‒2, some of which caused injuries and considerable property damage.  An EF‒2 tornado 
at 0059 UTC 28 September with a 6-n mi track in Palm Beach County injured 2 when it caused 
the roof of a house to collapse.  An EF-1 tornado that formed at 2317 UTC 27 September at the 
North Perry Airport in Pembroke Pines damaged several buildings and aircraft, causing an 
estimated $2 million in property damage.  The final tornado associated with Ian occurred in an 
outer rain band on the coast of North Carolina on 30 September.   
CASUALTY AND DAMAGE STATISTICS 
 
  
In the United States, Ian was responsible for at least 156 fatalities, 66 of which were 
considered deaths9 directly caused by the storm.  All direct deaths in the United States occurred 
in Florida (Fig. 16).  Storm surge was the deadliest hazard, claiming 41 lives, with 36 of the  
41 surge fatalities occurring in Lee County, Florida.  There were 12 direct fatalities attributed to 
freshwater flooding in central and eastern Florida, 8 were categorized as marine fatalities, 4 were 
related to wind, and 1 was due to rough surf.  A boat carrying a reported 27 migrants travelling 
from Cuba to the United States capsized just off the coast of the Florida Keys in rough waters 
generated by Ian.  While four passengers swam to shore and five were rescued, only seven 
bodies were recovered (accounting for 7 of the 8 marine deaths).  It should be noted that the  
11 other people missing from the boat are not represented in the total fatalities of this report.  A 
couple living on a separate boat that was set adrift from the Florida Keys are also still missing. 
                                                
8 https://supicket.com/readyfight-how-the-bahamas-is-faring-against-hurricane-ian/ 
9 Deaths occurring as a direct result of the forces of the tropical cyclone are referred to as “direct” deaths. 
These would include those persons who drowned in storm surge, rough seas, rip currents, and freshwater 
floods. Direct deaths also include casualties resulting from lightning and wind-related events (e.g., 
collapsing structures). Deaths occurring from such factors as heart attacks, house fires, electrocutions from 
downed power lines, vehicle accidents on wet roads, etc., are considered indirect” deaths. 

Hurricane Ian     13 
 
 
Ian was also indirectly responsible for 90 casualties in the United States.  Most of the 
victims (84 in total) were located in Florida, with 5 in North Carolina, and 1 in Virginia (Fig. 16).  
The leading causes of death were lack of access to timely medical care (18), accidents (such a  
trip-and-fall during power outages; 16), and cardiac events (16).  Other causes included vehicular 
accidents, accidents related to storm preparations or clean up, carbon monoxide poisoning, 
suicide, and homicide. 
 
A distribution of all the fatalities (Fig. 17) shows a wide range of ages, from 6 to 101 years 
old.  However, the peak of the distribution is skewed towards the elderly population.  It is possible 
this a reflection of demographics in the counties of southwest Florida but is consistent with other 
hurricane landfalls where the oldest die at the highest rates.   
 
Cuba reported a total of 5 deaths10. Three were directly related to Ian’s hazards (two due 
to wind and one unknown), and two were indirect deaths due to accidents that occurred during 
clean up.   
According to the NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information11, Ian caused an 
estimated $112.9 billion worth of total damage in the United States (with a 90% confidence interval 
of $86.8 to $135.9 billion), making Ian the third-costliest United States hurricane on record.  Of 
that total, $109.5 billion occurred in Florida, making Ian the costliest hurricane to ever affect that 
state.  In southwestern Florida, the catastrophic storm surge and wind left a huge swath of 
complete destruction.  In Fort Myers Beach alone, an estimated 900 structures were totally 
destroyed (Fig. 18), and 2,200 were damaged.  In Lee County, at least 52,514 structures were 
impacted, of which 5,369 were destroyed and 14,245 received major damage.  Bridges and 
roadways were also severely damaged or destroyed.   Roads and bridges to Sanibel and Pine 
Islands were washed away, limiting access to either by boat or helicopter.  A portion of Interstate 
75 in southern Sarasota County was shut down due flooding from the Myakka River.   In Collier 
County, 33 buildings were destroyed, and over 3,500 buildings sustained major damage while at 
least 200 homes were destroyed in Charlotte County.   
In central and eastern Florida, widespread historic freshwater flooding caused destruction 
and significant damage to many structures and roadways, leading to over 250 water rescues  
(Fig. 19).  In Volusia County, 40 buildings were destroyed, and 1,378 structures were damaged.  
Ian damaged an estimated 4,100 structures in Osceola County and 1,656 structures in Seminole 
County.  The Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services estimated $1.1 to $1.8 
billion in losses due to flooding and wind damage to the state’s crops and infrastructure.12  
An estimated 4.45 million customers13 (about 9.62 million people) lost power in the United 
States due to Ian between 28 September and 1 October.  Florida experienced the largest loss of 
power with ~3.28 million customers total and maximum outage count of 2.78 million at once  
                                                
10 https://eldiariony.com/2022/10/02/huracan-ian-causo-estragos-en-cuba-con-cinco-muertos-y-mas-de-
100000-viviendas-destruidas/  
11 NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate 
Disasters (2023). https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/billions/, DOI: 10.25921/stkw-7w73 
12 https://www.agri-pulse.com/ext/resources/pdfs/Hurricane-Ian-Damage-Report_FDACS.pdf  
13 Estimate is based on PowerOutage.US storm summary. https://poweroutage.us/about/majorevents  

Hurricane Ian     14 
 
(Fig. 20).  North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia had an estimated 579,000, 378,000, and 
211,000 affected customers, respectively. 
In South Carolina, storm surge inundated the city of Georgetown, flooding streets and 
businesses in the downtown area (Fig. 21).  In Horry County, the U.S. Coast Guard rescued crews 
from a stranded commercial shrimp boat. Roadway and beach flooding were also reported along 
the North Carolina and South Carolina coastal areas.  
Stormwaters exiting back into the Gulf of Mexico carried debris, fertilizer, and other 
pollutants (Fig. 22).  Scientists from NOAA’s National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science tracked 
a harmful algal bloom in the days following Ian off the coast of southwestern Florida.  Researchers 
from Florida Gulf Coast University also noted significant damage to artificial reefs in the region14. 
More than 100,000 homes were damaged or destroyed in Cuba due to Ian.  According to 
news reports, this represents 60% of all the homes in the Pinar del Río province.  It was also 
reported that while the hurricane made landfall in western Cuba, the entire island lost power for a 
few days.  At the time of this report, there is no monetary damage estimate available for Cuba. 
 
FORECAST AND WARNING CRITIQUE 
 
Genesis 
The genesis of Ian was reasonably well forecast.  The tropical wave from which Ian 
developed was introduced in the Tropical Weather Outlook (TWO) with a low (<40%) 5-day 
probability of formation 84 h prior to genesis (Table 4).  At 72 h prior to genesis, the system was 
first given a low 2-day chance of development, and the 5-day genesis probability was raised to 
the medium (40%–60%) category. A Special TWO was issued just before 1500 UTC  
20 September, 63 h before genesis, where the 2- and 5-day probabilities of development were 
raised to the medium and high (>60%) categories, respectively.  Finally, the 2-day probabilities 
were increased to the high category 54 h before development.  In terms of the location of genesis, 
NHC forecasters did a good job of highlighting the correct area.  Ian’s genesis location occurred in 
100% of the areas shown in the outlooks issued, roughly in the center of the summed areas  
(Fig. 23).   
 
Track 
A verification of NHC official track forecasts for Ian is given in Table 5a.  The average 
official track forecast errors were lower than the mean official errors for the previous 5-yr period 
at 12, 24, and 120 h, comparable to the 5-yr means at 36 and 48 h, and higher than the 5-yr 
means at 72 and 96 h.  A homogeneous comparison of the official track errors with selected 
                                                
14 https://wusfnews.wusf.usf.edu/environment/2022-11-02/hurricane-ian-ruined-man-made-reefs-brought-
algae-blooms-to-florida  

Hurricane Ian     15 
 
guidance models is given in Table 5b and Figs. 24 and 25.  While the official track forecast through 
60 h had errors lower than or comparable to the 5-yr mean errors, most of the consensus models 
outperformed the NHC forecast at these lead times.  The best performing model in the short-term 
forecast (through 36 h) was the Florida State Superensemble (FSSE).  The consensus model 
HCCA, the United Kingdom Met Office global model (EGRI), and the COAMPS-TC model (CTCI) 
provided the best guidance at 48, 60, and 72 and 96 h, respectively.  Of the dynamical models, 
the Canadian model (CMCI), the GFS ensemble mean (AEMI), and HWRF (HWFI) tended to 
have the greatest track errors.  Examination of the individual official forecasts revealed the  
cross-track error to be the largest source of error with a consistent westward bias noted (Fig. 26).  
While the left-of-track bias made forecasting the exact landfall location of the Ian in southwestern 
Florida difficult, the forecast track cone of uncertainty did contain the landfall location for all 
advisory cycles (Fig. 27).  In general, storms that parallel a coastline tend to be more challenging 
to predict because a small change in heading can cause large differences in the landfall location.  
Ian was an example of this particular challenge. 
 
Intensity 
A verification of the NHC official intensity forecasts for Ian is given in Table 6a.  Official 
intensity forecast errors were greater than the mean official errors for the previous 5-yr period 
largely due to Ian’s rapid intensification.  The climatology-persistence (OCD5) errors were also 
higher than the corresponding 5-yr average values at all forecast periods, indicating Ian’s intensity 
was more difficult than normal to predict.  A homogeneous comparison of the official intensity 
errors with selected guidance models is given in Table 6b and Figs. 28 and 29.  While the NHC 
forecast was very hard to improve upon through 48 h, the regional dynamical model HMON 
(HMNI) had the best predictions at 36-60 h, while the CTCI had the best predictions at 72 and 
120 h.  The statistical model LGEM had the lowest errors at 96 h.  The greatest challenge for the 
official forecast was an inability to predict the second instance of rapid intensification after Ian 
moved north of Cuba, leading to the peak intensity of 140 kt (Fig. 30).  Both HMNI and CTCI had 
forecasts with intensities closer to the observed peak.  It is also worth noting that there was a low 
bias in the NHC intensity forecasts at longer lead times when Ian emerged over the Atlantic 
Ocean.  This was due to several official track forecasts that showed the storm remaining over the 
southeastern U.S. and not emerging over the western Atlantic.   
 
Storm Surge Forecasts and Warnings 
 
Storm surge watches and warnings associated with Ian are given in Table 7 and shown in 
Fig. 7. A Storm Surge Watch was first issued at 0300 UTC 26 September for the Florida Keys 
from the Card Sound Bridge to Key West, including the Dry Tortugas, and for the west coast of 
Florida from Englewood to the Card Sound Bridge, including Florida Bay. Fort Myers Beach and 
Estero Island, which experienced the worst of the storm surge event, were included in this first 
storm surge watch area. The initial peak storm surge forecast was 4 to 7 ft AGL from Englewood 
to Bonita Beach including Fort Myers Beach.  

Hurricane Ian     16 
 
At 0900 UTC 26 September, the Storm Surge Watch was extended northward to the 
Anclote River, Florida, including Tampa Bay. A Storm Surge Warning was issued at 2100 UTC 
26 September from the Anclote River southward to Flamingo, Florida. At the time the warning 
was issued, the peak storm surge forecast was 5 to 10 ft AGL from the Anclote River to the Middle 
of Longboat Key including Tampa Bay, 5 to 8 ft AGL from the Middle of Longboat Key to 
Englewood, and 4 to 7 ft AGL from Englewood to Bonita Beach including Fort Myers Beach.  
The Storm Surge Warning did not verify north of Englewood due to a southward shift in 
the track of Ian. As previously noted, sharp gradients in the water level measurements (e.g.  
Fig. 8, Fig. 9a) demonstrate the sensitivity of storm surge to the exact track of the storm. The 
track forecast uncertainty during the warning phase (i.e., within 36 h of the onset of hazardous 
conditions) warranted the issuance of the storm surge warning for this large area however, as 
only a small northward shift of the track could have caused extreme storm surge flooding in places 
that were dry during Ian (not shown).  
Figure 31 depicts the timeline of the storm surge watch/warning and peak storm surge 
forecast ranges at Fort Myers Beach. It also shows the time of maximum wave-filtered water level 
(12.70 ft above MHHW) from the USGS water level sensor located at Fort Myers Beach. The 
storm surge watch and warning for this location were issued 48 and 30 h prior to the onset of 
tropical-storm-force winds. On the morning of 27 September, the peak storm surge forecast range 
increased from 4 to 7 ft AGL to 8 to 12 ft AGL as the forecast track of Ian shifted southward. On 
the morning of 28 September, additional changes to the peak storm surge forecast were made 
as a result of the intensification of Ian found by the hurricane hunter aircraft. The final peak storm 
surge forecast range (12 to 18 ft AGL) captures the peak USGS water level sensor measurement 
and is consistent with the NHC storm surge analysis of 10 to 15 ft AGL. 
Along the Florida east coast, a Storm Surge Watch was first issued at 2100 UTC  
26 September, extending from the Flagler/Volusia County line through the Florida/Georgia border 
including the St. Johns River. The Storm Surge Watch was later upgraded to a Storm Surge 
Warning as Ian was forecast to traverse the Florida Peninsula and emerge into the western 
Atlantic Ocean as a tropical storm. Many portions of the warning area verified, including the  
St. Johns River, with observed water levels reaching in excess of 3 ft AGL (which NHC uses as 
a first-cut threshold for the storm surge watch/warning). The NHC storm surge analysis indicates 
peak water levels of 3 to 5 ft AGL did extend southward into portions of Volusia County, which 
was marginally outside of the storm surge watch/warning area. As previously noted, the storm 
surge impacts in this area were contained to the wave action at the immediate beach.  
In the storm surge warning area along the coast of Georgia through Charleston, South 
Carolina, water levels reached 2 to 4 ft AGL, marginally meeting the criteria for the warning. The 
track uncertainty at the time of the forecast supported the issuance of the warning. Ultimately, the 
track shifted to the east and there were fewer storm surge impacts in this area. 
In South Carolina, a Storm Surge Watch was first issued at 2100 UTC 28 September from 
the South Santee River to Little River Inlet, including locations such as Georgetown and Myrtle 
Beach. At the watch issuance time, the peak storm surge forecast was 2 to 4 ft AGL. The same 
area was upgraded to a warning at 1500 UTC 29 September with a peak storm surge forecast of 
3 to 5 ft AGL. The peak storm surge forecast increased to 4 to 7 ft AGL in subsequent advisories 
as the forecast track of Ian shifted eastward. The warning area verified well with observations of 

Hurricane Ian     17 
 
greater than 3 ft AGL. The final storm surge forecast range is consistent with the NHC storm surge 
analysis of 4 to 6 ft in this area. 
Storm surge watches/warnings were issued along the North Carolina coast at 1500 UTC 
29 September with a peak storm surge forecast of 2 to 4 ft AGL. At this time, a small warning area 
was also issued along the Neuse River where there was a favorable angle for strong onshore flow 
from a frontal gradient. Six hours later, an additional portion of the watch between Little River Inlet 
and Cape Fear was upgraded to a warning with a peak storm surge forecast of 3 to 5 ft AGL. The 
forecast values in this area are consistent with the NHC storm surge analysis. In the storm surge 
watch area between Cape Lookout and Cape Fear, water levels reached 2 to 4 ft AGL. 
 
Wind Watches and Warnings 
Coastal wind watches and warnings associated with Ian are given in Table 8.  A verification 
of select coastal watches and warnings is provided below. 
For the United States, a Tropical Storm Watch was first issued for the Florida Keys and 
Dry Tortugas at 2100 UTC 25 September.  Tropical-storm-force winds are estimated to have 
begun in the Florida Keys around 1500 UTC 27 September, about 42 h after the issuance of the 
Tropical Storm Watch.  The watch was upgraded to a Tropical Storm Warning at 0300 UTC  
25 September, about 36 h before the onset of tropical-storm-force winds.  A Hurricane Warning 
was issued for the Dry Tortugas about 18 h before the arrival of tropical-storm-force winds.  
A Tropical Storm Watch was first issued for the coastal region of southwestern Florida 
about 48 h before the arrival of tropical-storm-force winds (estimated to be 0300 UTC  
28 September).  A Tropical Storm Warning and a Hurricane Watch were issued for the Fort Myers 
area at 2100 UTC 26 September, about 30 h before the arrival of tropical-storm-force winds.  A 
Hurricane Warning was issued for this area at 0900 UTC 27 September, about 18 h before the 
onset of tropical-storm-force winds on the barrier islands. 
For Georgetown County, South Carolina, where Ian made landfall, a Tropical Storm Watch 
was not issued, but a Tropical Storm Warning was issued at 1500 UTC 28 September, about  
39 h before the arrival of tropical-storm-force winds.  The Tropical Storm Warning was upgraded 
to a Hurricane Warning at 1500 UTC 29 September, about 15 h before the onset of tropical-storm-
force winds.   
 
Impact-based 
Decision 
Support 
Services 
(IDSS) 
and 
Public 
Communication 
 
The NHC began communication with emergency managers on Friday, 23 September as 
Ian was forming over the east-central Caribbean Sea. Twenty-four decision support briefings were 
provided to emergency managers and coordinated through the FEMA Hurricane Liaison Team 
embedded at the NHC. These briefings continued until the storm became extratropical over North 
Carolina on Friday, 30 September and included 12 Federal video-teleconferences with FEMA HQ 
and FEMA Region 4, and 11 webinar briefings for the Florida Division of Emergency Management 

Hurricane Ian     18 
 
and counties in Florida. In addition, the NHC acting director maintained direct communications 
with senior federal and state emergency management officials to discuss the evolving threat to 
the southeast United States, including in-person briefings for FEMA Administrator Deanne 
Criswell at the NHC on 26 September. 
 
The Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch of NHC provided 16 live briefings on Ian from 
23 September to 1 October to the U.S. Coast Guard Districts 7 and 8 in support of their life-saving 
mission. 
 
During Hurricane Ian, the NHC media pool was activated from 7 AM to 7 PM EDT on  
24 September with hours extended until 11 PM EDT as necessary. The media pool closed on  
30 September at 6 PM EDT. A total of 282 interviews were conducted. These included: 1) 56 
network broadcast/cable outlets; 2) 42 cable weather outlets; 3) 50 local affiliate outlets; 4) 81 
English and Spanish virtual interviews; and 5) 40 radio and print. 
NHC provided 13 live stream broadcasts via YouTube Live, Facebook, and Twitter during 
the seven-day span of this media pool. These videos received more than two million views during 
the seven-day period on all three platforms, with a peak total of 334,000 views during the  
26 September broadcast as Ian approached the southwestern coast of Florida.  The total views 
reached through the live streams for the event was 1.1 million through Facebook and 500,000 
through YouTube. 
The NHC web pages were accessed approximately 224 million times between  
23 September and 1 October resulting in approximately 4.2 billion hits (Ian generated most of the 
traffic during this period). A majority of the page views went to graphical products such as the key 
messages, cone graphic, and the wind speed probabilities. The key messages graphics for Ian 
were viewed approximately 26 million times on the NHC website.  Non-automated tweets about 
Ian garnered 38.9 million views during the storm, with about 12.4 million views of the Key Message 
graphics.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Much of the data in this report came from Post Tropical Cyclone (PSH) Reports issued by 
NWS Weather Forecast Offices (WFOs) in Tampa Bay, Melbourne, Miami, Key West, and 
Jacksonville, Florida; Charleston and Greer, South Carolina; and Wilmington and Morehead City, 
North Carolina. David Roth of the NOAA Weather Prediction Center produced the rainfall map 
and much of the rainfall data. Data from the National Data Buoy Center, NOS Center for 
Operational Oceanographic Products and Services, United States Geological Survey, Storm 
Prediction Center, and the Cuban Meteorological Service were also used in this report.  The 
authors would like to thank those at NHC for their contributions to this report.  Michael Spagnolo 
and Matthew Green from FEMA supplied the IDSS briefing information; Dr. Chris Landsea 
supplied the TAFB briefing information; Maria Torres provided the media information; Dr. Matthew 
Onderlinde provided the website information and the cone figure; Dr. Philippe Papin provided the 
genesis figure; John Cangialosi provided the direct and indirect fatality locations figure; Dr. Cody 
Fritz, Dr. Heather Nepaul, William Booth, and Joshua Alland contributed to the storm surge 
analysis and figures; and the Hurricane Specialist Unit peer reviewed the report.  The authors 

Hurricane Ian     19 
 
would like to thank those outside NHC who provided data, images, and expertise. Steve Gregg 
of WeatherFlow provided data from its network.  Dr. Forrest Masters and Dr. Brian Phillips 
provided the data from the Florida Coastal Monitoring Program mobile towers.  Maxwell Olson 
provided storm surge videos.  Josh Morgerman provided data and images.  The National Centers 
for Environmental Information provided the monetary damage estimate for the United States. Dr. 
Heather Holbach, Dr. Paul Reasor, and Dr. Michael Fischer of the Hurricane Research Division 
were very helpful in analyzing some of the aircraft data. 
 

Hurricane Ian     20 
 
TABLES 
 
Table 1. 
Best track for Hurricane Ian, 23–30 September 2022.   
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
22 / 1800 
12.3 
66.3 
1006 
30 
low 
23 / 0000 
12.9 
67.2 
1006 
30 
" 
23 / 0600 
13.7 
68.1 
1006 
30 
tropical depression 
23 / 1200 
14.2 
69.3 
1006 
30 
" 
23 / 1800 
14.6 
70.6 
1006 
30 
" 
24 / 0000 
14.7 
71.7 
1005 
35 
tropical storm 
24 / 0600 
14.7 
72.9 
1005 
35 
" 
24 / 1200 
14.5 
74.4 
1003 
40 
" 
24 / 1800 
14.4 
75.8 
1003 
40 
" 
25 / 0000 
14.6 
77.2 
1003 
40 
" 
25 / 0600 
14.6 
78.3 
1003 
40 
" 
25 / 1200 
15.0 
79.4 
1003 
40 
" 
25 / 1800 
15.8 
80.1 
1003 
40 
" 
26 / 0000 
16.8 
80.9 
991 
50 
" 
26 / 0600 
17.7 
81.7 
985 
65 
hurricane 
26 / 1200 
18.7 
82.4 
981 
70 
" 
26 / 1800 
19.7 
83.0 
976 
80 
" 
27 / 0000 
20.8 
83.3 
965 
85 
" 
27 / 0600 
21.8 
83.6 
956 
100 
" 
27 / 0830 
22.2 
83.7 
947 
110 
" 
27 / 1200 
22.6 
83.6 
963 
100 
" 
27 / 1800 
23.5 
83.3 
951 
105 
" 
28 / 0000 
24.4 
83.0 
947 
105 
" 
28 / 0200 
24.6 
82.9 
952 
110 
" 

Hurricane Ian     21 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
28 / 0600 
25.2 
82.9 
945 
120 
" 
28 / 1200 
26.0 
82.7 
937 
140 
" 
28 / 1800 
26.6 
82.4 
938 
135 
" 
28 / 1905 
26.7 
82.2 
941 
130 
" 
28 / 2035 
26.8 
82.0 
945 
125 
" 
29 / 0000 
27.2 
81.7 
960 
100 
" 
29 / 0600 
27.7 
81.1 
985 
65 
" 
29 / 1200 
28.4 
80.6 
987 
60 
tropical storm 
29 / 1800 
28.9 
80.1 
986 
65 
hurricane 
30 / 0000 
29.6 
79.4 
986 
70 
" 
30 / 0600 
30.3 
79.1 
984 
75 
" 
30 / 1200 
31.5 
79.0 
980 
75 
" 
30 / 1800 
33.3 
79.2 
978 
70 
" 
30 / 1805 
33.3 
79.2 
978 
70 
" 
01 / 0000 
34.4 
79.3 
990 
50 
extratropical 
01 / 0600 
35.3 
79.7 
999 
30 
" 
01 / 1200 
 
 
 
 
dissipation 
28 / 1200 
26.0 
82.7 
937 
140 
minimum pressure & 
maximum wind 
27 / 0830 
22.2 
83.7 
947 
110 
Landfall near La 
Coloma in the Pinar 
Del Rio Province of 
Cuba 
28 / 0200 
24.6 
82.9 
952 
110 
Landfall in the Dry 
Tortugas, Florida 
28 / 1905 
26.7 
82.2 
941 
130 
Landfall near Cayo 
Costa, Florida 
28 / 2035 
26.8 
82.0 
945 
125 
Landfall near Punta 
Gorda, Florida 
30 / 1805 
33.3 
79.2 
978 
70 
Landfall near 
Georgetown, South 
Carolina 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     22 
 
Table 2. 
Selected ship reports with winds of at least 34 kt for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 
September 2022. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Ship call 
sign 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Wind 
dir/speed (kt) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
27 / 1100 
9V3143 
22.6 
78.1 
110 /  45 
1022.4 
27 / 1900 
V7IJ2 
23.4 
82.6 
150 /  45 
1002.0 
27 / 2000 
V7IJ2 
23.4 
82.1 
150 /  45 
 
27 / 2100 
V7IJ2 
23.4 
82.1 
150 /  55 
1001.0 
27 / 2100 
WHIA 
23.4 
81.6 
150 /  35 
1002.2 
27 / 2200 
WHIA 
23.4 
81.7 
170 /  39 
1001.5 
27 / 2300 
WHIA 
23.4 
81.8 
180 /  38 
1000.9 
28 / 0000 
V7IJ2 
23.4 
81.6 
180 /  50 
1001.0 
28 / 0200 
WHIA 
23.4 
81.2 
180 /  38 
1007.0 
28 / 0300 
V7IJ2 
23.4 
82.1 
200 /  45 
1002.0 
28 / 0300 
ELVQ7 
24.5 
79.4 
140 /  42 
1008.0 
28 / 0600 
WOTA 
25.7 
79.8 
120 /  42 
1007.6 
28 / 1000 
WMCU 
25.8 
79.4 
140 /  35 
1006.6 
28 / 1200 
TBWUK8 
28.9 
89.3 
110 /  35 
1017.3 
28 / 1300 
WOTA 
24.8 
79.6 
170 /  45 
1007.3 
28 / 1500 
ELVQ7 
24.2 
80.1 
160 /  38 
1008.0 
28 / 1500 
WMCU 
25.0 
79.5 
180 /  35 
1008.0 
28 / 1600 
D5BF7 
31.8 
79.6 
050 /  36 
1014.0 
28 / 1700 
WMCU 
24.6 
79.7 
180 /  35 
1007.4 
28 / 1800 
KPSJ 
26.2 
79.7 
180 /  35 
1004.9 
28 / 2100 
KS1059 
29.0 
80.4 
050 /  35 
1007.2 
28 / 2200 
9HA540 
31.9 
78.1 
020 /  42 
1016.0 
29 / 0000 
KS1059 
29.0 
80.4 
040 /  41 
1004.9 
29 / 1700 
A8SI7 
31.3 
77.3 
050 /  42 
1008.3 
29 / 2000 
KS1059 
29.0 
80.2 
310 /  35 
990.9 
29 / 2100 
KS1059 
29.0 
80.2 
320 /  44 
990.6 
29 / 2200 
KS1059 
29.0 
80.1 
320 /  40 
991.4 
29 / 2300 
KS1059 
29.0 
80.1 
340 /  50 
992.1 
29 / 2300 
WDM218 
32.9 
77.6 
230 /  43 
1009.9 

Hurricane Ian     23 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Ship call 
sign 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Wind 
dir/speed (kt) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
30 / 0000 
KS1059 
29.0 
80.1 
330 /  50 
993.8 
30 / 0100 
KS1059 
29.0 
80.0 
320 /  45 
995.7 
30 / 0200 
KS1059 
28.9 
80.0 
320 /  39 
997.7 
30 / 0300 
KS1059 
28.9 
80.0 
310 /  46 
998.6 
30 / 0400 
KS1059 
28.9 
80.0 
290 /  35 
999.9 
30 / 0400 
A8SI7 
31.1 
74.8 
180 /  35 
1007.3 
30 / 0700 
OUJK2 
36.5 
75.2 
050 /  35 
1011.0 
30 / 1200 
H3BL 
32.0 
72.4 
090 /  35 
1011.9 
30 / 1500 
WDM218 
32.4 
75.6 
150 /  44 
1004.3 
30 / 1800 
WDM218 
32.3 
75.7 
160 /  44 
1004.1 
30 / 1800 
9HA564 
36.5 
75.2 
050 /  45 
1011.2 
30 / 1900 
OUJK2 
36.6 
75.1 
050 /  55 
1004.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     24 
 
Table 3. 
Selected storm surge observations for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022. 
Location 
Storm surge 
(ft)a 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)b 
Estimated Inundation 
(ft)c 
Florida 
 
 
 
National Ocean 
Service (NOS) Sites 
 
 
 
Old Port Tampa (OPTF1)  
(27.85N, 82.55W) 
1.09 
2.12 
1.34 
Fort Myers (FMRF1)  
(26.64N, 81.87W) 
7.25 
7.53 
7.26 
Naples (NPSF1)  
(26.13N, 81.8W) 
6.28* 
6.79* 
6.18* 
Key West (KYWF1)  
(24.55N, 81.8W) 
2.12 
2.5 
2.46 
Mayport (Bar Pilots Dock) 
(MYPF1)  
(30.39N, 81.42W) 
3.71 
4.45 
2.48 
I-295 Buckman Bridge 
(BKBF1)  
(30.19N, 81.69W) 
2.85 
3.45 
3.06 
 
 
 
 
US Geological Survey 
(USGS) Water Level 
Sensors 
 
 
 
Fort Myers Beach 
(FLLEE03382)  
(26.45N, 81.95W) 
 
13.23 
12.70 
Sanibel Island 
(FLLEE26290) 
(26.42N, 82.08W) 
 
13.09 
12.58 
Pirate Harbor 
(FLCHA03379)   
(26.8N, 82.05W) 
 
4.69 
4.47 
Punta Rassa 
(FLLEE03246)   
(26.48N, 82.01W) 
 
8.83 
8.37 
San Carlos Island 
(FLLEE03284)   
(26.45N, 81.95W) 
 
12.06 
11.62 
Delnor-Wiggins State 
Park (FLCOL03294)   
(26.27N, 81.82W) 
 
10.24 
9.73 

Hurricane Ian     25 
 
Location 
Storm surge 
(ft)a 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)b 
Estimated Inundation 
(ft)c 
Naples Bay 
(FLCOL03297) 
(26.14N, 81.79W) 
 
7.10 
 
Marco Island 
(FLCOL03171) 
(25.94N, 81.74W) 
 
7.38 
6.74 
Everglades City 
(FLCOL03237) 
(25.84N, 81.38W) 
 
7.33 
6.51 
 
 
 
 
USGS High Water 
Marks 
 
 
 
Lee County 
(FLLEE32905) 
(26.65N, 81.86W) 
 
7.7 
4.43 
Lee County 
(FLLEE33028) 
(26.48N, 81.85W) 
 
10.8 
8.31 
Collier County 
(FLCOL03170) 
(25.96N, 81.71W) 
 
6.99 
4.71 
 
 
 
 
NWS High Water 
Marks 
 
 
 
Lee County  
(26.45N,81.96W) 
 
 
15.0 
 
 
 
 
Georgia 
 
 
 
National Ocean 
Service (NOS) Sites 
 
 
 
Fort Pulaski (FPKG1)  
(32.03N, 80.9W) 
3.85 
5.47 
2.01 
 
 
 
 
South Carolina 
 
 
 
National Ocean 
Service (NOS) Sites 
 
 
 
Charleston (CHTS1) 
(32.78N, 79.92W) 
2.56 
4.51 
1.89 
Springmaid Pier (MROS1) 
(33.65N, 78.91W) 
6.41 
7.62 
5.17 

Hurricane Ian     26 
 
Location 
Storm surge 
(ft)a 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)b 
Estimated Inundation 
(ft)c 
 
 
 
 
USGS Stream Gauges 
 
 
 
Pee Dee River, 
Georgetown (2136350) 
(33.37N,79.26W) 
 
5.47 
3.36 
 
 
 
 
North Carolina 
 
 
 
National Ocean 
Service (NOS) Sites 
 
 
 
Wrightsville Beach 
(JMPN7)  
(34.21N, 77.78W) 
4.03 
5.27 
3.54 
Wilmington (WLON7) 
(34.22N, 77.95W) 
5.06 
5.06 
2.98 
Beaufort, Duke Marine 
Lab (BFTN7)  
(34.71N, 76.67W) 
3.3 
4.3 
2.84 
 
a  Storm surge is water height above normal astronomical tide level. 
b  Storm tide is water height above the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). 
c  Estimated inundation is the maximum height of water above ground.  For USGS water level sensors and stream 
gauges, inundation is estimated by converting the NAVD88 measurement to Mean Higher High Water (MHHW) using 
the NOAA VDatum tool.  For USGS high-water marks, estimated inundation is the direct above ground measurement. 
For NWS high-water marks, estimated inundation is approximated as the water level height above the high tide line 
(MHHW). For NOS tide gauges, the height of the water above MHHW is used as a proxy for inundation. 
*   Incomplete 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     27 
 
Table 4. 
Number of hours in advance of formation associated with the first NHC Tropical 
Weather Outlook forecast in the indicated likelihood category. Note that the timings 
for the “Low” category do not include forecasts of a 0% chance of genesis. 
 
 
Hours Before Genesis 
48-Hour Outlook 
120-Hour Outlook 
Low (<40%) 
72 
84 
Medium (40%-60%) 
63 
72 
High (>60%) 
54 
63 
 
Table 5a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) track 
forecast errors (n mi) for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.  Mean errors for 
the previous 5-yr period are shown for comparison.  Official errors that are smaller 
than the 5-yr means are shown in boldface type. 
 
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
18.3 
32.0 
50.9 
67.8 
87.6 
110.5 
140.3 
141.8 
OCD5 
39.3 
90.6 
147.7 
195.8 
248.7 
303.1 
442.4 
589.7 
Forecasts 
29 
27 
25 
23 
21 
19 
15 
11 
OFCL (2017-21) 
23.6 
35.5 
47.6 
61.4 
78.2 
91.3 
125.6 
172.1 
OCD5 (2017-21) 
45.5 
98.3 
156.7 
213.7 
252.4 
316.9 
403.6 
484.6 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     28 
 
Table 5b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected track forecast guidance models (in n mi) 
for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022. Errors smaller than the NHC official 
forecast are shown in boldface type. The number of official forecasts shown here 
will generally be smaller than that shown in Table 5a due to the homogeneity 
requirement. 
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
18.7 
32.8 
50.2 
66.9 
87.5 
115.6 
151.8 
152.7 
OCD5 
37.3 
82.3 
131.8 
173.5 
230.4 
290.9 
468.0 
719.6 
GFSI 
18.2 
36.4 
60.5 
86.9 
113.0 
158.9 
228.2 
266.7 
EMXI 
22.6 
39.7 
56.7 
73.0 
90.1 
112.8 
136.5 
128.9 
EGRI 
19.3 
34.0 
41.0 
48.2 
67.1 
94.3 
164.7 
203.3 
CMCI 
24.9 
49.6 
76.9 
105.5 
133.6 
162.1 
207.3 
271.3 
HWFI 
23.5 
44.8 
69.8 
91.9 
117.1 
156.8 
238.7 
252.0 
HMNI 
23.2 
39.1 
54.0 
63.1 
74.5 
95.2 
156.0 
195.4 
CTCI 
21.9 
36.8 
48.9 
59.6 
72.2 
87.2 
98.5 
187.5 
AEMI 
22.2 
46.2 
73.3 
102.8 
132.2 
173.0 
228.5 
247.7 
HCCA 
16.9 
30.2 
43.1 
54.6 
71.5 
97.1 
141.8 
146.9 
FSSE 
16.0 
26.6 
40.0 
55.5 
73.5 
98.0 
160.6 
186.4 
GFEX 
19.2 
35.6 
56.6 
76.2 
98.5 
131.8 
176.2 
186.2 
TVCA 
17.9 
33.0 
49.0 
63.6 
81.3 
109.9 
154.0 
165.7 
TVCX 
18.4 
32.6 
49.1 
64.3 
81.2 
108.7 
152.6 
161.9 
TVDG 
17.5 
32.4 
47.7 
63.6 
83.0 
112.1 
159.9 
170.3 
TABD 
27.0 
46.4 
67.4 
81.6 
103.6 
131.9 
245.0 
367.7 
TABM 
27.6 
59.4 
86.9 
108.8 
126.7 
163.6 
241.0 
306.2 
TABS 
54.5 
125.1 
180.7 
213.5 
220.8 
228.3 
279.2 
340.1 
Forecasts 
24 
22 
20 
18 
16 
14 
10 
6 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     29 
 
Table 6a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) intensity 
forecast errors (kt) for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.  Mean errors for the 
previous 5-yr period are shown for comparison.  Official errors that are smaller 
than the 5-yr means are shown in boldface type.   
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
7.6 
9.3 
11.0 
12.4 
15.2 
12.9 
18.7 
20.9 
OCD5 
11.4 
16.7 
21.1 
25.3 
31.8 
40.7 
43.4 
41.2 
Forecasts 
29 
27 
25 
23 
21 
19 
15 
11 
OFCL (2017-21) 
5.4 
8.0 
9.5 
10.9 
11.0 
12.1 
13.1 
14.7 
OCD5 (2017-21) 
7.0 
11.1 
14.5 
17.1 
18.0 
20.2 
21.9 
22.1 
 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     30 
 
Table 6b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected intensity forecast guidance models (in kt) 
for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022. Errors smaller than the NHC official 
forecast are shown in boldface type. The number of official forecasts shown here 
will generally be smaller than that shown in Table 6a due to the homogeneity 
requirement. 
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
8.1 
10.7 
12.8 
14.4 
17.2 
15.4 
17.5 
19.2 
OCD5 
13.0 
19.2 
23.6 
26.9 
34.9 
38.9 
45.7 
25.2 
HWFI 
10.4 
11.0 
14.6 
17.1 
18.3 
15.0 
17.6 
32.2 
HMNI 
11.2 
14.0 
11.1 
13.9 
14.1 
19.0 
20.6 
20.0 
CTCI 
12.5 
14.7 
13.4 
17.2 
16.9 
14.0 
20.6 
10.2 
DSHP 
10.5 
15.0 
19.0 
20.4 
21.8 
22.0 
17.4 
19.2 
LGEM 
11.5 
15.7 
19.6 
18.7 
22.2 
22.4 
14.0 
16.7 
ICON 
10.1 
11.5 
14.8 
15.6 
17.3 
17.4 
16.4 
17.0 
IVCN 
10.4 
11.5 
14.1 
15.9 
16.9 
16.0 
16.7 
15.2 
IVDR 
10.4 
11.3 
12.4 
14.6 
15.8 
14.5 
16.9 
15.7 
HCCA 
9.2 
12.3 
17.6 
18.1 
18.0 
16.7 
15.3 
16.0 
FSSE 
10.0 
13.6 
19.6 
23.1 
24.7 
25.5 
17.2 
20.7 
GFSI 
11.3 
13.7 
15.2 
15.1 
15.2 
12.9 
14.4 
17.0 
EMXI 
11.9 
15.5 
20.6 
23.5 
31.9 
30.2 
33.2 
20.5 
Forecasts 
24 
22 
20 
18 
16 
14 
10 
6 
 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     31 
 
Table 7. 
Storm Surge watch and warning summary for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 
2022. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
26/0300 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Florida Keys from the Card Sound 
Bridge westward to Key West, including 
the Dry Tortugas, and for the west 
coast of Florida from Englewood 
southward to the Card Sound Bridge, 
including Florida Bay 
26/0900 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Englewood FL to the Anclote River FL 
26/2100 
Storm Surge Warning issued 
Anclote River FL southward to 
Flamingo FL, including Tampa Bay 
26/2100 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Anclote River FL to Aucilla River FL 
27/1500 
Storm Surge Warning issued 
Marineland FL to the mouth of St. 
Mary's River including the St. Johns 
River, the Dry Tortugas, and the 
Suwanee River FL to Anclote River FL 
27/1500 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
St. Mary's River to South Santee River 
SC 
27/2100 
Storm Surge Warning issued 
Marineland FL to the Flagler/Volusia 
County Line 
27/2100 
Storm Surge Watch discontinued 
Aucilla River FL to the Suwannee River 
FL 
28/0430 
Storm Surge Warning issued 
Lower Florida Keys from Big Pine Key 
westward to Key West 
28/1500 
Storm Surge Warning issued 
St. Mary's River to South Santee River 
SC 
28/2100 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
South Santee River SC to Little River 
Inlet 

Hurricane Ian     32 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
28/2100 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
Lower Florida Keys 
28/2100 
Storm Surge Watch discontinued 
Middle and Upper Florida Keys 
29/0300 
Storm Surge Watch discontinued 
Flamingo eastward to the Card Sound 
Bridge, including Florida Bay 
29/0900 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
Suwannee River FL to the Middle of 
Longboat Key including Tampa Bay 
29/1200 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
Middle of Longboat Key to Flamingo FL 
including Charlotte Harbor 
29/1500 
Storm Surge Warning issued 
South Santee River SC to Little River 
Inlet and for the Neuse River in NC 
29/1500 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Little River Inlet to Duck NC, including 
the Pamlico River 
29/2100 
Storm Surge Warning issued 
Little River Inlet to Cape Fear NC 
29/2100 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Cape Fear River 
30/1500 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
Savannah River to Marineland FL, 
including the St. Johns River 
30/2100 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
South Santee River SC to the 
Savannah River 
01 / 0000 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
Cape Fear NC to South Santee River 
SC 
01 / 0000 
Storm Surge Watch discontinued 
Cape Fear to Surf City, including the 
Cape Fear River 

Hurricane Ian     33 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
01 / 0300 
Storm Surge Watch/Warning 
discontinued 
All 
 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     34 
 
Table 8. 
Wind watch and warning summary for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
23 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Jamaica 
23 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Cayman Is 
24 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Little Cayman to Cayman Brac 
24 / 1800 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
All 
24 / 1800 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Grand Cayman 
24 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
Jamaica 
25 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Matanzas to La Habana 
25 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Isla de Juventud 
25 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Artemisa to Pinar del Rio 
25 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Matanzas to La Habana 
25 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Isla de Juventud 
25 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Artemisa to Pinar del Rio 
25 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
All 
25 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Little Cayman to Cayman Brac 
25 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Dry Tortugas to Seven Mile Bridge 

Hurricane Ian     35 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
26 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Dry Tortugas to Seven Mile Bridge 
26 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Englewood to Chokoloskee 
26 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Anclote River to Englewood 
26 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Englewood to Flamingo 
26 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Seven Mile Bridge to Channel 5 Bridge 
26 / 1800 
Hurricane Warning changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Grand Cayman 
26 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Englewood to Flamingo 
26 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning changed 
to Hurricane Warning 
Dry Tortugas 
26 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Anclote River to Englewood 
26 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
Little Cayman to Cayman Brac 
26 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Indian Pass to Suwannee River 
26 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Jupiter Inlet to Altamaha Sound 
26 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Grand Cayman 
26 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Key West to Seven Mile Bridge 
26 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Suwannee River to Anclote River 
26 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Englewood to Bonita Beach 

Hurricane Ian     36 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
27 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
Seven Mile Bridge to Channel 5 Bridge 
27 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Deerfield Beach to Jupiter Inlet 
27 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Key West to Channel 5 Bridge 
27 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Bonita Beach to Flamingo 
27 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Suwannee River to Anclote River 
27 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Jupiter Inlet to Volusia/Brevard CL 
27 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Englewood to Bonita Beach 
27 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Anclote River to Bonita Beach 
27 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
Deerfield Beach to Jupiter Inlet 
27 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Altamaha Sound to South Santee River 
27 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Flamingo to Blackwater Sound 
27 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Channel 5 Bridge to Boca Raton 
27 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Jupiter Inlet to Volusia/Brevard CL 
27 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Boca Raton to Altamaha Sound 
27 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Bonita Beach to Chokoloskee 
27 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Isla de Juventud 

Hurricane Ian     37 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
27 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
Indian Pass to Suwannee River 
27 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
Flamingo to Blackwater Sound 
27 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
Channel 5 Bridge to Boca Raton 
27 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Matanzas to Pinar del Rio 
27 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Indian Pass to Anclote River 
27 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Bonita Beach to Flamingo 
27 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Key West to Altamaha Sound 
27 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Chokoloskee to Blackwater Sound 
27 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Bimini to Grand Bahama Island 
27 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
All 
27 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Artemisa to Pinar del Rio 
27 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Anclote River to Chokoloskee 
28 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
All 
28 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Key West to South Santee River 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Isla de Juventud 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Matanzas to Pinar del Rio 

Hurricane Ian     38 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Key West to Sebastian Inlet 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Flagler/Volusia CL to Little River Inlet 
28 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Flagler/Volusia CL to South Santee 
River 
28 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Sebastian Inlet to Flagler/Volusia CL 
28 / 1800 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Dry Tortugas 
28 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Surf City to Cape Lookout 
28 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Card Sound Bridge to Sebastian Inlet 
28 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Flagler/Volusia CL to Surf City 
29 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Chokoloskee to Flamingo 
29 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Boca Raton to Sebastian Inlet 
29 / 0600 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Chokoloskee to Flamingo 
29 / 0600 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Anclote River to Bonita Beach 
29 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
All 
29 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Bimini to Grand Bahama Island 
29 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Indian Pass to Bonita Beach 
29 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Boca Raton to Cape Lookout 

Hurricane Ian     39 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
29 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Flagler/Volusia CL to Surf City 
29 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
All 
29 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Jupiter Inlet to Cape Lookout 
29 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Indian Pass to Bonita Beach 
29 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Jupiter Inlet to Savannah River 
29 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Little River Inlet to Duck 
29 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Flagler/Volusia CL to Savannah River 
29 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Savannah River to Little River Inlet 
29 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Vero Beach to Savannah River 
29 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Cape Fear to Duck 
29 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Cape Fear to Surf City 
29 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Savannah River to Cape Fear 
30 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Sebastian Inlet to Savannah River 
30 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Flagler/Volusia CL to Savannah River 
30 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Flagler/Volusia CL to Savannah River 
30 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Altamaha Sound to Savannah River 

Hurricane Ian     40 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
30 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Altamaha Sound to Savannah River 
30 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Edisto Beach to Duck 
30 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
All 
30 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
All 
1 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
South Santee River to Duck 
1 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
All 
 
 
  

Hurricane Ian     41 
 
FIGURES 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Best track positions for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022. Tracks during the extratropical stage are partially based on 
analyses from the NOAA Weather Prediction Center. 

Hurricane Ian     42 
 
 
Figure 2. 
Selected wind observations and best track maximum sustained surface wind speed curve for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 
2022.  Aircraft observations have been adjusted for elevation using 90%, 80%, and 75% adjustment factors for observations 
from 700 mb, 850 mb, and 925 mb, respectively. SATCON intensity estimates are from the Cooperative Institute for 
Meteorological Satellite Studies. Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC, and solid vertical lines correspond to landfalls. 

Hurricane Ian     43 
 
 
Figure 3. 
Selected pressure observations and best track minimum central pressure curve for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.  
Advanced Dvorak Technique estimates represent the Current Intensity at the nominal observation time. SATCON intensity 
estimates are from the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies. KZC P-W refers to pressure estimates derived 
using the Knaff-Zehr-Courtney pressure-wind relationship. Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC, and solid vertical 
lines correspond to landfalls. 

Hurricane Ian     44 
 
 
Figure 4. 
Tail Doppler Radar wind speeds (shaded, kt) and vertical motion (black contour, m/s) along the flight track of the NOAA P-3 in 
Hurricane Ian on 28 September 2022.  Courtesy of Michael Fischer and Paul Reasor, Hurricane Research Division. 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     45 
 
 
Figure 5. 
Selected sustained surface or near-surface wind observations associated with Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.  Courtesy 
of Matt Onderlinde. 

Hurricane Ian     46 
 
 
Figure 6. 
Analyzed storm surge inundation (feet above ground level) along the coasts of Florida, 
Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina from Hurricane Ian. 

Hurricane Ian     47 
 
 
Figure 7. 
Maximum water levels (ft above MHHW) during Hurricane Ian measured by NOS tide 
gauge network and the maximum extent of the storm surge watches (lavender) and 
warnings (magenta). Ian’s track is overlaid (black line). 
 

Hurricane Ian     48 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  
Maximum wave filtered water level measurements (ft above MHHW or NAVD88) from 
USGS water level sensors deployed along the west coast of Florida. NHC uses MHHW 
(displayed as squares) as an approximation for inundation at USGS sensors when a valid 
conversion from NAVD88 can be made using the NOAA VDatum tool. Sensors outside 
the valid conversion are given in NAVD88 (displayed as stars). 

Hurricane Ian     49 
 
(a)
         (b)
 
 
Figure 9.  
(a) USGS and (b) NWS high water marks collected in Southwest Florida estimating the storm surge impacts during Hurricane 
Ian. USGS surveyed a wider area including inland impacts, and estimated the water level above ground level (AGL). NWS 
heavily surveyed coastal areas for peak impacts, and estimated the water level above the high tide line (MHHW).   

Hurricane Ian     50 
 
 
Figure 10.  
Unfiltered water level (gray) and wave-filtered water level (red) (ft above MHHW) measured during Hurricane Ian from a USGS sensor 
located in Fort Myers Beach. Vertical black lines (labeled as a to e) represent the still image times from Max Olson’s remote camera 
in Figure 11. 

Hurricane Ian     51 
 
 
 
Figure 11. 
Series of still images and the approximate local times from a remote camera that recoded a timelapse video of storm surge inundation 
and destruction in Fort Myers Beach. Credit: Max Olson. 

Hurricane Ian     52 
 
(a) 
   (b) 
  
 
Figure 12. 
(a) Storm surge high water mark in bathroom cabinet on the second-story of a beachfront structure in Fort Myers Beach. (b) 
NWS survey team extrapolating the high water mark to the outside of the home to survey its elevation of approximately 12 ft 
above the brick foundation and 15 ft above MHHW. Images courtesy of the NWS.

Hurricane Ian     53 
 
(a) 
 (b) 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  
Before (a) and after (b) imagery of a portion of the Sanibel Causeway, showing the damage caused by Hurricane Ian. Imagery 
courtesy of the NOAA Remote Sensing Division at https://storms.ngs.noaa.gov/storms/ian/index.html#17/26.47970/-82.02219  

Hurricane Ian     54 
 
 
Figure 14. 
Analysis of storm total rainfall (inches) for Hurricane Ian courtesy of David Roth of the 
NOAA Weather Prediction Center.

Hurricane Ian     55 
 
(a)
  
(b)
 
©
 
Figure 15. 
USGS River Gauges measurements (ft) between 28 September‒12 October 2022 at (a) 
Peace River at SR 70 at Arcadia, Florida, (b) Horse Creek at SR 72 near Arcadia, and (c) 
the Myakka River near SR 72 near Sarasota, Florida. 

Hurricane Ian     56 
 
 
 
Figure 16. 
Locations of deaths directly (top) and indirectly (bottom) caused by Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 
September 2022.  

Hurricane Ian     57 
 
 
Figure 17. 
Age distribution of fatalities (both direct and indirect) in the United States during Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September. 

Hurricane Ian     58 
 
   
 
 
Figure 18. 
Destruction caused by Hurricane Ian in Fort Myers Beach, Florida.  
 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     59 
 
  
 
       
             
 
Figure 19.  
Images showing the freshwater flooding from Ian. [Top left] Rescue workers in Orlando, Florida, on Thursday, 29 September. 
Credit: Phelan M. Ebenhack/EBENP, via Associated Press.  [Top right] Screen capture from drone footage in Daytona Beach, 
Florida. Credit: Daytona Beach Police Department. [Bottom left] Flooded buildings in Good Samaritan Society, Kissimmee, 
Florida. Credit: US Representative Darren Soto [Bottom right] Flooding from the Peace River washes out the road along NW 
Brownville Street in Brownville, outside of Arcadia, Friday. Credit: Luis Santana, Tampa Bay Times  

Hurricane Ian     60 
 
   
 
Figure 20. 
Power outage map for 2100 UTC 29 September (left) and 2300 UTC 30 September (right). Photo credit: PowerOutage.us 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     61 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21. 
Storm surge inundation in historic Georgetown, South Carolina, between 2:35 and 2:50 pm EDT 30 September. Photo credit: 
Josh Morgerman, iCyclone. 
 

Hurricane Ian     62 
 
 
Figure 22. 
Gap-filled Landsat-7 image taken 2 October 2022 of the southwestern coast of Florida in 
the Fort Myers area.  Photo credit: Michelle Bouchard using Landsat data from the U.S. 
Geological Survey 

Hurricane Ian     63 
 
 
Figure 23. 
5-day Tropical Weather Outlook genesis areas associated with the disturbance that developed into Hurricane Ian for (a) all 
probability areas (10–100%, multi-color shading), (b) low probability areas (< 40%, yellow shading), (c) medium probability 
areas (40–60%, orange shading), and (d) high probability areas (> 60%, red shading). The black star in each panel indicates 
the genesis location of Ian. Hit rate indicates the percentage of outlook areas where the genesis location was captured within.              

Hurricane Ian     64 
 
 
Figure 24. 
Track forecast error (n mi) of the official forecasts and selected models for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.   

Hurricane Ian     65 
 
 
Figure 25. 
Track forecast skill of the official forecasts and selected models for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.   

Hurricane Ian     66 
 
 
Figure 26.  
Selected official track forecasts between 00 UTC 25 September and 18 UTC 27 September (dashed lines, with 0, 12, 24, 36, 
48, 60, 72, 96, and 120 h positions indicated) for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.  The best track is given by the thick 
solid black line with positions given by red symbols at 6-h intervals.  

Hurricane Ian     67 
 
 
Figure 27.  
Select official NHC forecast track cones (light shaded blue) from 00 UTC 26 September through 06 UTC 28 September 
(advisories 12 through 22) with the best track (solid blue line) and Cayo Costa, Florida landfall location (red dot). 

Hurricane Ian     68 
 
 
Figure 28. 
Intensity forecast error (kt) of the official forecasts and selected models for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.   

Hurricane Ian     69 
 
 
Figure 29. 
Intensity forecast skill of the official forecasts and selected models for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.   

Hurricane Ian     70 
 
 
Figure 30.  
Selected official intensity forecasts between 00 UTC 25 September and 00 UTC 27 September (dashed lines, with 0, 12, 24, 
36, 48, 60, 72, 96, and 120 h intensities indicated) for Hurricane Ian, 23‒30 September 2022.  The best track is given by the 
white solid line with intensities given at 6-h intervals.  
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     71 
 
 
Figure 31.  
Timeline of NHC storm surge forecasts for Hurricane Ian compared with verifying onset time of tropical-storm-force winds, 
landfall, and the wave-filtered maximum water level measurement from the USGS sensor at Fort Myers Beach (shown as a 
star). 
 
 

Hurricane Ian     72 
 
 
ADDITIONAL NWS RESOURCES 
 
Note that the storm overviews in these reports were generated using the preliminary Best Track data for Hurricane Ian. 
 
https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/2d5269a0866d436fb70677b0a3c1de3a (Tampa Bay WFO) 
 
https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/4a242bae868140a394c96bc2d9415e86 (Melbourne WFO) 
 
https://noaa.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=ec1990ce72d444b99e58d1553f7775b1 (Miami WFO) 
https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/bd0750c3c312476ba9c8c59eb7cb3cce (Charleston WFO) 
https://www.weather.gov/ilm/hurricaneian (Wilmington WFO) 
 
 
