 
NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER 
TROPICAL CYCLONE REPORT 
 
 
HURRICANE ISAIAS
 
(AL092020) 
 
30 July–4 August 2020 
 
Andy Latto, Andrew Hagen, and Robbie Berg  
National Hurricane Center 
11 June 20211 
 
 
GOES-16 10.3-µM INFRARED SATELLITE IMAGE OF HURRICANE ISAIAS AT 0310 UTC 04 AUGUST 2020 AS IT MADE 
LANDFALL NEAR OCEAN ISLE BEACH, NORTH CAROLINA. 
 
Isaias was a hurricane that formed in the eastern Caribbean Sea. The storm 
affected the Leeward Islands, Puerto Rico, Hispaniola, Cuba, the Bahamas, and a large 
portion of the eastern United States. 
                                               
1 Original report date 30 March 2021. Second version on 15 April updated Figure 12. This version 
corrects a wind gust value in the Winds and Pressures section and the track length of a tornado in 
Delaware. 

Hurricane Isaias     2 
 
Table of Contents 
 
SYNOPTIC HISTORY .......................................................................................... 3 
METEOROLOGICAL STATISTICS ...................................................................... 5 
Winds and Pressure ........................................................................................... 5 
Caribbean Islands and Bahamas ..................................................................... 6 
United States ................................................................................................... 6 
Rainfall and Flooding ......................................................................................... 7 
Storm Surge ....................................................................................................... 8 
Tornadoes ........................................................................................................ 10 
CASUALTY AND DAMAGE STATISTICS .......................................................... 11 
Caribbean and the Bahamas ............................................................................ 11 
Continental United States ................................................................................. 11 
FORECAST AND WARNING CRITIQUE ........................................................... 16 
Genesis ............................................................................................................ 16 
Track ................................................................................................................ 16 
Intensity ............................................................................................................ 17 
Watches and Warnings .................................................................................... 17 
Impact-Based Decision Support Services (IDSS) and Public Communication . 19 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS .................................................................................. 19 
 
TABLES ............................................................................................................. 21 
 
FIGURES ........................................................................................................... 64 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     3 
 
Hurricane Isaias 
 
30 JULY–4 AUGUST 2020 
 
 
SYNOPTIC HISTORY 
 
     
 The origin of Isaias can be traced back to a vigorous tropical wave that emerged off 
the coast of Africa on 24 July. The wave moved westward over the next couple of days, steered 
by an expansive subtropical ridge to its north. A broad area of low pressure developed in 
association with the wave on 25 July, but convection remained disorganized and confined mainly 
to the southern portion of the circulation through early 26 July due to dry air entrainment. Later 
that day, the convection briefly became better organized while the disturbance was located about 
midway between the African coast and the Lesser Antilles, but quickly waned. The convection 
once again became better organized by late 27 July; however, the system’s low-level circulation 
remained broad and elongated. By 0000 UTC 29 July, the system began to produce tropical-
storm-force winds over a large area within the northern portion of the circulation as it approached 
the Lesser Antilles but it still lacked a well-defined center. The disturbance crossed the Lesser 
Antilles that day, bringing widespread heavy rainfall and strong winds to the central and northern 
portions of those islands, with these conditions spreading across the Virgin Islands and Puerto 
Rico by late that day. Scatterometer passes by early on 30 July indicated that the system had 
developed a sufficiently well-defined center and it is estimated that the system became a tropical 
storm by 0000 UTC 30 July when it was located about 120 n mi south of Ponce, Puerto Rico. The 
“best track” chart of the tropical cyclone’s path is given in Fig. 1, with the wind and pressure 
histories shown in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively.  The best track positions and intensities are listed 
in Table 12. 
 
After formation, Isaias turned toward the west-northwest and then northwest as the 
cyclone reached the southwestern portion of the ridge. During the first day or so after genesis, 
Isaias continued to exhibit a large area of tropical-storm-force winds and a band of deep 
convection over the northern portion of the circulation, which spread across Puerto Rico and 
eastern portions of the Dominican Republic. The first landfall of Isaias occurred at 1615 UTC 30 
July near San Pedro De Macoris in southeastern Dominican Republic, and the cyclone’s center 
crossed the eastern portion of the country during the next several hours. Despite the land 
interaction, Isaias strengthened as a mid-level center emerged near the northern coast of 
Hispaniola, and surface observations indicated that the low-level center began to redevelop under 
that feature later that day. By 0000 UTC 31 July, about the same time that the bulk of Isaias’ 
circulation had emerged over the Atlantic waters, data from an Air Force Reserve reconnaissance 
                                               
2 A digital record of the complete best track, including wind radii, can be found on line at 
ftp://ftp.nhc.noaa.gov/atcf. Data for the current year’s storms are located in the btk directory, while previous 
years’ data are located in the archive directory. 

Hurricane Isaias     4 
 
aircraft indicated that the cyclone had strengthened into a hurricane while the center was located 
just offshore of the northern coast of Hispaniola. 
 
Isaias continued to move northwestward and made its second landfall around 0900 UTC 
31 July as the center crossed Great Inagua Island in the southeastern Bahamas and then passed 
just west of the central Bahamas through early 1 August. During that time, the wind field gradually 
contracted, and a central dense overcast (CDO) feature temporarily developed with an embedded 
small eye as noted in radar imagery from the Bahamas (not shown).  By 0000 UTC 1 August, 
Isaias reached its initial peak intensity of 75 kt while located about 175 miles south-southeast of 
Nassau.  However, both the satellite and radar appearance of the cyclone began to degrade early 
on 1 August due to an increase in westerly shear and dry air entrainment, and a weakening trend 
began.  Isaias made its third landfall on Andros Island at 1300 UTC 1 August and weakened to a 
tropical storm by 1800 UTC that day as it emerged back over the waters west of the island. Early 
on 2 August, the tropical storm made its closest approach to southeastern Florida, with the center 
coming within 40 n mi of West Palm Beach and Fort Lauderdale. The cyclone turned toward the 
north-northwest that day into a weakness of the Bermuda-Azores ridge that had developed from 
northern Florida to offshore of Georgia. This path kept the center of Isaias offshore of the east 
coast of Florida and over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream, which helped to maintain the 
storm’s intensity while it continued to be affected by strong westerly shear. On 3 August, Isaias 
turned toward the north, and then toward the north-northeast with an increase in forward speed 
as the cyclone moved through the weakness in the ridge and came under the influence of 
southwesterly flow ahead of an approaching mid- to upper-level trough over the United States. 
Later that day, the shear magnitude decreased while the cyclone’s motion became parallel to the 
shear vector. This allowed Isaias to regain organization and strengthen into a hurricane once 
again by 1800 UTC that day while located about 100 n mi south of Charleston, South Carolina. 
Isaias continued to quickly strengthen, reaching its peak intensity of 80 kt by 0000 UTC 4 August 
when it was located just off the coast of South Carolina. The hurricane made its fourth and final 
landfall near Ocean Isle Beach, North Carolina, at 0310 UTC 4 August with maximum sustained 
winds of 80 kt. Isaias then weakened to a tropical storm by 0600 UTC that morning while located 
about 50 n mi southwest of Greenville, North Carolina.  
 
The cyclone continued to accelerate north-northeastward after landfall, with the center 
moving across Virginia, Maryland, Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, and Vermont 
on 4 August. Isaias did not weaken as rapidly as a typical tropical cyclone moving over land due 
to baroclinic forcing from a mid- to upper-level trough and a significant portion of Isaias’ circulation 
remaining over water. This resulted in the storm maintaining an intensity of 55–60 kt as its center 
moved parallel to but about 100 n mi inland of the U.S. east coast.  During this time, Isaias 
produced a swath of heavy rainfall, strong damaging winds, and tornadoes from South Carolina 
through the Mid-Atlantic states and New England. By 0000 UTC 5 August, surface and radar 
observations indicated that Isaias had lost tropical characteristics and became an extratropical 
low as it crossed from Vermont into southeastern Canada. The extratropical low dissipated later 
that morning over the Canadian Province of Quebec. 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     5 
 
METEOROLOGICAL STATISTICS 
 
  
Observations in Isaias (Figs. 2 and 3) include subjective satellite-based Dvorak technique 
intensity estimates from the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch (TAFB) and the Satellite 
Analysis Branch (SAB), and objective Advanced Dvorak Technique (ADT) estimates from the 
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies/University of Wisconsin-Madison. Data 
and imagery from NOAA polar-orbiting satellites including the Advanced Microwave Sounding 
Unit (AMSU), the NASA Global Precipitation Mission (GPM), the European Space Agency’s 
Advanced Scatterometer (ASCAT), and Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) 
satellites, among others, were also useful in constructing the best track of Isaias.  Aircraft 
observations include flight-level, stepped frequency microwave radiometer (SFMR), and 
dropwindsonde observations from 15 flights (including 50 center fixes) of the 53rd Weather 
Reconnaissance Squadron of the U.S. Air Force Reserve Command and 10 missions (including 
2 center fixes) from the NOAA Hurricane Hunters of the NOAA Aircraft Operations Center (AOC). 
In addition, the NOAA AOC G-IV aircraft flew 3 synoptic surveillance flights around Isaias, 
collecting valuable data on the surrounding steering currents and other environmental conditions. 
Radar data from the Bahamas and National Weather Service WSR-88D radars from San Juan, 
Puerto Rico, and along the United States east coast were beneficial in tracking Isaias. 
Selected ship reports of winds of tropical storm force or greater associated with Isaias are 
given in Table 2. Selected surface observations from land stations and data buoys are given in 
Table 3. 
Winds and Pressure  
 
Isaias’ initial peak intensity of 75 kt at 0600 UTC 1 August is based on a blend of flight-
level winds and SFMR surface wind speed measurements from the Air Force Reserve Hurricane 
Hunters. The highest SFMR value during that time was 73 kt, while the aircraft measured flight- 
level winds of 90 kt at 850 mb, which corresponds to an intensity of 72 kt. Isaias’ second peak 
intensity of 80 kt from 0000 UTC 4 August through landfall in North Carolina is also based on a 
blend of flight-level winds and SFMR surface wind speed measurements observed by the 
Hurricane Hunters. The highest SFMR values during that time were 75 kt measured at 0042 UTC 
and again at 0253 UTC.  There were several flight-level observations at 700 mb from 0042–0044 
UTC of 100–106 kt, which would yield an intensity of 93 kt using the typical 90% reduction factor 
from that altitude.  However, radar and satellite imagery at the time indicated that the core 
convection of Isaias was not as deep or well organized as seen in most hurricanes, indicating that 
a reduction factor less than the usual 90% would be more suitable. Therefore, a blend of the peak 
75-kt SFMR measurement and a more conservative flight-level to surface wind reduction supports 
an intensity estimate of 80 kt from 0000 UTC 4 August through landfall in North Carolina, although 
the uncertainty in this estimate is larger than usual given the structure of Isaias at the time. While 
there was one flight-level wind observation of 117 kt, this observation appears to be a singular 
spike, possibly in a meso-vortex sampled around that same time and is not considered 
representative of Isaias’ intensity.  
 
The minimum pressure of 986 mb at 0000 4 August and at landfall is based on aircraft 
and buoy observations.   

Hurricane Isaias     6 
 
Caribbean Islands and Bahamas 
 
 
Prior to being designated as a tropical cyclone, the precursor disturbance of Isaias 
produced a large area of strong winds that spread across the northern Leeward and Virgin Islands 
as the center of the broad circulation moved westward over the Leeward Islands and into the 
eastern Caribbean Sea on 29 July.  Most of the northern Leeward Islands experienced wind gusts 
of 35 to 45 kt during the passage of the disturbance. A wind gust to 45 kt was reported on St. 
Thomas at 1853 UTC, while a gust to 44 kt was reported at the San Juan International Airport in 
Puerto Rico at 1856 UTC. The disturbance became Tropical Storm Isaias over the eastern 
Caribbean by 0000 UTC 30 July, and sustained winds to 34 kt and 36 kt were reported at 
Magueyes Island, Puerto Rico and on Vieques at 1342 UTC and 1418 UTC that day, respectively. 
A wind gust to 51 kt was reported from the observing station on Vieques. 
 
The highest wind gusts reported in the Dominican Republic were 30 kt at Punta Cana 
and Sabana de la Mar at 1500 and 1800 UTC 30 July, respectively. While there were no sustained 
winds of tropical storm force reported in the Dominican Republic, scatterometer wind data 
suggested that tropical-storm-force winds likely occurred along the southeastern coast of the 
island.  
 
A peak sustained wind of 48 kt and a gust to 51 kt was observed on Providenciales in 
the Turks and Caicos at 0434 UTC 31 July before the instrument stopped reporting. In the 
Bahamas, a wind gust to 47 kt was reported at 1424 UTC 31 July at San Salvador Airport on San 
Salvador Island, and a gust to 49 kt was measured at 1200 UTC 1 August at Lynden Pindling 
Airport in Nassau. At 1430 UTC 2 August, sustained winds of 41 kt and a gust to 56 kt were 
reported by an observing station at Settlement Point, located on the westernmost tip of Grand 
Bahama Island.   
 
United States 
 
 
 The strongest sustained surface wind reported in southeast Florida during Isaias was 
42 kt at Stuart Beach at 1154 UTC 2 August. The highest wind gust was 50 kt, observed at Dania 
Beach Pier near Ft. Lauderdale at 0232 UTC that day. The strong winds from the storm spread 
northward over east-central Florida, while the center of the cyclone slowly increased its distance 
from the shoreline. At Melbourne Beach, sustained winds reached 36 kt at 2006 UTC with a gust 
to 43 kt. Farther north at Jacksonville Beach, a wind gust to 36 kt was reported the morning of 3 
August.  
 
A sustained wind of 33 kt and gust to 36 kt occurred on Tybee Island, Georgia, at 1724 
UTC 3 August. Late that day, the center of the hurricane passed near NOAA buoy 41004, 
producing a sustained wind of 58 kt at 2349 UTC and a gust to 69 kt. The lowest pressure reported 
from the buoy was 988.8 mb at 2240 UTC, while the winds had decreased to around 21 kt as the 
center of the cyclone passed over. Just prior to U.S. landfall, the ragged eye of Isaias (cover 
photo) passed directly over NOAA buoy 41024, where the lowest pressure reported was 988.3 
mb at 0223 UTC while sustained winds were about 25 kt.   

Hurricane Isaias     7 
 
 
The strongest winds reported in North Carolina were at Federal Point, with sustained 
winds of 69 kt at 0250 UTC, and a gust to 86 kt. Oak Island reported sustained winds of 66 kt at 
0321 UTC and a gust to 76 kt. There were several other reports of sustained winds of 50 to 60 kt 
and gusts of 60 to 74 kt across coastal sections of southern North Carolina around the time of 
landfall. The lowest pressure recorded over land of 989.0 mb was at Lockwoods Folly Inlet and 
Oak Island at 0307 and 0321 UTC, respectively. In South Carolina, the highest sustained wind 
reported was 53 kt at Winyah Bay at 2316 UTC on 3 August. The highest wind gust in the state 
was 61 kt at Crescent Beach at 0314 UTC 4 August.  
 
Tropical storm conditions spread northward along the Mid-Atlantic coast and adjacent 
inland areas east of the storm’s center (Fig. 4). The highest sustained wind reported in Virginia 
was 63 kt that was observed at 1157 UTC at the elevated height of 52 feet at the Third Island 
Chesapeake Bay Bridge Tunnel. A wind gust to 76 kt was observed at 1118 UTC at Chesapeake 
Channel. In Ocean City, Maryland, a sustained wind of 55 kt and a gust to 64 kt was reported. 
The strongest winds reported in Delaware near the standard surface elevation was a sustained 
wind of 52 kt and a gust to 59 kt. There were numerous other observations across this region of 
sustained winds of 50 to 55 kt with gusts to hurricane force.  
 
There were several observations of sustained winds of 50+ kt along the coastal areas 
from New Jersey to New York, while sustained winds to tropical storm force were reported as far 
inland as Allentown, Pennsylvania. The highest sustained wind reported on land in this region 
was 57 kt at 1456 UTC on Long Beach Island, New Jersey. There was also a wind gust to 95 kt 
at this same observing station. However, these values were due to the passage of a waterspout 
at that location and therefore were not representative of the wind field of the tropical cyclone. A 
wind gust to 70 kt was reported at Egg Harbor, New Jersey, and there were several other 
observing sites that reported gusts of 65 to 68 kt across coastal sections of Delaware, New York, 
and New Jersey (Fig. 5). Sustained winds of 40–45 kt and wind gusts of 50–60 kt occurred across 
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and coastal sections of New Hampshire, well to the 
east of the center of Isaias. There were several locations across Vermont and Maine that reported 
wind gusts of tropical storm force. It is interesting to note that Isaias passed close to the summit 
of Mount Washington, New Hampshire, where sustained winds of 84 kt were recorded at 2210 
UTC 4 August along with a gust to 108 kt around that same time.  
Rainfall and Flooding 
Even though the center of Isaias did not directly pass over Puerto Rico, rainfall totals 
between 8 and 13 inches occurred at many locations across the island associated with the outer 
bands of the storm (Fig. 6). This rainfall resulted in flash and river flooding which flooded 
numerous roadways. Isaias also produced heavy rainfall over the Dominican Republic, where 
there were multiple reports over 8 inches (203 mm), which produced widespread flooding (Fig. 
7).  
 
There were only minor impacts from Isaias’ rainfall as it moved across Inagua Island and 
across Andros Island. Although the center of the cyclone passed within 40 n mi of the 
southeastern Florida coast, dry air on the western side of the circulation as well as westerly shear 
limited storm-total rainfall in the state to under 3 inches.  

Hurricane Isaias     8 
 
 
Isaias produced a swath of heavy rainfall extending from the Carolinas through the Mid-
Atlantic region and into southern New England (Fig. 8). In the Carolinas, there were several storm 
total reports of 5–7 inches of rainfall along coastal sections of the upper South Carolina coast. 
The highest rainfall total reported in South Carolina was 7.01 inches near McClellanville. North 
Carolina experienced rainfall totals of 3–6 inches, primarily over the inland sections of the eastern 
portion of the state. The highest rainfall total in the state was 6.00 inches just west-northwest of 
Windsor. Other than a couple of road and lane closures, there was no significant flooding reported 
due to this rainfall. 
 
There were numerous observations of 5-8 inches of rainfall across Virginia, Maryland, and 
Delaware, with some localized higher amounts. In Virginia, the highest rainfall total was 7.03 
inches near the town of Lightfoot, while the maximum rainfall total reported in Maryland was 9.15 
inches near Leonardtown.  In Delaware, 6.7-inch totals were reported at two different observing 
stations. Several streams rose above their flood stages, resulting in road closures and flash 
flooding. The stream gauge at Saint Clements Creek in Clements, Maryland, reached moderate 
flood stage and peaked over 2 ft above its flood stage on 4 August.  
 
In eastern Pennsylvania and extreme western New Jersey, widespread rainfall totals of 
4–7 inches were reported, with a few amounts in excess of 7–8 inches.  The highest totals were 
8.85 inches reported in Harleysville, Pennsylvania, and 7.86 inches near Salem, New Jersey.  In 
eastern Pennsylvania, some of the worst flooding associated with Isaias in the United States 
occurred as this heavy rain fell on ground already saturated due to recent rains. This led to severe 
flash flooding and significant river flooding (Fig. 9). Widespread minor to moderate flooding 
occurred with a few rivers reaching major flood stage. A couple of sites, including the Little Lehigh 
Creek at Allentown and the Perkiomen Creek at Graterford, reached their highest levels on record.  
 
Rainfall totals gradually tapered off as the cyclone moved across New York and New 
England. The highest storm total rainfall reported in New York was 5.92 inches in Tannersville, 
while there were several locations across New England observing rainfall amounts between 3–4 
inches, but with no significant flooding impacts. 
Storm Surge3 
Isaias produced peak storm surge inundation levels of 3 to 6 ft above ground level along 
the extreme southern coast of North Carolina and the Grand Strand region of South Carolina 
(Table 3, Fig. 10).  The highest inundation occurred along the coast of Brunswick County, North 
Carolina, between Cape Fear and the North Carolina/South Carolina border, just to the east of 
Isaias’ landfall location.  Two United States Geological Survey (USGS) water level pressure 
                                               
3 Several terms are used to describe water levels due to a storm. Storm surge is defined as the abnormal 
rise of water generated by a storm, over and above the predicted astronomical tide, and is expressed in 
terms of height above normal tide levels. Because storm surge represents the deviation from normal water 
levels, it is not referenced to a vertical datum. Storm tide is defined as the water level due to the 
combination of storm surge and the astronomical tide, and is expressed in terms of height above a vertical 
datum, i.e. the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) or Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW). 
Inundation is the total water level that occurs on normally dry ground as a result of the storm tide, and is 
expressed in terms of height above ground level. At the coast, normally dry land is roughly defined as areas 
higher than the normal high tide line, or Mean Higher High Water (MHHW). 

Hurricane Isaias     9 
 
sensors deployed on the beachfront at Ocean Isle Beach and Oak Island recorded wave-filtered 
water levels of 8.68 ft and 8.13 ft above the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88), 
respectively.  These readings convert to 6.3 ft and 6.0 ft, respectively, above Mean Higher High 
Water (MHHW) and indicate that the highest inundation levels in that area were around 6 ft above 
ground level.  Sensors were also deployed along the Intracoastal Waterway behind the barrier 
islands at Ocean Isle Beach and Holden Beach, and each of these instruments measured water 
levels of 4.8 ft MHHW.  Along the Grand Strand of South Carolina, USGS sensors deployed at 
Myrtle Beach and Surfside Beach recorded peak wave-filtered water levels of 7.60 ft and 7.73 ft 
above NAVD88, respectively, which each convert to 5.3 ft MHHW.  Multiple sensors from Winyah 
Bay northward to the North Carolina border measured peak water levels of 3 ft MHHW or greater.  
A National Ocean Service (NOS) tide gauge at Springmaid Pier in Myrtle Beach measured a 
storm surge of 4.26 ft above normal tide levels and a peak water level of 4.6 ft MHHW.  An NOS 
gauge at Oyster Landing recorded a peak water level of 3.5 ft MHHW. 
Storm surge inundation levels of 2 to 4 ft above ground level occurred along other parts 
of the southern North Carolina coast, particularly up the Cape Fear River into Wilmington.  The 
NOS gauge at Wilmington recorded a record water level of 4.35 ft MHHW, surpassing the previous 
record of 3.60 ft MHHW measured during Hurricane Florence (2018).  This gauge also registered 
the highest departure from normal tides of any NOS gauge during Isaias, recording a storm surge 
of 5.57 ft above normal tide levels.  Along the open coast, two USGS sensors recorded wave-
filtered water levels of 3.3 ft MHHW at Carolina Beach and Topsail Beach. 
Inundation of 1 to 3 ft above ground level occurred along the remainder of the North 
Carolina coast, including on the Outer Banks and along Pamlico and Albemarle Sounds.  Within 
that area, the highest available water level readings were 3.1 ft MHHW from a USGS sensor in 
Belhaven along the Pungo River (an arm of Pamlico Sound) and 3.1 ft MHHW from a USGS 
sensor at Nags Head.  A storm surge hindcast (not shown) suggests that inundation a little higher 
than 3 ft above ground level may have occurred in some areas along Pamlico and Albemarle 
Sounds, but most of these areas appear to be wetlands adjacent to rivers that empty into the 
sounds. 
Along the coasts of eastern Florida, Georgia, and the remainder of South Carolina (west 
of the track of Isaias’ center), maximum recorded water levels were 1 to 2 ft above ground level 
(Fig. 11).  The highest water levels recorded by NOS tide gauges in each region were 1.6 ft 
MHHW at Fernandina Beach, Florida; 1.7 ft MHHW at Fort Pulaski, Georgia; and 1.7 ft MHHW at 
Charleston, South Carolina. 
Storm surge inundation levels were also generally 1 to 2 ft above ground level along the 
U.S. Mid-Atlantic coast, however localized inundation higher than 2 ft likely occurred in some 
areas within Chesapeake Bay and Delaware Bay.  The highest observed water level in 
Chesapeake Bay was 2.5 ft MHHW at an NOS gauge in Cambridge, Maryland, which was just 
high enough to reach the National Weather Service’s level of major coastal flooding at that 
location.  All other NOS gauges within the bay had peak water levels less than 2 ft MHHW.  A 
combination of storm surge and heavy rainfall also caused moderate to minor flooding within 
portions of Delaware Bay and along tidal portions of the Delaware River, with most NOS tide 

Hurricane Isaias     10 
 
gauges in that region recording peak water levels of 2.0 ft MHHW or higher.  The NOS gauge 
farthest upriver at Newbold, Pennsylvania, measured a peak water level of 3.0 ft MHHW. 
A noteworthy storm surge (departure from normal tide levels) also occurred along the New 
Jersey coast and in the New York City metropolitan area, but there was little to no coastal flooding 
because the peak surge occurred just before low tide.  For example, the NOS gauges at Bergen 
Point West, New Jersey, and The Battery in Lower Manhattan recorded storm surges of 4.91 ft 
and 4.49 ft, respectively, above normal tide levels, but the actual peak water levels measured by 
the gauges were only 1.7 ft and 1.6 ft MHHW. 
Negligible storm surge occurred along the coast of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands 
when Isaias passed to the south of the islands as a tropical storm.  The maximum measured 
storm surge recorded by an NOS gauge was 1.36 ft above normal tide levels on Magueyes Island, 
Puerto Rico, which resulted in a peak water level of 1.2 ft MHHW.  All other NOS gauges on the 
islands recorded peak water levels less than 1 ft MHHW. 
There were no known storm surge reports from the Dominican Republic or the Bahamas.  
Tornadoes 
Isaias produced 39 confirmed tornadoes: 13 in North Carolina, 10 in Maryland, 7 in 
Virginia, 3 in Delaware, 2 in New Jersey, 2 in Pennsylvania, 1 in South Carolina, and 1 in 
Connecticut (Fig. 12). Of the tornadoes, 1 was rated EF-3 (on the enhanced Fujita Scale), 7 were 
EF-2, 17 were EF-1, and 14 were EF-0.  The 39 tornadoes that occurred during Isaias was the 
largest number produced by a U.S. landfalling tropical cyclone since Hurricane Florence in 2018 
(44 tornadoes).  
The tornado outbreak began at 1855 UTC 3 August, as outer rain bands began to spread 
inland across the Carolinas well before Isaias made landfall in North Carolina. A cold front and 
associated upper-level trough approaching the region helped to enhance vertical wind shear 
profiles as Isaias approached, resulting in a favorable environment for the development of 
tornadoes. Seventeen of the 39 tornadoes occurred before the hurricane made landfall early on 
4 August – over a span of about 8 hours. Another 21 tornadoes were spawned in a 7-hour period 
beginning when Isaias made landfall in North Carolina.  
The EF-3 tornado that Isaias spawned in Bertie County, North Carolina was the first 
tornado of that intensity produced by a tropical cyclone since Hurricane Rita in 2005. One of the 
EF-2 tornadoes that occurred in Delaware remained on the ground for 35.5 miles, becoming the 
longest-track tornado on record for that state. The winds of two of the tornadoes that occurred 
were sampled by surface weather observing equipment. A wind gust to 83 kt was measured at a 
Delaware Department of Transportation weather station as the circulation of an EF-2 tornado 
passed by. A wind gust to 95 kt was reported near Long Beach Island, New Jersey, and was the 
basis for the EF-1 intensity assigned to the tornado that struck the observing site.  For specifics 
about the damage and casualties from some of the individual tornadoes, please see the “Casualty 
and Damage Statistics” section of this report.  
 

Hurricane Isaias     11 
 
CASUALTY AND DAMAGE STATISTICS 
 
 
Isaias caused 12 direct4 deaths as a result of strong winds, heavy rains, tornadoes, and 
high surf across the Caribbean Islands and eastern United States. Ten of the casualties occurred 
in the continental United States, where Isaias affected a large geographical area while spawning 
a tornado outbreak and bringing heavy rainfall to already saturated areas.  The storm also caused 
2 direct fatalities in the Caribbean – 1 in Puerto Rico and 1 in the Dominican Republic. Of the 
direct fatalities, 6 were due to wind, 3 were drownings due to freshwater flooding, 2 were the result 
of tornadoes and 1 was a drowning due to a rip current.  In addition to the direct fatalities, 4 indirect 
deaths were reported in the United States and 1 in the Dominican Republic. Numerous others 
were injured before, during, or after the passage of Isaias. 
Caribbean and the Bahamas 
In Puerto Rico, a 56-year-old woman drowned as she was swept away in her vehicle by 
floodwaters in the coastal town of Rincón. In the Dominican Republic, a 5-year-old boy was killed 
when the winds from Isaias blew a tree onto a home in the town of Altamira in Puerto Plata.  
Strong winds from Isaias damaged roofs, knocked over billboards, and caused numerous 
trees and power lines to fall across Puerto Rico. Nearly a half a million people lost power, including 
23 hospitals. Heavy rainfall produced widespread flooding that forced several dams’ floodgates 
to be opened. This flooding resulted in 150,000 people losing drinking water service. In 
Mayagϋez, Puerto Rico, 25 people were trapped by flood waters which resulted in water rescues 
by the National Guard. According to the Puerto Rico Department of Agriculture, nearly 50 million 
USD in damage occurred to agriculture on the island due the effects of Isaias. The Dominican 
Republic experienced similar conditions as Puerto Rico, with reports of downed limbs and trees 
as well as widespread flooding.  
The effects of Isaias across the Bahamas from 31 July to 1 August produced damage to 
roofs and knocked down trees. Although the center of Isaias crossed Andros Island, the damage 
reported there was generally minor. The passage of the storm made it particularly difficult for 
those locations still trying to recover from Hurricane Dorian from the year prior.  
Continental United States 
In the continental United States, there were 10 direct fatalities: two in both North Carolina 
and Pennsylvania and one each in the states of South Carolina, Maryland, Delaware, New York, 
                                               
4 Deaths occurring as a direct result of the forces of the tropical cyclone are referred to as “direct” deaths. 
These would include those persons who drowned in storm surge, rough seas, rip currents, and freshwater 
floods. Direct deaths also include casualties resulting from lightning and wind-related events (e.g., 
collapsing structures). Deaths occurring from such factors as heart attacks, house fires, electrocutions from 
downed power lines, vehicle accidents on wet roads, etc., are considered “indirect” deaths.  
 

Hurricane Isaias     12 
 
Connecticut, and New Hampshire. At one point in time, nearly 3 million customers were without 
power in the United States along the path of the storm.  
  
In addition to the 10 direct deaths, Isaias produced widespread wind damage, heavy 
rainfall, and both inland and coastal flooding across much of the United States east coast. The 
storm also spawned 39 tornadoes, some that caused extensive to catastrophic damage. The 
NOAA Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) estimates that the wind and water damage 
caused by Isaias in the United States, including Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, totaled 
approximately 4.8 billion USD. Nearly 3.5 billion of this damage occurred in the northeastern 
United States, making Isaias the costliest tropical cyclone to affect that region since Hurricane 
Sandy in 2012. 
 
Florida and Georgia 
 
Damage in Florida was mostly minor. There was minor beach erosion that occurred due 
to wave action on top of the abnormally high tide. About 3,000 customers lost power, most of 
them in Palm Beach County. In Georgia, impacts were minimal, with a few road closures in 
anticipation of the minor storm surge flooding. 
 
South Carolina 
 
Most of the southern coastal sections of the state were spared significant damage, but 
minor coastal flooding occurred, and trees and power lines were downed. Across the northern 
coast, where the northern and western eyewall of Isaias reached the coastal sections, greater 
impacts occurred. The storm surge of 3 to 6 ft that occurred along the Grand Strand region of 
South Carolina caused significant damage in Horry County. Portions of a pier were destroyed, 
while homes in low-lying areas near the beach were flooded. In that county, a 76-year-old man 
drowned in rip currents along the coast while he was trying to save a swimmer in distress. In 
Myrtle Beach alone, 483 properties sustained damage, and over 100 baby sea turtles were found 
dead in North Myrtle Beach.  
 
An EF-0 tornado that began as a waterspout moved onshore in Garden City, South 
Carolina, where it damaged a few homes and caused an injury to a person. 
 
North Carolina 
 
Hurricane-force wind gusts caused damage to trees, power lines, and some structures 
along the southeastern coast. The Fort Anderson State Historic Park in Brunswick County 
reported comparable tree damage to that caused by Hurricane Florence in 2018. That county 
reported 53,000 customers without power at the height of the storm. Across New Hanover County, 
downed trees and power lines knocked out electrical service to 85,000 residents. Pender County 
reported that 27,500 residents lost electrical power, with damage to trees and power lines limited 
to the coastal sections of the county. Over 200,000 residents lost power in North Carolina during 
the passage of Isaias.   

Hurricane Isaias     13 
 
Isaias spawned 13 tornadoes across eastern North Carolina causing swaths of significant 
damage along their paths.  The EF-3 tornado that Isaias spawned touched down early on 4 August 
near the town of Woodard in Bertie County. The tornado moved near the town of Windsor, 
destroying several mobile homes and stick-built houses in the area, with unrecognizable debris 
remaining of some of the mobile homes (Fig. 13). There were two direct fatalities and fourteen 
injuries resulting from this tornado. The first EF-2 tornado spawned by Isaias occurred the evening 
of 3 August, several hours prior to the hurricane making landfall. This tornado began as a strong 
waterspout that moved onshore near East Beach of Bald Head Island, where it produced swaths 
of damage to vegetation. The tornado crossed the island and blew in windows and removed roofs 
off homes. After crossing the Cape Fear River and moving onto the mainland near Southport, the 
tornado damaged additional homes and trees before it dissipated. 
In Brunswick County, Isaias caused extensive damage to a hundred or more boats 
moored in a marina. Some of these boats were pushed across a marsh and into a nearby 
neighborhood. Heavy damage occurred to waterfront shops in the town of Southport.  Storm surge 
flooding damaged or destroyed an estimated 75–100 vehicles on Oak Island (Fig. 14). Bulkheads 
were eroded and sand dunes were destroyed, with some of the sand pushed up to 3 blocks inland. 
On Holden Beach, 42 of the 45 sea turtle nests identified before the storm were destroyed. The 
storm surged moved up the tidal portion of the Cape Fear River into downtown Wilmington, 
causing significant street flooding and damaging some first-floor businesses. Farther up the coast, 
the combination of the storm surge and waves washed away a roadway in Bayview (Fig. 15).  
 
Virginia 
 
Isaias remained a strong tropical storm as the center crossed the southeastern portion of 
the state. The strongest winds occurred across eastern Virginia (Fig. 4), downing numerous trees 
and power lines, resulting in over 200,000 power outages.  
The tornado outbreak during the approach of Isaias produced 7 tornadoes in the state (2 
of them EF-2), resulting in extensive damage. An EF-2 tornado touched down at 0149 UTC 4 
August a few miles west-southwest of Franklin and produced a swath of damage until 4 miles 
north of Sebrell. The tornado crossed the town of Courtland where it caused damage to numerous 
homes and businesses, including lifting the second story roof off a hotel building. Several vehicles 
were also flipped over. Numerous trees were downed or snapped along this tornado’s path. The 
other EF-2 tornado touched down at 0440 UTC just east-northeast of Palmer and intensified, 
causing significant roof loss and structural damage to numerous houses near Antipoison Creek. 
The tornado weakened after that, but still caused damage to numerous roofs and siding of 
structures in the area as well as snapping or uprooting many trees. Five people were injured as 
a result of this tornado. An EF-1 tornado touched down near Suffolk and caused significant 
damage to 8 buildings and uprooted or snapped numerous trees along its path.  
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     14 
 
Maryland 
 
Strong winds overturned 3 tractor trailers along U.S. Route 50 and caused roof damage 
and downed trees and power lines. Due to the high winds, a 31-year-old female was killed in St. 
Mary’s County when a tree fell on the vehicle she was inside. Over 60,000 customers lost power 
in the state. The strong south to southeast winds caused water to pile up in the mid- to upper 
Chesapeake Bay early on 4 August. Then the winds shifted from the west, causing water levels 
to rise rapidly on the Lower Eastern Shore where moderate to locally major tidal flooding occurred, 
particularly in Cambridge (Fig. 16). 
The 10 tornadoes (including 2 EF-2s) that occurred in the state were second in number 
only to North Carolina. An EF-2 tornado touched down at 0455 UTC 4 August just south of 
Mardela Springs and caused a house to be shifted off its foundation as well as numerous downed 
trees and roofs damaged. At 0614 UTC that day, an EF-2 tornado occurred near Girdletree. This 
tornado destroyed several chicken houses and snapped or downed numerous trees along its path 
(Fig. 17). 
The flash flooding that occurred in the state washed out several roads, and the 
combination of these road closures and downed trees complicated accessibility to some of those 
areas affected by the tornadoes. 
Delaware 
 
Numerous trees and power lines were knocked down, causing widespread power outages 
affecting around 60,000 homes. In Milford, a woman died after she was struck by a falling tree 
branch.  
Of the 3 tornadoes that occurred in the state due to Isaias, one was rated EF-2. At 0755 
UTC on 4 August, this tornado touched down in the southern suburbs of Dover. The tornado tore 
off pieces of a middle school roof, a warehouse had parts of its metal walls removed, and tractor 
trailers were flipped over. Numerous trees were damaged or uprooted while the tornado was on 
the ground in Kent County. The long-track tornado then entered New Castle County where it 
snapped and uprooted numerous trees, destroyed a garage at a residence, blew out several 
garage doors, downed the walls of a home, and produced extensive damage to many residences’ 
roofs. About a dozen of these residences sustained enough damage to be declared uninhabitable.  
The heavy rainfall during the passage of Isaias produced flash flooding at many locations 
in northern Delaware, where streams came out of their banks resulting in several road closures 
and water rescues (Fig. 18).  
New Jersey 
 
The conditions and damage that occurred in Delaware were similar to what occurred in 
New Jersey, with numerous downed trees and power lines commonplace from the winds of the 
storm. There were at least 2 direct injuries in the state from falling trees as a result of Isaias.  At 
one point, about 1 million customers were without power.  

Hurricane Isaias     15 
 
The state was not spared from Isaias’ tornado outbreak, with 2 tornadoes – both EF-1 –
occurring as the center of the storm approached from the south-southwest. One of these 
tornadoes produced significant damage to homes and businesses, flipped a truck trailer, and 
upended a shed in Cape May County.  
Heavy rainfall across the state resulted in flash flooding in several counties, including 
Cumberland, Ocean, Gloucester, Warren, and Hunterdon. The main impact from this flooding was 
numerous road closures. 
 
New York 
 
Isaias produced widespread tropical-storm-force winds and occasional gusts to hurricane 
force across the southeastern portion of the state, including Long Island and New York City (Fig. 
5).  In Queens, a 60-year-old male was killed when a tree fell on a car he was inside. In Brooklyn, 
a woman was critically injured when a falling tree branch hit her as she was walking down a street. 
There was also damage to homes, businesses, and vehicles as a result of the strong winds 
blowing down trees and limbs across eastern New York. At the height of the storm about 800,000 
utility customers lost service in the southeastern portion of the state, resulting in the largest power 
outage in that area by a tropical cyclone since Hurricane Sandy in 2012.  
 
Pennsylvania 
 
Recent heavy rainfall preceding Isaias made the region more vulnerable to flash flooding. 
The heavy rainfall produced by the cyclone caused streams and rivers to breach their banks, 
causing widespread road closures and numerous water rescues. A 5-year-old girl in Montgomery 
County and a 44-year-old female in Lehigh County both drowned after being swept away by flood 
waters. The strongest winds associated with the storm were to the east of the center when it 
clipped the extreme eastern portion of the state, and so the tree and power line damage was 
primarily confined to that area. Even so, there were 300,000 customers in the state that lost power 
as the storm passed.  
There was one EF-2 tornado spawned by Isaias in the state. This tornado touched down 
at 0950 UTC 4 August just east of Philadelphia Mills Mall in the northeastern suburbs of 
Philadelphia, where it blew construction equipment off a former Walmart store, tore roofs, siding, 
and awnings off many homes in the area, tossed or overturned a few cars, and snapped numerous 
trees resulting in additional car and home damage. The tornado strengthened and passed near 
the Doylestown Hospital Complex, tossing at least 6 cars some distance and bending over metal 
lamp posts. The tornado produced substantial damage to the Children’s Village Daycare Center, 
then snapped and downed many additional trees and damaged more homes before it lifted. There 
were 6 injuries as a result of this tornado, but none were serious. 
 
New England 
 
Across Connecticut, Rhode Island, and Massachusetts, sustained winds up to 40 kt and 
gusts to 55 kt were commonly observed. A man of 66 years died in Naugatuck, Connecticut after 

Hurricane Isaias     16 
 
he was struck by a falling tree while trying to remove debris off the road. Nearly 700,000 
customers lost power across these 3 states due to the strong winds knocking down power lines. 
In Massachusetts and Rhode Island, over 140,000 and nearly 250,000 customers lost power, 
respectively. The tree damage was extensive across the region, with many trees blocking 
roadways that made power restoration quite difficult.  
The center of Isaias crossed Vermont as the cyclone lost its tropical characteristics. Wind 
gusts of 40–45 kt were observed at several locations in Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine as 
the system moved quickly through the area. A 60-year-old woman died in North Conway, New 
Hampshire, when these winds blew a tree down on her apartment home. As a result of the strong 
winds blowing down limbs and power lines, there were nearly 70,000 power outages in New 
Hampshire, about 18,000 in Vermont, and 64,000 in Maine.   
 
FORECAST AND WARNING CRITIQUE 
 
Genesis 
The genesis of Isaias was well forecast, with formation occurring a little later than 
anticipated as the precursor disturbance took longer than expected to develop a well-defined 
center, primarily due to the initially broad wind field and fast forward motion. The disturbance was 
first introduced into the Tropical Weather Outlook (TWO) 150 h prior to genesis, with a low (<40%) 
chance for formation within the next 5 days (Table 4). The 5-day probabilities were increased to 
medium (40–60%) and high (>60%) 126 and 102 h prior to formation, respectively. The first 2-
day probabilities were introduced with a low chance for genesis 108 h prior to formation. These 
probabilities were then raised to the medium and high categories 96 and 78 h prior to genesis, 
respectively. Due to the threat the system posed to the land areas of the eastern Caribbean, 
Potential Tropical Cyclone advisories were issued on 28 July, 36 h before genesis occurred to 
allow for the issuance of Tropical Storm Watches and Warnings for portions of that area.   
Track  
A verification of NHC official track forecasts for Isaias is given in Table 5a. Official track 
forecast errors were slightly lower than the mean official errors for the previous 5-yr period at 12, 
24, and 96 h, but were slightly higher than the mean official errors at 36–72 h and 120 h. A 
homogeneous comparison of the official track errors with selected guidance models is given in 
Table 5b. Generally, the consensus aids had the lowest overall errors. The best-performing of 
these was TVDG (which includes a double weighting of the global models), which beat the official 
NHC forecasts at all but one verifying time. TVCX and the corrected consensus HCCA also beat 
the NHC forecasts at most of the verifying times. The official NHC track forecasts beat the GFS 
ensemble mean (AEMI), the ECMWF (EMXI), and UKMET (EGRI) at all verifying times. 
 

Hurricane Isaias     17 
 
Intensity 
A verification of NHC official intensity forecasts for Isaias is given in Table 6a. Official 
intensity forecast errors were above the mean official errors for the previous 5-yr period at  
12–60 h and below the mean official errors at 72–120 h. A homogeneous comparison of the 
official intensity errors with selected guidance models is given in Table 5b. The consensus models 
IVCN and IVDR as well as the corrected consensus HCCA were the best performers, beating the 
NHC forecasts at all but 2 verifying times. The dynamical models generally performed better than 
the NHC forecast in the 12–36 h forecast timeframes, while the NHC forecasts performed better 
than most of those models beyond 36 h. There were a couple of forecast challenges for intensity 
during the lifecycle of Isaias. The first occurred while the cyclone was crossing the eastern 
Caribbean Sea and it was anticipated that the storm would weaken over Hispaniola (Fig. 19). 
However, the apparent reformation of the low-level center underneath a strong mid-level vortex 
near the northern coast of Hispaniola could have helped Isaias to increase in strength during its 
passage over the island. The second challenge in forecasting the intensity of Isaias occurred on 
its approach and landfall over the southeastern United States. Until within 24 h of landfall, model 
guidance and the NHC forecast were not indicating that Isaias would regain hurricane intensity 
prior to landfall (Fig. 20). The main reason for this was that strong southwesterly vertical wind 
shear that was impacting the system was expected to counteract any effects of the cyclone 
crossing the warm waters of the Gulf Stream. However, as Isaias turned toward the north-
northeast on 3 August, it began to move parallel to the shear vector, which provided a more 
conducive environment for strengthening prior to landfall.  
Watches and Warnings 
Coastal tropical storm and hurricane watches and warnings associated with Isaias are 
listed in Table 7. Tropical Storm Watches and Warnings were issued across portions of the 
eastern Caribbean, Turks and Caicos Islands, and the southeastern Bahamas in conjunction with 
potential tropical cyclone advisories prior to the formation of Isaias, in anticipation of the arrival of 
tropical-storm force winds.  
For the United States, a Tropical Storm Warning was first issued for Puerto Rico and the 
U.S. Virgin Islands at 1500 UTC 28 July. Sustained tropical-storm-force winds first arrived just 
after 1200 UTC on 30 July, so a lead time of about 42 h was provided. A Tropical Storm Watch 
was first issued for the southeastern Florida coastline from Ocean Reef to Sebastian Inlet, at 1500 
UTC 31 July. Since sustained tropical-storm-force winds first reached this portion of the coast 
within the Tropical Storm Watch around 0800 UTC 2 August, a lead time of 41 h was provided for 
this area. Hurricane Watches and Warnings were also issued for a portion of the eastern Florida 
coast. However, the track of Isaias gradually trended farther offshore, and sustained hurricane-
force winds were not experienced in Florida. Additional Tropical Storm Watches and Warnings 
were issued along much of the eastern coast of the United States along with Hurricane Watches 
and Warnings in the Carolinas.  A Tropical Storm Watch was first issued from South Santee River, 
SC to Surf City, NC (the stretch of coast where Isaias was expected to make landfall) at 0900 
UTC 2 August. The Tropical Storm Watch was upgraded to a Tropical Storm Warning at 1500 
UTC that day, and at 2100 UTC a Hurricane Watch was issued for that stretch of coastline. This 

Hurricane Isaias     18 
 
watch was then upgraded to a Hurricane Warning at 0900 UTC 3 August. Sustained tropical-
storm-force winds began to spread across this portion of coastline by around 2100 UTC 3 August, 
resulting in a lead time of 36 h for the initial Tropical Storm Watch and 24 h and 12 h for the 
Hurricane Watch and Hurricane Warning, respectively.   
Storm surge watches and warnings associated with Isaias are given in Table 8 and 
indicated in Fig. 21.  Because Isaias was forecast to be near or over the east coast of Florida as 
a hurricane, a Storm Surge Watch was issued from Jupiter Inlet to Ponte Vedra Beach at 2100 
UTC 31 July for the possibility of significant storm surge inundation.  However, since Isaias 
weakened to a tropical storm as it approached Florida and its center remained just off the east-
central coast of the state, the watch was never upgraded to a warning.  Water levels along the 
east coast of Florida remained below warning criteria, and the watch was discontinued at 1500 
UTC 2 August.  
For the Carolinas, a Storm Surge Watch was first issued from Edisto Beach, South 
Carolina, to Surf City, North Carolina, at 0900 UTC 2 August.  At 2100 UTC that day, the portion 
of the watch from Edisto Beach to Cape Fear, North Carolina, was upgraded to a Storm Surge 
Warning, and the watch area was extended northward to Duck, North Carolina, including portions 
of Pamlico and Albemarle Sounds.  Storm surge inundation of 3 ft or greater above normally dry 
ground (which NHC uses as a first-cut threshold for the storm surge watch/warning) occurred 
within this Storm Surge Warning area (Fig. 21). Sustained tropical-storm-force winds are 
estimated to have reached the area where 3 ft or greater inundation above ground level occurred 
around 2100 UTC 3 August, 36 h and 24 h after the watch and warning, respectively, were issued. 
Farther north, a Storm Surge Warning was issued for portions of Pamlico and Albemarle 
Sounds and the Outer Banks from Oregon Inlet to the North Carolina/Virginia border at 1500 UTC 
3 August.  The warning was extended southward to Ocracoke Inlet at 0300 UTC 4 August.  
Although not widespread, storm surge inundation of 3 ft above normally dry ground occurred 
within some parts of this warning area, particularly near the mouths of rivers that empty into 
Pamlico and Albemarle Sounds. 
The portion of the North Carolina coast from Cape Fear to Ocracoke Inlet was not 
upgraded from a storm surge watch to a warning.  Water levels within this area generally remained 
below warning criteria, although observations in a few localized areas reached near or just above 
3 ft MHHW, especially along the New Hanover and Pender County coasts. 
For the southern coast of North Carolina and the Grand Strand of South Carolina, the 
initial storm surge inundation forecast, issued with the Storm Surge Watch at 0900 UTC 2 August, 
was 2 to 4 ft above normally dry ground somewhere between Edisto Beach, South Carolina, to 
Cape Fear, North Carolina.  This forecast was raised to 3 to 5 ft above normally dry ground for a 
portion of that original area, from South Santee River, South Carolina, to Cape Fear at 0900 UTC 
3 August.  That forecast remained steady through Isaias’ landfall and ultimately turned out to have 
a slight low bias, since the estimated maximum storm surge inundation was about 6 ft above 
ground level along the Brunswick County, North Carolina coastline. 
 

Hurricane Isaias     19 
 
Impact-Based Decision Support Services (IDSS) and Public 
Communication 
The NHC began communication with emergency managers on 29 July when Isaias was a 
potential tropical cyclone moving through the easternmost Leeward Islands. Initial communication 
was in support of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands and included FEMA headquarters and 
FEMA Region 2. As the threat expanded to the continental U.S., NHC briefings continued on joint 
Federal-State video-teleconferences with FEMA headquarters, impacted FEMA Regions and 
states. NHC also provided briefings on state-specific teleconferences for Florida, North Carolina, 
Virginia, FEMA Region 1 states, and FEMA Region 2 states to communicate the evolving forecast 
and impacts. These briefings were coordinated through the FEMA Hurricane Liaison Team, 
embedded at the NHC. The coordination of information continued through 4 August when the 
impacts associated with Isaias exited the northeastern U.S. In total, NHC provided over 30 
briefings for state and federal emergency managers during the storm. In addition, the Tropical 
Analysis and Forecast Branch of NHC provided 14 live briefings on Hurricane Isaias to the U.S. 
Coast Guard Districts 7 and 8, in support of their life-saving mission.  In addition to NHC’s IDSS 
described above, there was a large-scale collaborative IDSS effort across the NWS, including 
WFOs, RFCs, and National Centers, in response to the multiple life-threatening hazards produced 
by Isaias in Puerto Rico and along much of the U.S. East Coast. 
 
The NHC media pool was in operation from 31 July–4 August to provide live briefings to 
national and local television outlets in both English and Spanish. NHC provided 149 live interviews 
through the pool, comprising 52 to local television stations, 57 to networks, and 40 generic 
broadcasts, which were also recorded and made available on the NHC website during the daytime 
hours. Numerous telephone media interviews were also given. NHC was active on social media 
to keep the public informed on the latest NHC/NWS forecasts and warnings in real time.  There 
were 18 Facebook Live broadcasts provided during the 5-day span of this media pool, with 1.4 
million views received during that time period, including 117,000 the morning of 1 August near 
the time Isaias was making landfall on Andros Island in the Bahamas. Postings of the latest 
advisory information on Facebook were made at least every 3 hours with these posts reaching 
nearly 5 million and post engagement of nearly 3 million, while adding 27,000 followers. The posts 
on Twitter during Isaias resulted in 28 million impressions and added 15,000 followers. During the 
eight-day threat from Isaias (28 July - 4 August), the NHC web site had approximately 102 million 
page views. The majority of the views went to the graphical products, particularly the cone graphic, 
the key messages, and the wind speed probabilities. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
 
Data in Table 3 were compiled from Post Tropical Cyclone Reports issued by the NWS 
Forecast Offices (WFOs) in San Juan, Miami, Melbourne, Jacksonville, Charleston S.C., 
Morehead City, Wilmington N.C., Wakefield, Sterling, Philadelphia, New York City, 
Boston/Norton, and Gray/Portland.  Additional data were used from reports sent by WFOs in 

Hurricane Isaias     20 
 
Raleigh, State College, Binghamton, Albany, and Burlington. Data from the Weather Prediction 
Center, National Data Buoy Center, NOS Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and 
Services, United States Geological Survey, Storm Prediction Center, the Dominican Republic 
Meteorological Service, and the Bahamas Department of Meteorology were also used in this 
report. Roger Edwards of the NOAA Storm Prediction Center provided tornado information.  David 
Roth of the NOAA Weather Prediction Center produced the rainfall map. John Cangialosi 
produced the track map and tornado map. Dennis Feltgen reported the media statistics used in 
this report, Tiffany O’Connor contributed to the IDSS report, and Matt Onderlinde provided the 
web statistics.  
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     21 
 
Table 1. 
Best track for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 2020. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
28 / 1200 
12.5 
54.0 
1007 
35 
disturbance 
28 / 1800 
13.2 
56.4 
1006 
35 
" 
29 / 0000 
14.1 
58.3 
1005 
40 
" 
29 / 0600 
14.8 
60.3 
1005 
40 
" 
29 / 1200 
15.2 
62.2 
1005 
40 
" 
29 / 1800 
15.3 
64.0 
1005 
40 
" 
30 / 0000 
15.8 
65.7 
1004 
45 
tropical storm 
30 / 0600 
16.7 
67.2 
1003 
50 
" 
30 / 1200 
17.7 
68.5 
1002 
55 
" 
30 / 1615 
18.4 
69.3 
1002 
55 
" 
30 / 1800 
18.9 
69.8 
999 
60 
" 
31 / 0000 
19.9 
71.2 
996 
65 
hurricane 
31 / 0600 
20.5 
72.7 
990 
70 
" 
31 / 0900 
20.9 
73.4 
990 
70 
" 
31 / 1200 
21.3 
74.0 
992 
65 
" 
31 / 1800 
22.1 
75.1 
990 
70 
" 
01 / 0000 
22.9 
75.9 
987 
75 
" 
01 / 0600 
23.6 
76.7 
987 
75 
" 
01 / 1200 
24.3 
77.5 
987 
70 
" 
01 / 1300 
24.4 
77.7 
989 
70 
" 
01 / 1800 
24.8 
78.3 
993 
60 
tropical storm 
02 / 0000 
25.3 
78.9 
995 
60 
" 
02 / 0600 
25.9 
79.2 
996 
55 
" 
02 / 1200 
26.6 
79.5 
995 
55 
" 
02 / 1800 
27.4 
79.6 
995 
60 
" 
03 / 0000 
28.2 
79.7 
995 
60 
" 
03 / 0600 
29.1 
79.9 
995 
60 
" 
03 / 1200 
30.1 
80.0 
995 
60 
" 
03 / 1800 
31.2 
79.7 
991 
65 
hurricane 
04 / 0000 
32.8 
79.1 
986 
80 
" 

Hurricane Isaias     22 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
04 / 0310 
33.9 
78.5 
986 
80 
" 
04 / 0600 
35.0 
78.1 
992 
60 
tropical storm 
04 / 1200 
37.7 
76.8 
993 
60 
" 
04 / 1800 
40.9 
75.1 
994 
55 
" 
05 / 0000 
44.0 
73.1 
998 
45 
extratropical 
05 / 0600 
46.7 
71.8 
1000 
35 
" 
05 / 1200 
 
 
 
 
dissipated 
04 / 0000 
32.8 
79.1 
986 
80 
minimum pressure 
and maximum winds 
30 / 1615 
18.4 
69.3 
1002 
55 
Landfall near San 
Pedro De Macoris, 
Dominican Republic 
31 / 0900 
20.9 
73.4 
990 
70 
Landfall on Great 
Inagua Island, 
Bahamas 
01 / 1300 
24.4 
77.7 
987 
70 
Landfall on Andros 
Island, Bahamas 
04 / 0310 
33.9 
78.5 
986 
80 
Landfall near Ocean 
Isle Beach, NC 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     23 
 
Table 2. 
Selected ship reports with winds of at least 34 kt for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July – 4 
August 2020.  
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Ship call 
sign 
Latitude 
(N) 
Longitude 
(W) 
Wind 
dir/speed 
(kt) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
28 / 0900 
2AKI3  
 13.4 
  53.4 
080 /  36 
1007.4 
30 / 1100 
9V9917 
 18.4 
  74.7 
030 /  35 
1011.0 
31 / 1400 
C6FV9  
 26.0 
  78.5 
050 /  49 
1015.3 
01 / 0500 
C6YR6  
 24.4 
  81.2 
020 /  55 
1011.7 
02 / 2200 
OYCY2  
 27.9 
  77.3 
130 /  37 
1010.2 
03 / 0200 
WNFQ   
 27.7 
  79.5 
220 /  45 
1007.2 
03 / 0700 
J8QY1  
 27.2 
  79.3 
080 /  46 
1010.4 
03 / 0700 
WNFQ   
 28.7 
  79.2 
180 /  44 
1006.1 
03 / 1400 
WNFQ   
 30.0 
  78.5 
180 /  45 
1013.0 
03 / 1800 
WNFQ   
 30.7 
  78.1 
170 /  55 
1009.2 
03 / 1800 
KABP   
 32.3 
  77.6 
150 /  35 
1012.5 
03 / 2100 
KABP   
 31.5 
  77.4 
170 /  42 
1008.6 
03 / 2200 
KABP   
 31.2 
  77.4 
170 /  45 
1010.1 
03 / 2300 
KABP   
 30.8 
  77.3 
180 /  35 
1010.8 
04 / 0000 
WAIU   
 31.1 
  77.2 
170 /  40 
1015.0 
04 / 0000 
OWWS2  
 34.1 
  75.3 
130 /  35 
1014.0 
04 / 0200 
WNFQ   
 32.0 
  77.2 
190 /  45 
1016.6 
04 / 0200 
OWWS2  
 33.7 
  75.5 
170 /  37 
1012.0 
04 / 0600 
OWWS2  
 32.8 
  75.9 
170 /  44 
1013.0 
04 / 0600 
VRFO7  
 36.2 
  74.2 
140 /  40 
1015.5 
04 / 1200 
WTEA   
 36.9 
  76.3 
210 /  36 
 999.9 
04 / 1400 
WNFQ   
 34.3 
  74.4 
200 /  35 
1019.2 
04 / 1800 
VRFX6  
 37.8 
  72.7 
200 /  36 
1005.8 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     24 
 
Table 3. 
Selected surface observations for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 2020.  
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)c 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)d 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)e 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)a 
Sustained 
(kt)b 
Gust 
(kt) 
ANGUILLA 
Clayton J. Lloyd Intl. 
Airport (TQPF) 
(18.21N 63.05W) 
 
 
29/1500 
30 
(31 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
ANTIGUA 
V.C. Bird Intl Airport 
(TAPA) 
(17.14N 61.79W) 
 
 
29/0700 
26 
(10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
DOMINICA 
Canefield Airport (TDCF) 
(15.34N 61.39W) 
29/0430 
1005.1 
29/0020 
 
34 
 
 
 
 
ST. BARTHELEMY 
St. Barthelemy BL 
(FW2827) 
(17.92N 62.86W) 
 
 
29/1446 
 
43 
 
 
 
 
ST. EUSTATIUS 
F.D. Roosevelt Airport 
(TNCE) 
(17.49N 62.97W) 
 
 
29/1055 
25 
(10 m) 
36 
 
 
 
 
ST. MARTIN 
Grand Case-Espérance 
Airport (TFFG) 
(18.10N 63.05W) 
 
 
29/1055 
26 
(10 m) 
44 
 
 
 
 
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC 
Arroyo Barril (MDAB) 
(19.64N 69.90W) 
30/1800 
1004.9 
30/1800 
18 
 
 
 
 
10.26 
Cabrera (78464) 
(19.64N 69.90W) 
30/1800 
1004.3 
30/1800 
10 
 
 
 
 
8.47 
Las Américas (MDSD) 
(19.64N 69.90W) 
30/2100 
1005.5 
29/2300 
16 
 
 
 
 
6.18 
La Romana (MDLR) 
(18.45N 68.91W) 
30/1500 
1004.0 
29/2300 
20 
 
 
 
 
1.64 
Puerto Plata (MDPP) 
(19.76N 70.56W) 
30/2100 
1003.0 
30/1800 
26 
 
 
 
 
3.45 
Sabana de la Mar (78467) 
(19.05N 69.39W) 
30/1800 
1006.9 
29/0600 
16 
30 
 
 
 
12.90 
BAHAMAS 
Lynden Pindling (Nassau) 
IAP (MYNN) 
(25.04N 77.47W) 
 
 
01/1200 
30 
49 
 
 
 
 
San Salvador Airport 
(MYSM) 
(24.06N 74.52W) 
 
 
31/1424 
31 
47 
 
 
 
 
Settlement Point (SPGF1) 
(26.70N 79.00W) 
02/1300 
1000.5 
02/1430 
41 
(10 min, 7 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
TURKS AND CAICOS 

Hurricane Isaias     25 
 
Providenciales  
(21.78N 72.16W) 
 
 
31/0434 
48 I 
51 I 
 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES 
Buoys 
41004 – NOAA 
(32.50N 79.10W) 
03/2240 
988.8 
03/2349 
58 
(1 min, 4 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
41009 – NOAA  
(28.51N 80.19W) 
03/0140 
1002.9 
02/2238 
39 
(1 min, 5 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
41010 – NOAA  
(28.88N 78.49W) 
03/0230 
1007.0 
03/0305 
47 
(1 min, 4 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
41013 – NOAA  
(33.44N 77.76W) 
04/0210 
999.8 
04/0219 
52 
(1 min, 4 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
41024 – CORMP  
(33.84N 78.48W) 
04/0223 
988.3 
04/0338 
43 
(8 min, 3 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
41025 – NOAA 
(35.03N 75.36W) 
04/0830 
1009.5I 
04/0826 
43 
(1 min, 4 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
41029 – CORMP  
(32.80N 79.62W) 
03/2338 
999.9 
03/2308 
35 
(3 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
41033 – CORMP 
(32.28N 80.41W) 
04/2138 
1006.3 
03/1908 
29 
(3 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
41037 – CORMP  
(33.99N 77.36W) 
04/0308 
1004.5 
04/0408 
39 
(8 min, 3 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
41038 – CORMP 
(34.14N 77.71W) 
04/0408 
995.0 
04/0408 
45 
(8 min, 3 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
41043 – NOAA  
(21.03N 64.79W) 
30/0800 
1013.4 
29/2342 
45 
(1 min, 4 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
41064 – CORMP 
(34.21N 76.95W) 
04/0508 
1006.9 
04/0308 
35 
(3 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
42059 – NOAA 
(15.25N 67.48W) 
30/0730 
1005.6 
30/1422 
27 
(1 min, 4 m) 
31 
 
 
 
 
42060 – NOAA  
(16.43N 63.33W) 
29/1350 
1006.6 
29/1038 
33 
(1 min, 4 m) 
35 
 
 
 
 
44007 – NOAA 
(43.53N 70.14W) 
05/0250 
1006.3 
05/0016 
34 
(1 min, 5 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
44013 – NOAA 
(42.35N 70.65W) 
04/2150 
1006.4 
04/2150 
34 
(10 min, 5 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
44014 – NOAA 
(36.61N 74.82W) 
04/1030 
1008.2 
04/1036 
43 
(1 min, 3 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
44017 – NOAA 
(40.69N 72.05W) 
04/1950 
1008.3 
04/1906 
41 
(1 min, 4 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
44020 – NOAA 
(41.49N 70.28W) 
04/2200 
1010.2 
04/2200 
31 
(8 min, 4 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
44022 – UCONN 
(40.88N 73.73W) 
 
 
04/1800 
31 
(4 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
44025 – NOAA 
(40.25N 73.16W) 
04/1820 
1003.5 
04/1804 
49 
(1 min, 4 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
44040 – UCONN 
(40.96N 73.58W) 
 
 
04/1800 
31I 
(4 m) 
54I 
 
 
 
 
44058 – CBIBS 
(37.57N 76.26W) 
04/1212 
999.1 
04/1300 
37 
(3 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
44065 – NOAA 
(40.37N 73.70W) 
04/1830 
998.2 
04/1734 
49 
(1 min, 4 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 
44069 – Stony Brook U 
(40.70N 73.09W) 
 
 
04/2000 
39 
(3 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
44072 – CBIBS 
(37.20N 76.27W) 
 
 
04/1120 
39 
(3 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
PUERTO RICO AND VIRGIN ISLANDS 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
San Juan, PR (TJSJ) 
(18.43N 66.00W) 
29/2256 
1006.9 
29/1856 
28 
44 
 
 
 
6.20 
St. Thomas, VI (TIST) 
(18.33N 64.97W) 
29/2053 
1006.3 
29/1853 
29 
45 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     26 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Esperanza, Vieques 
Island (ESPP4)  
(18.09N 65.47W) 
29/2130 
1006.3 
30/1418 
36 
51 
0.89 
 
0.7 
 
Lime Tree Bay, VI 
(LTBV3) 
(17.69N 64.75W) 
29/1954 
1006.2 
30/1630 
29 
38 
0.63 
 
0.7 
 
Magueyes Island, PR 
(MGIP4)  
(17.97N 67.05W) 
30/0930 
1005.1 
30/1342 
34 
47 
1.36 
 
1.2 
 
San Juan Bay, PR 
(SJNP4) 
(18.46N 66.12W) 
29/2248 
1006.9 
30/1018 
32 
44 
0.57 
 
0.7 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Duque, 4 NW (NGIP4) 
(18.28N 65.78W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.48 
G. L. Garcia, 4 E (CAIP4) 
(18.13N 66.05W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.53 
Rio Blanco, 1 NE (LBLP4) 
(18.23N 65.78W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.43 
Weatherflow 
Buck Island, VI (XBUK) 
(18.28N 64.89W) 
 
 
30/0454 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
Culebrita Island, PR 
(XCUL) 
(18.31N 65.23W) 
 
 
29/1750 
 
54 
 
 
 
 
La Mareas, PR (XMRS) 
(17.93N 66.16W) 
 
 
30/1312 
 
55I 
 
 
 
 
Marina Del Ray, PR 
(XREY) 
(18.29N 65.63W) 
 
 
30/1439 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
Yabucoa- El Negro, PR 
(XYAB)  
(18.05N 65.83W) 
 
 
30/0938 
 
53 
 
 
 
 
FLORIDA 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Ft. Lauderdale (KFLL) 
(26.07N 80.15W) 
02/0942 
1004.0 
01/1827 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
39 
 
 
 
 
Vero Beach (KVRB) 
(27.65N 80.41W) 
02/2155 
1005.1 
02/1827 
28 
(2 min, 10 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
West Palm Beach (KPBI) 
(26.68N 80.09W) 
02/1253 
1004.8 
02/0855 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Fowey Rocks (FWYF1) 
(25.59N 80.10W) 
02/0800 
1006.0 
01/1300 
31 
(10 min, 44 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
St. Augustine (SAUF1) 
(29.86N 81.27W) 
03/1000 
1008.0 
03/1010 
29 
(10 min, 8 m) 
36 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Fernanda Beach (FRDF1) 
(30.67N 81.47W) 
03/1300 
1009.8 
03/1406 
15 
25 
2.72 
4.33 
1.6 
 
Lake Worth (LKWF1) 
(26.61N 80.03W) 
02/1036 
1003.1 
02/0812 
36 
(10 m) 
46 
1.56 
1.49 
0.9 
 
Mayport (MYPF1) 
(30.40N 81.43W) 
03/1148 
1009.6 
 
 
 
2.00 
3.40 
1.4 
 
Port Canaveral (TRDF1) 
(28.42N 80.59W) 
03/0330 
1007.9 
03/0112 
25 
36 
1.42 
2.49 
1.4 
 

Hurricane Isaias     27 
 
Virginia Key (VAKF1) 
(25.73N 80.16W) 
02/0742 
1006.0 
01/1754 
27 
(10 m) 
37 
1.06 
1.09 
0.9 
 
Weatherflow 
Banana River at 520 
(XCCB) 
(28.36N 80.66W) 
03/0333 
1007.0 
03/0112 
34 
(1 min, 5 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Biscayne Light 20 (XKBS) 
(25.66N 80.19W) 
 
 
01/1757 
35 
(1 min, 6 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Carysfort Reef Light 
(XCFL) 
(25.23N 80.21W) 
01/2131 
1006.5 
01/1819 
39 
(1 min, 14 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Crandon (XCRN) 
(25.72N 80.15W) 
02/0749 
1005.2 
01/1754 
34 
(1 min, 8 m) 
39 
 
 
 
 
Dania Pier (XDAN) 
(26.05N 80.11W) 
02/0917 
1002.7 
02/0232 
32 
(5 min, 9 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Government Cut (XGVT) 
(25.75N 80.10W) 
02/0722 
1002.0 
01/1748 
41 
(1 min, 23 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Grant Indian River (XIND) 
(27.96N 80.53W) 
02/2305 
1005.2 
02/2007 
34 
(1 min, 5 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Jacksonville Beach Pier 
(XJAX)  
(30.30N 81.38W) 
 
 
03/1129 
31 
(1 min, 12 m) 
36 
 
 
 
 
Juno Beach Pier (XJUP) 
(26.89N 80.06W) 
02/1455 
1003.7 
02/1152 
36 
(1 min, 6 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Malbar Indian River 
(XRPT) 
(27.98N 80.55W) 
02/2203 
1006.0 
02/2007 
34 
(1 min, 6 m) 
38 
 
 
 
 
Melbourne Beach (XMBI) 
(27.90N 80.47W) 
02/2119 
1002.9 
02/2006 
37 
(1 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Sea Forest Indian River 
Shores  
(27.69N 80.37W) 
02/2134 
1005.1 
02/1817 
35 
43 
 
 
 
 
St. Lucie Nuclear Power 
Plant (XSTL)  
(27.35N 80.23W) 
02/2250 
1001.5 
02/1205 
36 
(1 min, 10 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Weather Stem 
Stuart Beach 
(27.20N 80.17W) 
02/1905 
1003.3 
02/1154 
42 
45 
 
 
 
 
Florida Institute of Technology Weather Stations 
Sebastian Inlet (SIPF1) 
(27.86N 80.44W) 
02/2131 
1004.6 
02/2131 
34 
(11 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Air Force Sites 
Launch Complex 39B NW 
(KSC0397)  
(28.63N 80.62W) 
 
 
03/0400 
42 
(5 min, 78 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Launch Complex 39B NW 
(KSC0397)  
(28.63N 80.62W) 
 
 
03/0355 
49 
(1 min, 66 m) 
 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 2 
(KSC0002) 
(28.44N 80.56W) 
 
 
03/0422 
41 
(1 min, 17 m) 
 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 2 
(KSC0002) 
(28.44N 80.56W) 
 
 
03/0105 
29 
(5 min, 27 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 6 
(KSC0006) 
(28.51N 80.56W) 
 
 
03/0055 
40 
(5 min, 49 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 19 
(KSC0019) 
(28.74N 80.70W) 
 
 
03/0125 
32 
(5 min, 17 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     28 
 
USAF Tower 22 
(KSC0022) 
(28.80N 80.74W) 
 
 
02/2305 
31 
(5 min, 17 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 62 
(KSC0062) 
(28.51N 80.56W) 
 
 
03/0055 
40 
(1 min, 17 m) 
 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 108 
(KSC0108) 
(28.54N 80.57W) 
 
 
03/0055 
28 
(5 min, 17 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 300 
(KSC0300) 
(28.40N 80.65W) 
 
 
02/2335 
33 
(5 min, 17 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
UASF Tower 1007 
(KSC1007)  
(28.53N 80.77W) 
 
 
03/0155 
29 
(5 min, 17 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Public/Other 
Key Largo Yacht Club 
(25.08N 80.44W) 
 
 
01/0214 
34 
41 
 
 
 
 
GEORGIA 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Fort Pulaski (FPKG1) 
(32.04N 80.90W) 
03/2100 
1008.8 
03/1336 
27 
(7 m) 
35 
3.19 
5.17 
1.7 
 
Weatherflow 
Tybee Island North 
(XTYB) 
(32.02N 80.84W) 
03/2044 
1006.1 
03/1724 
33 
(1 min, 10 m) 
36 
 
 
 
 
SOUTH CAROLINA 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Georgetown (KGGE) 
(33.31N 79.32W) 
04/0035 
1001.0 
04/0035 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Myrtle Beach (KMYR) 
(33.69N 78.93W) 
04/0156 
997.2 
04/0245 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
46 
 
 
 
2.98 
North Myrtle Beach 
(KCRE) 
(33.81N 78.72W) 
04/0220 
993.2 
04/0217 
29 
(2 min, 10 m) 
46 
 
 
 
2.38 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Folly Island (FBIS1) 
(32.69N 79.89W) 
03/2300 
1003.8 
03/2110 
36 
(10 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Charleston (CHTS1) 
(32.78N 79.92W) 
03/2236 
1003.1 
03/2100 
30 
37 
2.07 
4.35 
1.7 
 
Oyster Landing (N Inlet 
Estuary) (NITS1) 
(33.35N 79.19W) 
 
 
 
 
 
3.44 
5.93 
3.5 
 
Springmaid Pier (MROS1) 
(33.66N 78.92W) 
04/0200 
1000.8 
 
 
 
4.26 
7.02 
4.6 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
McClellanville 7 NE CRN 
(SRES1)  
(33.15N 79.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.01 
Winyah Bay North Inlet 
(NIWS1)  
(33.35N 79.19W) 
04/0030 
998.0 
04/0145 
26 
44 
 
 
 
5.79 
Weatherflow 
Folly Beach (XFOL) 
(32.65N 79.94W) 
03/2229 
1001.9 
03/2306 
41 
(1 min, 11 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     29 
 
Fort Sumter (XSUM) 
(32.75N 79.87W) 
03/2244 
998.7 
03/2209 
34 
(1 min, 12 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Georgetown (XGEO) 
(33.37N 79.27W) 
04/0043 
998.0 
04/0136 
33 
(1 min, 10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Lake Arrowhead 
(33.78N 78.77W) 
04/0222 
991.0 
04/0302 
 
43 
(10 m) 
 
 
 
 
Murrells Inlet (XMUR) 
(33.52N 79.03W) 
04/0110 
996.0 
03/2340 
34 
(5 min, 7 m) 
44 
 
 
 
 
Shutes Folly (XSHF) 
(32.77N 79.91W) 
03/2232 
1001.3 
03/2152 
33 
(1 min, 13 m) 
39 
 
 
 
 
Winyah Bay 
(33.19N 79.18W) 
04/0033 
995.0 
03/2316 
53 
(1 min, 15 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Georgetown (D6758) 
(33.38N 79.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.54 
Isle of Palms (F1744) 
(32.80N 79.78W) 
 
 
03/2215 
 
41 
 
 
 
 
Little River (AU245) 
(33.88N 78.63W) 
 
 
04/0356 
 
42 
 
 
 
 
Little River (AU254) 
(33.89N 78.63W) 
 
 
04/0340 
 
43 
 
 
 
 
McClellanville (F2360) 
(33.18N 79.41W) 
 
 
04/0005 
 
41 
 
 
 
 
Myrtle Beach (C0637) 
(33.78N 78.95W) 
 
 
04/0307 
25 
40 
 
 
 
 
Myrtle Beach (F5285) 
(33.65N 78.94W) 
 
 
04/0255 
 
43 
 
 
 
 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Georgetown (GEOS1) 
(33.32N 79.32W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.80 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Georgetown 1 E  
(SC-GT-27) 
(33.37N 79.28W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.45 
Georgetown 6 S  
(SC-GT-4) 
(33.28N 79.29W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.54 
Georgetown 11.2 SW 
(SC-GT-38)  
(33.23N 79.41W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.32 
Pawleys Island 0.8 NW 
(SC-GT-26)  
(33.43N 79.14W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.53 
Pawleys Island 2.4 NW 
(SC-GT-42)  
(33.44N 79.16W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.97 
Pawleys Island 2.6 N (SC-
GT-24)  
(33.46N 79.11W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.11 
United States Geological Survey (USGS) Water Level Sensors 
Huntington Beach State 
Park - Murrells Inlet 
(SCGEO14321) 
(33.53N 79.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.79 
4.5 
 
Myrtle Beach 
(SCHOR00003) 
(33.68N 78.89W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.60 
5.3 
 
Myrtle Beach 
(SCHOR17779) 
(33.66N 78.92W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.52 
5.1 
 

Hurricane Isaias     30 
 
Myrtle Beach - Briarcliffe 
Acres (SCHOR17780) 
(33.76N 78.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.26 
4.8 
 
North Myrtle Beach 
(SCHOR14333) 
(33.79N 78.74W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.79 
4.4 
 
North Myrtle Beach - 
Cherry Grove Beach 
(SCHOR14329) 
(33.84N 78.62W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.99 
4.6 
 
Sullivans Island 
(SCCHA14309)  
(32.76N 79.86W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.14 
1.6 
 
Surfside Beach 
(SCHOR14328) 
(33.60N 78.97W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.73 
5.3 
 
USGS High Water Marks 
Myrtle Beach 
(SCHOR00003) 
(33.68N 78.89W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.94 
3.0 
 
Public/Other 
Crescent Beach 
KSCNORTH95  
(33.83N 78.66W) 
04/0224 
992.6 
04/0314 
 
61 
 
 
 
 
NORTH CAROLINA 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Beaufort (KMRH) 
(34.73N 76.66W) 
04/0432 
1009.4I 
04/0422 
32I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
49I 
 
 
 
 
Bogue Field (KNJM) 
(34.69N 77.04W) 
04/0557 
1006.1I 
04/0537 
37I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
56I 
 
 
 
 
Cape Fear (KSUT) 
(33.93N 78.07W) 
04/0315 
991.5 
04/0235 
39 
(2 min, 10 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Cherry Point (KNKT) 
(34.90N 76.88W) 
04/0654 
1005.3 
04/0509 
30 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Edenton (KEDE) 
(36.03N 76.56W) 
04/0835 
1002.0I 
04/0935 
37I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51I 
 
 
 
 
Elizabeth City (KECG) 
(36.26N 76.17W) 
04/0954 
1003.1 
04/1034 
36 
(2 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
1.45 
Elizabethtown (KEYF) 
(34.60N 78.58W) 
04/0415 
998.2 
04/0455 
29 
(2 min, 10 m) 
44 
 
 
 
2.34 
Goldsboro (KGSB) 
(35.35N 77.95W) 
04/0656 
994.1 
04/0556 
30 
41 
 
 
 
3.36 
Greenville (KPGV) 
(35.63N 77.40W) 
04/0755 
997.6 
04/0735 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
47 
 
 
 
1.85 
Hatteras (KHSE) 
(35.22N 75.62W) 
04/0851 
1009.6 
04/0809 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Hyde County AP (K7W6) 
(35.56N 75.96W) 
04/0835 
1007.1 
04/0935 
31 
45 
 
 
 
 
Jacksonville (KNCA) 
(34.71N 77.43W) 
04/0556 
1000.1 
04/0528 
39 
(2 min, 10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
1.42 
Jacksonville (KOAJ) 
(34.83N 77.62W) 
04/0556 
995.8 
04/0630 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Kenansville (KDPL) 
(35.00N 77.98W) 
04/0555 
993.1 
04/0655 
22 
(2 min, 10 m) 
33 
 
 
 
2.78 
Kill Devil Hills (KFFA) 
(36.02N 75.67W) 
04/0935 
1006.4 
04/0855 
20 
(2 min, 10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Kinston (KISO) 
(35.33N 77.61W) 
04/0655 
995.2 
04/0715 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
37 
 
 
 
1.02 
Manteo (KMQI) 
(35.92N 75.70W) 
04/0935 
1006.8 
04/0935 
44 
(2 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     31 
 
New Bern (KEWN) 
(35.07N 77.04W) 
04/0654 
1003.4 
04/0650 
32 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
1.36 
Piney Island (KNBT) 
(35.02N 76.46W) 
04/0834 
1007.5 
04/0632 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Washington/Warren Field 
(KOCW)  
(35.57N 77.05W) 
04/0655 
1001.6I 
04/0615 
24I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
38I 
 
 
 
 
Wilmington (KILM) 
(34.28N 77.92W) 
04/0410 
992.6 
04/0343 
41 
(2 min, 10 m) 
64 
 
 
 
2.30 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Cape Lookout (CLKN7) 
(34.62N 76.53W) 
04/0700 
1008.1 
04/0420 
45 
(10 min, 10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Beaufort Tide Gauge 
(BFTN7)  
(34.72N 76.67W) 
04/0648 
1006.5I 
04/0536 
43I 
53I 
3.31 
2.89 
1.4 
 
Duck Tide Gauge 
(DUKN7) 
(36.18N 75.75W) 
04/0900 
1004.4I 
04/0900 
48I 
65I 
 
 
 
 
Hatteras Tide Gauge 
(HCGN7)  
(35.21N 75.70W) 
04/0830 
1009.3I 
04/0724 
34I 
49I 
 
 
 
 
Oregon Inlet Tide Gauge 
(ORIN7)  
(35.78N 75.53W) 
04/0906 
1007.8I 
04/0942 
41I 
50I 
2.79 
2.90 
2.4 
 
Wilmington (WLON7) 
(34.23N 77.95W) 
04/0354 
991.4 
 
 
 
5.57 
6.43 
4.4 
 
Wrightsville Beach 
(JMPN7) 
(34.21N 77.79W) 
04/0400 
993.5 
04/0406 
60 
(2 min, 8 m) 
74 
4.45 
4.36 
2.6 
 
Weatherflow 
Alligator River Bridge 
(XALI) 
(35.90N 76.01W) 
04/0844 
1006.0 
04/0924 
51 
(1 min, 12 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 
Avon Sound (XAVN) 
(35.34N 75.50W) 
04/0737 
1008.4 
04/0813 
45 
(1 min, 5 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Avon (XAVO) 
(35.35N 75.50W) 
04/0902 
1007.9I 
04/0811 
54I 
(12 m) 
63I 
 
 
 
 
Buxton (XBUX) 
(35.26N 75.59W) 
04/0926 
1008.3 
04/0650 
33 
(1 min, 10 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Croatan Sound (XCTN) 
(35.87N 75.66W) 
04/0844 
1006.4 
04/0805 
47 
(1 min, 8 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Federal Point (XFED) 
(33.96N 77.94W) 
04/0250 
996.0 
04/0326 
69 
(1 min, 15 m) 
86 
 
 
 
 
Fort Macon (XMAC) 
(34.70N 76.71W) 
04/0706 
1005.3 
04/0517 
46 
(1 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Frisco Woods (XFRI) 
(35.24N 75.63W) 
 
 
04/0808 
40 
(1 min, 6 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Hatteras High (XHAT) 
(35.26N 75.55W) 
04/0838 
1007.1 
04/0806 
34 
(1 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Jennettes Pier (XJNP) 
(35.91N 75.59W) 
04/0905 
1001.7 
04/0841 
53 
(1 min, 18 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
Kites Resort (KRTH) 
(35.58N 75.47W) 
04/0932 
1006.3I 
04/1030 
47I 
(16 m) 
55I 
 
 
 
 
Lockwoods Folly Inlet 
(XLOC) (33.92N 78.23W) 
04/0307 
989.0 
04/0208 
50 
(1 min, 6 m) 
67 
 
 
 
 
Nags Head 
(35.91N 75.59W) 
04/0905 
1001.7 
04/0840 
45 
(18 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
North River (XNRV) 
(34.77N 76.62W) 
04/0541 
1005.8 
04/0551 
39 
(1 min, 5 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Oak Island (XOKI) 
(33.91N 78.12W) 
04/0321 
989.0 
04/0241 
66 
(2 min, 10 m) 
76 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     32 
 
Ocracoke Sound (XOCR) 
(35.14N 76.00W) 
04/0752 
1006.9 
04/0631 
45 
(1 min, 8 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Oregon Inlet CG (XORE) 
(35.80N 75.55W) 
04/0942 
1003.6 
04/1039 
43 
(1 min, 10 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Pamlico Sound (XPM2) 
(35.42N 75.83W) 
04/1032 
1008.4 
04/0736 
52 
(1 min, 13 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Real Slick (XSLK) 
(35.57N 75.49W) 
04/0808 
1008.6 
04/0828 
38 
(5 min, 6 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Roanoke Sound Channel 
(XRNK)  
(35.94N 75.66W) 
04/0957 
1005.5 
04/0937 
46 
(1 min, 5 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Waves (XWAV) 
(35.57N 75.49W) 
04/0854 
1007.2 
04/1038 
42 
(11 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Waves 
(35.57N 75.48W) 
04/0808 
1008.6 
04/0828 
38 
(6 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Back Island NBAC 
(BKIN7) 
(34.53N 77.72W) 
 
 
04/0400 
22 
(10 min, 6 m) 
57 
 
 
 
2.44 
Beaufort (BNYN7) 
(35.52N 76.93W) 
 
 
04/0913 
 
43 
 
 
 
2.28 
Dare Bomb Range 
(STCN7) 
(35.76N 75.87W) 
 
 
04/0928 
28 
47 
 
 
 
 
Elizabeth City (ELRN7) 
(36.35N 76.28W) 
 
 
04/1013 
28 
52 
 
 
 
1.15 
Goldsboro (GBON7) 
(35.43N 78.02W) 
 
 
04/0514 
 
40 
 
 
 
3.02 
Green Cross (GCRN7) 
(36.03N 76.89W) 
 
 
04/0917 
 
41 
 
 
 
3.33 
Jacksonville (CLJN7) 
(34.61N 77.49W) 
 
 
04/0619 
 
47 
 
 
 
1.53 
Nature Conservancy 
NNAC (NATN7) (34.09N 
78.31W) 
 
 
04/0318 
 
49 
(6 m) 
 
 
 
 
Newport (NPTN7) 
(34.76N 76.90W) 
 
 
04/0605 
 
45 
 
 
 
2.63 
Pocosin Lakes (POCN7) 
(35.74N 76.51W) 
 
 
04/0917 
 
42 
 
 
 
 
Sunny Point NSUN 
(SUNN7) 
(34.00N 78.00W) 
 
 
04/0300 
28 
(10 min, 6 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Whiteville NWHI (WHIN7) 
(34.34N 78.73W) 
 
 
04/0418 
 
43 
(6 m) 
 
 
 
3.91 
North Carolina ECONET 
Bald Head Island 
(33.85N 77.97W) 
04/0214 
995.1 
04/0221 
52 
(2 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Castle Hayne 
(34.32N 77.92W) 
04/0315 
992.4 
04/0226 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Belhaven (E4218) 
(35.52N 76.64W) 
04/0654 
1003.7 
04/0636 
 
52 
 
 
 
 
Chapanoke (F2560) 
(36.24N 76.36W) 
 
 
04/1005 
32 
60 
 
 
 
 
Conway (E0790) 
(36.43N 77.23W) 
04/0930 
994.6 
04/1010 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
Corolla (F1502) 
(36.30N 75.80W) 
04/0947 
1005.0 
04/0900 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
Hertford (C6395) 
(36.16N 76.32W) 
04/0900 
1001.0 
04/1030 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
Indian Beach (F5126) 
(34.69N 76.90W) 
04/0632 
1006.1 
04/0600 
47 
59 
 
 
 
1.04 

Hurricane Isaias     33 
 
Newport (E4592) 
(34.72N 76.93W) 
04/0501 
1005.1I 
04/0501 
33I 
46I 
 
 
 
 
Newport (F4380) 
(34.78N 76.73W) 
 
 
04/0318 
28I 
46I 
 
 
 
 
Oriental (F4381) 
(35.05N 76.67W) 
04/0710 
1006.4 
04/0535 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
Rodanthe (E7670) 
(35.60N 75.47W) 
04/0940 
1007.4 
04/1243 
33 
49 
 
 
 
 
Roper (F0226) 
(35.95N 76.47W) 
 
 
04/0945 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
Sneads Ferry (C7779) 
(34.54N 77.37W) 
04/0931 
1001.7I 
04/0416 
 
44I 
 
 
 
 
Wilmington (F4721) 
(34.18N 77.86W) 
04/0359 
995.9 
04/0359 
 
48 
 
 
 
1.91 
Wilmington (F7311) 
(34.29N 77.83W) 
04/0427 
996.6 
04/0411 
 
43 
 
 
 
2.13 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Leland 5.7 WSW  
(NC-BR-2) 
(33.91N 78.59W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.05 
Oxford 3 WSW  
(NC-GV-10) 
(36.30N 78.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.06 
Windsor 4.5 WNW  
(NC-BT-35) 
(36.03N 77.01W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.00 
USGS Water Level Sensors 
Atlantic Beach 
(NCCAR12348) 
(34.70N 76.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.62 
1.3 
 
Aurora (NCBEA11728) 
(35.38N 76.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.43 
2.3 
 
Avon (NCDAR00004) 
(35.35N 75.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.73 
1.5 
 
Beaufort (NCCAR12248) 
(34.72N 76.67W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.82 
1.3 
 
Belhaven (NCBEA13648) 
(35.53N 76.61W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.30 
3.1 
 
Buxton (NCDAR00002) 
(35.27N 75.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.33 
1.1 
 
Carolina Beach 
(NCNEW00004) 
(34.06N 77.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.22 
3.3 
 
Carolina Beach 
(NCNEW12888) 
(34.06N 77.89W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.96 
3.0 
 
Columbia (NCTYR13548) 
(35.99N 76.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.28 
1.3 
 
Edenton (NCCHO12448) 
(36.06N 76.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.32 
2.3 
 
Emerald Isle 
(NCCAR12412) 
(34.66N 77.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.41 
2.5 
 
Hatteras (NCDAR00001) 
(35.21N 75.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.18 
1.1 
 
Kill Devil Hills 
(NCDAR12668) 
(36.02N 75.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.66 
2.7 
 

Hurricane Isaias     34 
 
Kitty Hawk 
(NCDAR12669) 
(36.10N 75.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.98 
1.5 
 
Nags Head 
(NCDAR12631) 
(35.91N 75.60W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.95 
3.1 
 
Nags Head - Oregon Inlet 
(NCDAR00005) 
(35.80N 75.55W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.69 
2.2 
 
Oak Island 
(NCBRU11891) 
(33.90N 78.08W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.13 
6.0 
 
Ocean Isle Beach 
(NCBRU00012)  
(33.89N 78.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.68 
6.3 
 
Ocean Isle Beach 
(NCBRU00014)  
(33.90N 78.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.20 
4.8 
 
Rodanthe (NCDAR12709) 
(35.58N 75.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.94 
2.5 
 
Southport (NCBRU12068) 
(33.92N 78.02W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.98 
4.0 
 
Supply - Holden Beach 
(NCBRU12008) 
(33.92N 78.27W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.00 
4.8 
 
Swansboro 
(NCONS00001) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.93 
2.4 
 
Topsail Beach 
(NCPEN00002) 
(34.37N 77.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.85 
2.0 
 
Topsail Beach 
(NCPEN00003) 
(34.37N 77.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.33 
3.3 
 
Sneads Ferry 
(NCONS13128) 
(34.58N 77.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.67 
1.5 
 
Wrightsville Beach 
(NCNEW13008) 
(34.22N 77.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.66 
2.7 
 
USGS High Water Marks 
Varnamtown 
(NCBRU12028)  
(33.68N 78.89W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.80 
2.3 
 
Public/Other 
Frying Pan Shoals Tower 
(33.49N 77.59W) 
 
 
04/0310 
 
90 
(41 m) 
 
 
 
 
Holden Beach 
(KNCSUPPL23) 
(33.91N 78.28W) 
 
 
04/0224 
 
63 
 
 
 
 
Oak Island 
(KNCOAKIS30) 
(33.92N 78.19W) 
04/0309 
989.2 
04/0234 
 
72 
 
 
 
 
Scotts Hill 
(KNCWILMI201) 
(34.31N 77.73W) 
 
992.9 
04/0308 
 
47 
 
 
 
 
Surf City Bridge 
(34.43N 77.55W) 
 
 
04/0405 
42 
(2 min, 20 m) 
72 
 
 
 
 
NWS Owned Station 

Hurricane Isaias     35 
 
Cedar Island 
(35.02N 76.32W) 
04/0802 
1008.0 
0421 
47 
68 
 
 
 
 
VIRGINIA 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Accomack Airport (KMFV) 
(37.65N 75.77W) 
04/1235 
999.6 
04/1335 
35I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
52I 
 
 
 
 
Fentress (KNFE) 
(36.70N 76.13W) 
 
 
04/0825 
28I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43I 
 
 
 
 
Fort Eustis (KFAF) 
(37.14N 76.62W) 
04/1056 
996.9 
04/1042 
28 
(2 min, 10 m) 
48 
 
 
 
1.36 
Langley AFB (KLFI) 
(37.10N 76.34W) 
04/1054 
999.2 
04/1033 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
1.07 
Newport News (KPHF) 
(37.14N 76.50W) 
04/1030 
998.4I 
04/1205 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Norfolk NAS (KNGU) 
(36.96N 76.29W) 
04/1059 
999.9 
04/1048 
31 
(2 min, 10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Norfolk (KORF) 
(36.91N 76.20W) 
04/1051 
999.8 
04/1157 
44 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Oceana NAS (KNTU) 
(36.83N 76.03W) 
04/1056 
1001.6 
04/1156 
32 
(2 min, 10 m) 
58 
 
 
 
1.26 
Richmond (KRIC) 
(37.51N 77.31W) 
04/1110 
1000.9 
04/1123 
31 
(2 min, 10 m) 
44 
 
 
 
5.20 
Suffolk (KSFQ) 
(36.68N 76.60W) 
04/1015 
999.3 
04/1055 
29 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
3.15 
Wallops Island (KWAL) 
(37.97N 75.47W) 
04/1335 
998.5 
04/1304 
42 
(2 min, 10 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Cape Henry (CHYV2) 
(36.91N 75.78W) 
04/1112 
1001.3 
04/1042 
36 
(28 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Dominion Terminal 
(DOMV2) 
(36.96N 76.42W) 
04/1036 
997.3 
04/1036 
43 
56 
 
 
 
 
Rappahannock Light 
Tower (RPLV2)  
(37.54N 76.02W) 
04/1254 
997.9 
04/1218 
51 
(17 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 
South Craney Island 
(CRYV2)  
(36.89N 76.34W) 
04/1112 
999.2 
04/1030 
41 
(9 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Willoughby Degaussing 
Station (WDSV2)  
(36.98N 76.32W) 
04/1036 
997.2 
04/1200 
48 
64 
 
 
 
 
York River Range Light 
(YKRV2)  
(37.25N 76.34W) 
04/1206 
997.7 
04/1100 
52 
65 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Chesapeake Channel 
(CHBV2)  
(37.03N 76.08W) 
04/1118 
999.2 
04/1154 
44 
(5 m) 
76 
1.52 
 
 
 
Kiptopeke (KPTV2) 
(37.17N 75.98W) 
 
 
04/1212 
47 
(7 m) 
60 
1.44 
 
 
 
Lewisetta (LWTV2) 
(38.00N 76.47W) 
04/1248 
997.1 
04/1324 
38 
(6 m) 
55 
2.26 
2.16 
1.5 
 
Money Point (MNPV2) 
(36.78N 76.30W) 
04/1000 
999.9 
04/1000 
30 
(6 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Wachapreague (WAHV2) 
(37.61N 75.69W) 
04/1248 
999.0 
04/1248 
42 
(7 m) 
52 
1.73 
2.84 
1.0 
 
Yorktown USCG (YKTV2) 
(37.23N 76.48W) 
04/1124 
996.9 
04/0848 
40 
(10 m) 
53 
1.84 
 
 
 
Weatherflow 

Hurricane Isaias     36 
 
Cape Charles – Plantation 
Flats (XPLT)  
(37.26N 76.03W) 
04/1146 
999.4 
04/1201 
43 
(5 min, 8 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Cape Henry (XHEN) 
(36.92N 76.01W) 
04/1105 
997.7 
04/1140 
42 
(1 min, 23 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
3rd Island Chesapeake 
Bay Bridge Tunnel 
(XBBT) 
(37.03N 76.08W) 
04/1127 
995.2 
04/1157 
63 
(16 m) 
71 
 
 
 
 
Deltaville (XDLT) 
(37.56N 76.30W) 
04/1032 
1000.4 
04/1258 
42 
(1 min, 6 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Hampton Flats (XHMP) 
(36.98N 76.34W) 
04/1109 
998.0 
04/1104 
47 
(1 min, 7 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Lafayette River (XODU) 
(36.89N 76.32W) 
04/1025 
999.4 
04/1055 
47 
(1 min, 6 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Lynnhaven Inlet Light 1L 
(XLHI)  
(36.92N 76.09W) 
04/1028 
997.1 
04/1155 
46 
(1 min, 8 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Middle Ground 
Lighthouse (XMGL) 
(36.95N 76.39W) 
04/1048 
994.7 
04/1031 
53 
(1 min, 20 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
New Point Comfort 
(XPNC) 
(37.33N 76.27W) 
04/1142 
996.1 
04/1030 
45 
(1 min, 13 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Norfolk- Lafayette River 
(36.89N 76.31W) 
04/1105 
999.4 
04/1110 
39 
(6 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Onancock (XHAK) 
(37.66N 75.87W) 
04/1309 
994.4 
04/1321 
53 
(1 min, 14m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Poquoson (XPOQ) 
(37.11N 76.31W) 
04/1141 
997.2 
04/1212 
45 
(1 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Poquoson River Light 11 
(XPQR)  
(37.16N 76.38W) 
04/1106 
998.9 
04/1032 
42 
(1 min, 7 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Potomoc Light 33 (XP33) 
(38.34N 76.99W) 
04/1231 
1001.1 
04/1141 
41 
(1 min, 8 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Pylons Dahlgren (XPYL) 
(38.31N 77.03W) 
04/1217 
1001.0 
04/1236 
36 
(1 min, 8 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Rudee Inlet (XRUD) 
(36.83N 75.97W) 
04/1038 
1000.1 
04/0850 
58 
(1 min, 9 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Sandbridge (XSBR) 
(36.70N 75.93W) 
 
 
04/1103 
45 
(5 min, 5 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Silver Beach (XSIL) 
(37.49N 75.97W) 
04/1210 
995.1 
04/1208 
37 
(1 min, 8 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
South Norfolk Jordan 
Bridge (XSNJ)  
(36.81N 76.29W) 
04/1032 
 
04/1037 
59 
(1 min, 59 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
Tangier Island (XTSL) 
(37.78N 75.98W) 
04/1253 
995.5 
04/1021 
53 
(1 min, 16 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Thimble Shoals (XTHM) 
(37.05N 76.26W) 
04/1120 
998.4 
04/1110 
48 
(6 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Virginia Beach- 
Lynnhaven Pier  
(36.92N 76.08W) 
04/1118 
997.5 
04/1148 
40 
(8 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Wachapreague (XWAC) 
(37.60N 75.69W) 
04/1258 
998.6 
04/1305 
53 
(1 min, 10 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Suffolk (GDSV2) 
(36.61N 76.55W) 
 
 
04/1126 
 
43 
 
 
 
3.08 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Chesterfield (F6249) 
(37.32N 77.49W) 
04/1045 
1000.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.61 
Dunnsville 2 NNE 
(37.89N 76.81W) 
04/1203 
998.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.26 

Hurricane Isaias     37 
 
Ford’s Colony (D6344) 
(37.30N 76.75W) 
04/1143 
999.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.09 
Hampton (E9762) 
(37.06N 76.28W) 
04/1135 
999.0 
04/1200 
29 
46 
 
 
 
 
Machipongo (F4496) 
(37.41N 75.97W) 
04/1242 
998.0 
04/1052 
31 
49 
 
 
 
 
Parksley (E1045) 
(37.73N 75.61W) 
04/1316 
999.0 
04/1301 
31 
46 
 
 
 
 
Skimino (F2571) 
(37.35N 76.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.02 
Virginia Beach (D4577) 
(36.77N 76.04W) 
04/1105 
1001.4 
04/1030 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
Virginia Beach (E1337) 
(36.75N 75.99W) 
04/1110 
1002.0 
04/1155 
 
51 
 
 
 
 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Dispuanta 2 ESE 
(DSPV2) 
(37.11N 77.20W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.53 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Centerville 1 SE (VA-JC-
23) 
(37.31N 76.78W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.05 
Ewell 2 SSW (VA-JC-48) 
(37.30N 76.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.60 
Five Forks 2 N (VA-JC-1) 
(37.27N 76.76W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.42 
Lightfoot 1 NW (VA-JC-
59) 
(37.35N 76.77W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.03 
Lightfoot 1 W (VA-JC-58) 
(37.34N 76.78W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.54 
Oak Tree (VA-YR-7) 
(37.33N 76.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.28 
Skimino 1 NNE (VA-YR-4) 
(37.36N 76.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.19 
Stampers 1 WSW  
(VA-MX-1) 
(37.54N 76.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.08 
Varnia 1 N (VA-HR-13) 
(37.46N 77.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.44 
Williamsburg Airport 1 N 
(VA-WLC-1)  
(37.25N 76.72W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.32 
Williamsburg Airport 1 
NW (VA-JC-40)  
(37.25N 76.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.63 
Public/Other 
Lewisetta 
(37.99N 76.46W) 
04/1100 
1001.5I 
04/1324 
38 
(8 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Monroe Creek 
(38.23N 76.95W) 
04/1215 
999.6 
04/1200 
36 
(12 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Stingray Point (CBIBS) 
(37.55N 76.25W) 
04/1212 
999.1 
04/1130 
37 
(3 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
MARYLAND 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Annapolis (KNAK) 
(38.98N 76.48W) 
04/1356 
1000.3 
04/1408 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
49 
 
 
 
3.74 
Easton Newman Field 
(KESN)  
(38.80N 76.07W) 
04/1350 
998.6 
04/1450 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
49 
 
 
 
2.13 

Hurricane Isaias     38 
 
Ocean City (KOXB) 
(38.31N 75.12W) 
04/1420 
999.3 
04/1433 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Patuxent River NAS 
(KNHK) 
(38.29N 76.40W) 
04/1304 
997.3 
04/1413 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
5.29 
Salisbury (KSBY) 
(38.35N 75.50W) 
04/1354 
997.9 
04/1513 
36 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
1.09 
St Inigoes (KNUI) 
(38.14N 76.43W) 
04/1253 
997.0 
04/1350 
26 
(2 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
4.30 
Stevensville (KW29) 
(38.98N 76.33W) 
04/1355 
999.0 
04/1415 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
6.51 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Cove Point (COVM2) 
(38.40N 76.39W) 
04/1312 
997.4 
04/1054 
36 
(28 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Francis Scott Key Bridge 
(FSKM2)  
(39.22N 76.53W) 
04/1418 
1000.6 
04/1418 
36 
(7 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Francis Scott Key Bridge 
(FSNM2)  
(39.22N 76.53W) 
04/1354 
1001.0 
04/1348 
43 
(42 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Piney Point (PPTM2) 
(38.14N 76.53W) 
 
 
04/1324 
44 
(7 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Thomas Point (TPLM2) 
(38.90N 76.44W) 
04/1300 
1001.1 
04/1340 
40 
(10 min, 18 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Annapolis (APAM2) 
(38.98N 76.48W) 
04/1354 
999.4 
04/1348 
35 
(9 m) 
49 
1.72 
 
 
 
Baltimore (BLTM2) 
(39.27N 76.58W) 
04/1424 
1001.9 
04/1412 
25 
(7 m) 
37 
2.00 
 
 
 
Bishops Head (BISM2) 
(38.22N 76.04W) 
04/1318 
996.2 
04/1406 
46 
(7 m) 
62 
2.63 
2.59 
1.7 
 
Cambridge (CAMM2) 
(38.57N 76.06W) 
04/1412 
996.2 
04/1442 
43 
(6 m) 
60 
3.96 
3.45 
2.5 
 
Chesapeake City 
(CHCM2) 
(39.53N 75.81W) 
04/1512 
998.1 
04/1600 
26 
(7 m) 
42 
2.38 
 
 
 
Ocean City Inlet (OCIM2) 
(38.33N 75.09W) 
04/1412 
1001.3 
04/1424 
49 
(9 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Solomons Island (SLIM2) 
(38.32N 76.45W) 
04/1254 
997.3 
04/1048 
36 
(9 m) 
45 
2.35 
2.03 
1.4 
 
Tolchester Beach 
(TCBM2) 
(39.22N 76.24W) 
04/1406 
999.7 
04/1348 
41 
(7 m) 
52 
2.03 
 
 
 
Weatherflow 
Assateague Island 
(XAST) 
(38.21N 75.20W) 
04/1359 
998.6 
04/1332 
45 
(1 min, 4 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Blackwalnut Harbor 
(XBWH) 
(38.68N 76.33W) 
04/1349 
996.3 
04/1400 
44 
(1 min, 7 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Chesapeake City 
(39.53N 75.81W) 
 
 
04/1422 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
Cobb Point (XCOB) 
(38.24N 76.83W) 
04/1214 
995.1 
04/1209 
37 
(5 min, 14 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Crisfield CG (XCRS) 
(37.97N 75.88W) 
04/1310 
997.4 
04/1408 
45 
(1 min, 6 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Cuckold Creek (XCCK) 
(38.31N 76.93W) 
04/1232 
1000.0 
04/1302 
38 
(1 min, 6 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Greenbury Point (XGRN) 
(38.97N 76.46W) 
04/1338 
997.6 
04/1413 
40 
(5 min, 8 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Grove Point (XGVP) 
(39.40N 76.04W) 
 
 
04/1422 
43 
(5 min, 11 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     39 
 
Gunpowder (XGUN) 
(39.36N 76.32W) 
04/1408 
999.1 
04/1413 
39 
(6 m) 
44 
 
 
 
 
Hart Miller Island (XHRT) 
(39.25N 76.37W) 
04/1359 
997.2 
04/1402 
38 
(1 min, 18 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Herring Bay (XHEB) 
(38.73N 76.54W) 
04/1335 
997.5 
04/1150 
40 
(1 min, 7 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Lower Hooper Island 
(XHPR) (38.26N 76.18W) 
04/1303 
995.8 
04/1408 
46 
(1 min, 9 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Ocean City (XOCN) 
(38.33N 75.08W) 
04/1434 
996.7 
04/1402 
55 
(1 min, 10 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Point Lookout (XPTL) 
(38.04N 76.32W) 
04/1251 
996.4 
04/1334 
53 
(11 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Tolly Point (XTOL) 
(38.94N 76.44W) 
 
 
04/1409 
40 
(5 min, 6 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Assateague Island 
(ASTM2) 
(38.08N 75.20W) 
 
 
04/1340 
40 
59 
 
 
 
 
Blackwater (BLWM2) 
(38.45N 76.09W) 
 
 
04/1426 
30 
56 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Grasonville (E5728) 
(38.92N 76.20W) 
04/1405 
1000.7 
04/1425 
40 
62 
 
 
 
7.24 
Huntingtown (D4923) 
(38.64N 76.62W) 
04/1259 
999.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.68 
Mechanicsville (D0282) 
(38.40N 76.66W) 
04/1243 
998.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.22 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Brandywine 7 ESE (MD-
PG-37)  
(38.67N 76.74W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.20 
Charlotte Hall 4 ENE 
(MD-SM-4)  
(38.49N 76.72W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.52 
Dares Beach 4 N (MD-
CV-20)  
(38.62N 76.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.95 
Huntingtown 3 NNW (MD-
CV-17)  
(38.65N 76.64W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.82 
Leonardtown 1 NE (MD-
SM-3)  
(38.31N 76.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.15 
Mechanicsville 4 N (MD-
SM-18)  
(38.49N 76.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.30 
Millington 4 WSW (MD-
QA-10)  
(39.24N 75.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.30 
North Beach 2 WNW 
(MD-CV-21)  
(38.72N 76.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.43 
Prince Frederick 1 W 
(MD-CV-7)  
(38.55N 76.62W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.58 
St. Michaels 1 SE (MD-
TB-4) 
(38.78N 76.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.45 
Public/Other 
Barber Point 
(38.24N 76.83W) 
04/1221 
1001.3 
04/1246 
28 
(5 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     40 
 
California 2 W 
(38.30N 76.53W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.41 
Cape St. Claire 1 E 
(39.04N 76.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.75 
La Plata 3 ENE 
(38.55N 76.92W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.77 
Potomoc Light 33 
(38.34N 76.99W) 
04/1231 
1001.1 
04/1141 
36 
(8 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Prince Frederick 1 S 
(38.53N 76.59W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.42 
Raccon Point 
(38.94N 76.44W) 
04/1304 
995.5 
04/1429 
41 
(6 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Sotterly 1 WNW 
(38.38N 76.55W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.00 
Tilghman 
(38.72N 76.33W) 
 
 
04/1400 
41 
60 
 
 
 
 
Tilghman Island (TILHM) 
(38.71N 76.34W) 
04/1349 
996.3 
04/1014 
40 
(7 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Trappe 
(38.66N 76.06W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.10 
DELAWARE 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Cheswold (K33N) 
(39.22N 75.60W) 
04/1515 
996.9 
04/1255 
22 
(2 min, 10 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Dover AFB (KDOV) 
(39.14N 75.47W) 
04/1508 
996.6 
04/1305 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
1.40 
Georgetown/Sussex Co 
(KGED) (38.70N 75.36W) 
04/1454 
997.0 
04/1350 
36 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
1.22 
Wilmington (KILG) 
(39.68N 75.60W) 
04/1550 
997.3 
04/1628 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
4.49 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Brandywine Shoal Light 
(BRND1)  
(38.99N 75.11W) 
04/1536 
998.1 
04/1618 
54I 
(21 m) 
67I 
2.62 
 
 
 
Delaware City (DELD1) 
(39.58N 75.59W) 
04/1542 
996.7 
04/1336 
32 
(7 m) 
53 
2.76 
 
2.2 
 
Lewes (LWSD1) 
(38.78N 75.12W) 
04/1454 
997.5 
04/1554 
42 
(10 m) 
53 
1.95 
 
 
 
Reedy Point (RDYD1) 
(39.56N 75.57W) 
04/1536 
996.1 
 
 
 
2.38 
4.84 
2.0 
 
Weatherflow 
Dewey Beach (XDEW) 
(38.68N 75.08W) 
04/1515 
995.4 
04/1547 
52 
(1 min, 11 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Lewes (XLEW) 
(38.79N 75.16W) 
04/1502 
995.8 
04/1558 
48 
(1 min, 15 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Greenwood (E7993) 
(38.78N 75.58W) 
04/1455 
995.6 
04/1320 
31 
44 
 
 
 
 
Delaware Environmental Observing System (DEOS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Claymont Park (DE038) 
(39.81N 75.46W) 
04/1615 
997.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.70 
Indian River Inlet (DE020) 
(38.63N 75.07W) 
 
 
04/1355 
39 
(5 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Millsboro – Long Neck 
(38.62N 75.12W) 
 
 
04/1405 
 
51 
 
 
 
 
Rehoboth Beach 
(RHBTH) 
(38.72N 75.08W) 
04/1510 
998.0 
04/1420 
32 
(4 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     41 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Clayton 1.5 SW (DE-KN-
20) 
(39.28N 75.66W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.00 
Wilmington 7 NNE (DE-
NC-65)  
(39.83N 75.49W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.70 
Public/Other 
Magnolia 1 NE 
(39.08N 75.46W) 
 
 
04/1255 
 
67 
 
 
 
 
Milford (MILFD) 
(38.93N 75.41W) 
 
 
04/1559 
25 
42 
 
 
 
 
Smyrna Landing 2 NW 
(39.32N 75.61W) 
 
 
04/1315 
46 
83 
 
 
 
 
PENNSYLVANIA 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Allentown (KABE) 
(40.66N 75.43W) 
04/1700 
997.3 
04/1715 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
4.92 
Doylestown (KDYL) 
(40.33N 75.12W) 
04/1730 
995.9 
04/1755 
25 
(2 min, 10 m) 
37 
 
 
 
4.35 
Mount Pocono (KMPO) 
(41.14N 75.38W) 
04/1815 
1000.0 
04/1750 
33 
44 
 
 
 
4.39 
North Philadelphia 
(KPNE) 
(40.09N 75.02W) 
04/1654 
996.8 
04/1525 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
46 
 
 
 
2.40 
Philadelphia (KPHL) 
(39.87N 75.23W) 
04/1606 
996.9 
04/1737 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
4.16 
Pottstown (KPTW) 
(40.24N 75.56W) 
04/1605 
997.2 
04/1710 
27I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43I 
 
 
 
5.06 
Reading (KRDG) 
(40.37N 75.96W) 
04/1705 
1001.3 
04/1600 
30 
(2 min, 10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
3.22 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Bridesburg (BDSP1) 
(39.98N 75.08W) 
04/1654 
996.8 
 
 
 
3.11 
 
2.4 
 
Marcus Hook (MRCP1) 
(39.81N 75.41W) 
04/1554 
996.8 
 
 
 
2.80 
5.42 
2.2 
 
Newbold (NBLP1) 
(40.14N 74.75W) 
04/1706 
997.3 
04/1830 
28 
(6 m) 
43 
 
 
3.0 
 
Philadelphia (PHBP1) 
(39.93N 75.14W) 
04/1648 
996.3 
 
 
 
3.00 
6.03 
2.4 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Avondale 2 N (AVOP1) 
(39.86N 75.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.34 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Center Valley (F7623) 
(40.53N 75.40W) 
04/1707 
998.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.28 
Gilbertsville (F7071) 
(40.28N 75.56W) 
04/1603 
999.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.46 
Palmer Township (E6123) 
(40.71N 75.26W) 
 
 
04/1705 
31 
46 
 
 
 
3.85 
Reading (E3190) 
(40.35N 75.90W) 
 
 
04/1610 
43 
65 
 
 
 
 
Sellersville (F3600) 
(40.39N 75.31W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.43 
Wayne (C8212) 
(40.05N 75.37W) 
04/1616 
996.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.48 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 

Hurricane Isaias     42 
 
Ardmore (PA-MT-48) 
(40.01N 75.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.57 
Blue Bell 2 NW  
(PA-MT-13) 
(40.17N 75.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.00 
Bryn Mawr 1 W  
(PA-DL-15) 
(40.02N 75.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.73 
Collegeville 1 NNE  
(PA-MT-91)  
(40.20N 75.45W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.10 
Gladwyne  
(PA-MT-116) 
(40.05N 75.28W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.15 
Graterford 1 WSW 
(40.22N 75.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.00 
Harleysville 3 S  
(PA-MT-51) 
(40.24N 75.38W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.85 
North Wales  
(PA-MT-110) 
(40.20N 75.27W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.37 
North Wales 1 SW  
(PA-MT-72) 
(40.20N 75.29W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.65 
North Wales 1 WSW  
(PA-MT-16)  
(40.21N 75.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.36 
Plymouth Meeting 2 NW 
(PA-MT-112)  
(40.13N 75.31W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.75 
Quakertown 2 NNE  
(PA-BK-33)  
(40.46N 75.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.17 
Saylorsburg 3 WNW  
(PA-MN-11)  
(40.90N 75.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.83 
West Chester 2 SE  
(PA-CH-21) 
(39.94N 75.58W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.71 
Public/Other 
Canadensis 
(41.19N 75.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.00 
Gap 
(39.99N 76.02W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.65 
Gouldsboro 
(41.24N 75.46W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.28 
Lakeville 
(41.43N 75.28W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.00 
Skippack 
(40.23N 75.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.00 
Wynnewood 
(40.00N 75.27W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.59 
NEW JERSEY 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Atlantic City (KACY) 
(39.46N 74.57W) 
04/1654 
998.2 
04/1500 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Belmar (KBLM) 
(40.18N 74.13W) 
04/1700 
999.6I 
04/1640 
32I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
46I 
 
 
 
 
Caldwell (KCDW) 
(40.88N 74.28W) 
04/1826 
997.5 
04/1717 
28 
(2 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
1.97 
Cape May (KOBI) 
(39.22N 74.79W) 
04/1428 
1000.6I 
04/1431 
32I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
40I 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     43 
 
Linden Airport (KLDJ) 
(40.62N 74.24W) 
04/1815 
996.9 
04/1715 
30 
(2 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
1.40 
Millville (KMIV) 
(39.37N 75.07W) 
04/1525 
997.1 
04/1701 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
2.05 
Morristown (KMMU) 
(40.80N 74.42W) 
04/1755 
997.1I 
04/1945 
28I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51I 
 
 
 
 
Newark (KEWR) 
(40.69N 74.16W) 
04/1815 
996.9 
04/1950 
41 
(2 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
1.06 
Somerville/Somerset 
(KSMQ) (40.62N 74.67W) 
04/1751 
995.8 
04/1922 
19 
(2 min, 10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
2.77 
Teterboro (KTEB) 
(40.86N 74.05W) 
041905 
996.9 
04/2003 
31 
(2 min, 10 m) 
48 
 
 
 
1.45 
Toms River (KMJX) 
(39.93N 74.29W) 
04/1735 
998.6 
04/1600 
39 
(2 min, 10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Trenton (KTTN) 
(40.28N 74.81W) 
04/1745 
995.5 
04/1605 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
2.15 
Wildwood (KWWD) 
(39.02N 74.92W) 
04/1550 
998.4 
04/1456 
38I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
54I 
 
 
 
 
Wrightstown (KWRI) 
(40.02N 74.60W) 
04/1656 
997.2 
04/1605 
28 
(2 min, 10 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Cape May (CMAN4) 
(38.97N 74.96W) 
04/1518 
997.8 
04/1618 
47 
(10 m) 
65 
2.85 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Atlantic City (ACYN4) 
(39.36N 74.42W) 
04/1630 
999.4 
 
 
 
3.06 
3.42 
1.4 
 
Burlington (BDRN4) 
(40.08N 74.87W) 
04/1706 
996.2 
04/1812 
32 
(8 m) 
44 
3.79 
 
2.8 
 
Sandy Hook (SDHN4) 
(40.47N 74.01W) 
04/1824 
997.9 
04/1930 
45 
(6 m) 
58 
4.29 
4.02 
1.6 
 
Ship John (Delaware Bay) 
(SJSN4) (39.31N 75.38W) 
04/1506 
996.5 
04/1418 
51 
(15 m) 
66 
3.25 
 
2.8 
 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Atlantic City Marina 
(ATLN4) 
(39.38N 74.42W) 
04/1630 
998.0 
04/1718 
35 
(2 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Egg Harbor EGGHB 
(TKTN4)  
(39.51N 74.32W) 
04/1642 
997.3 
04/1548 
46 
70 
 
 
 
 
Margate MRGRC 
(ALCN4) 
(39.35N 74.46W) 
04/1654 
998.3 
04/1736 
32 
47 
 
 
 
 
Stone Harbor 
(39.06N 74.77W) 
 
 
04/1642 
43 
61 
 
 
 
 
Weatherflow 
Barnegat Inlet Light 7 
(XBRN) 
(39.76N 74.09W) 
04/1649 
995.1 
04/1459 
54 
(1 min, 12 m) 
65 
 
 
 
 
Bayonne (XBYO) 
(40.68N 74.09W) 
04/1756 
995.1 
04/1722 
42 
(1 min, 10 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Cape May (XMAY) 
(38.97N 74.96W) 
04/1517 
996.2 
04/1624 
49 
(1 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Kite Island (XKIT) 
(39.80N 74.17W) 
04/1658 
996.3 
04/1633 
47 
(1 min, 6 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Long Beach Island Surf 
(XLBI) (39.66N 74.21W) 
04/1718 
997.9 
04/1456 
57 
(1 min, 6 m) 
95 
 
 
 
 
Ludlam Bay (XLUD) 
(39.18N 74.70W) 
04/1544 
996.3 
04/1459 
47 
(1 min, 6 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Ocean City South Beach 
(XOCS) (39.22N 74.64W) 
04/1604 
996.5 
04/1349 
52 
(1 min, 10 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     44 
 
Perth Amboy (XPER) 
(40.51N 74.28W) 
04/1808 
994.8 
04/1648 
47 
(1 min, 10 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Pleasantville Point 
(XPTP) 
(39.38N 74.50W) 
04/1625 
998.9 
04/1550 
43 
(1 min, 6 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Seaside Heights (XSEA) 
(39.94N 74.07W) 
04/1745 
997.0 
04/1618 
49 
(1 min, 14 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Tuckerton (XTUK) 
(39.52N 74.32W) 
04/1716 
996.9 
04/1525 
49 
(1 min, 10 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Coyle Field (CTWN4) 
(39.81N 74.43W) 
 
 
04/1610 
27 
(6 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Galloway (OCVN4) 
(39.46N 74.45W) 
 
 
04/1525 
36 
(6 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Beach Haven (E4321) 
(39.54N 74.26W) 
04/1616 
1000.3I 
04/1431 
41I 
57I 
 
 
 
 
Bridgewater (F7617) 
(40.58N 74.59W) 
04/1755 
996.6 
04/1520 
26 
50 
 
 
 
3.57 
Island Heights (AR575) 
(39.94N 74.15W) 
04/1751 
998.0 
04/1636 
40 
60 
 
 
 
 
Jersey City (F2280) 
(40.70N 74.04W) 
04/1804 
996.3 
04/1728 
43 
68 
 
 
 
 
Logan Township (E2237) 
(39.76N 75.36W) 
04/1603 
996.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.41 
Maywood (F6101) 
(40.89N 74.07W) 
 
 
04/1653 
44 
 
 
 
 
 
Middletown (E2017) 
(40.43N 74.10W) 
04/1830 
997.0 
04/2000 
25 
47 
 
 
 
 
Monmouth Beach 
MNMTB (D8195)  
(40.34N 73.97W) 
04/1831 
997.9 
04/1546 
27 
40 
 
 
 
 
North Beach Haven 
(C2530) 
(39.58N 74.23W) 
04/1615 
998.0I 
04/1615 
29I 
56I 
 
 
 
 
Ocean City (F2611) 
(39.28N 74.57W) 
04/1630 
998.0 
04/1545 
31 
51 
 
 
 
 
Sea Isle City (D8913) 
(39.15N 74.69W) 
04/1601 
998.6 
04/1532 
27 
46 
 
 
 
 
Sea Isle City (E8445) 
(39.12N 74.71W) 
04/1545 
998.0 
04/1645 
36 
50 
 
 
 
 
South Seaside Park 
(C4845) 
(39.91N 74.08W) 
04/1601 
1001.7I 
04/1525 
38I 
52I 
 
 
 
 
Surf City (F2015) 
(39.67N 74.16W) 
04/1715 
998.6 
04/1416 
25 
50 
 
 
 
 
Tabernacle (F3950) 
(39.85N 74.71W) 
04/1512 
999.3I 
04/1511 
30I 
46I 
 
 
 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Bethlehem TWP 1 S (NJ-
HN-7)  
(40.66N 75.01W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.22 
Blairstown TWP 4 SE 
(NJ-WR-8)  
(40.94N 74.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.14 
Franklin TWP 3 WSW 
(NJ-HN-62)  
(40.55N 74.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.13 
Pennsville TWP 1 NE 
(NJ-SL-13)  
(39.63N 75.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.95 
Salem 1 ENE (NJ-SL-11) 
(39.57N 75.46W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.86 

Hurricane Isaias     45 
 
White TWP 2 S (NJ-WR-
23) 
(40.80N 75.04W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.14 
Public/Other 
Elsinboro TWP 4 SSW 
(39.48N 75.54W) 
 
 
04/1330 
38 
40 
 
 
 
 
Fortescue 1 NW 
(39.25N 75.18W) 
 
 
04/1430 
51 
 
 
 
 
 
Harvey Cedars OEM 
(39.71N 74.14W) 
 
 
04/1440 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
Manasquan 1 ESE 
(40.12N 74.03W) 
 
 
04/1705 
43 
56 
 
 
 
 
Millstone 2 SW 
(40.48N 74.62W) 
 
 
04/1519 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
Ocean City OCNCS 
(39.26N 74.61W) 
04/1604 
998.3 
04/1729 
33 
44 
 
 
 
 
NEW YORK 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Farmingdale (KFRG) 
(40.74N 73.41W) 
04/1853 
999.9 
04/1750 
42 
(2 min, 10 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Islip (KISP) 
(40.80N 73.10W) 
04/1905 
1001.7 
04/1835 
43 
(2 min, 10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
New York JFK (KJFK) 
(40.64N 73.76W) 
04/1905 
998.0 
04/1725 
47 
(2 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
New York LGA (KLGA) 
(40.78N 73.88W) 
04/1905 
997.2 
04/1736 
46 
(2 min, 10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
New York Central Park 
(KNYC)  
(40.79N 73.96W) 
04/1920 
997.7 
04/2000 
22 
(2 min, 10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
1.09 
New York City Downtown 
(KJRB)  
(40.70N 74.01W) 
04/1905 
998.0 
04/2015 
31 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Shirley (KHWV) 
(40.83N 72.86W) 
04/1856 
1004.5 
04/1856 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Stewart (KSWF) 
(41.50N 74.10W) 
04/1845 
997.1 
04/2120 
32 
(2 min, 10 m) 
44 
 
 
 
 
Westhampton (KFOK) 
(40.86N 72.61W) 
04/2005 
1005.9 
04/1840 
29 
(2 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
White Plains (KHPN) 
(41.07N 73.70W) 
04/1905 
998.2 
04/1800 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
1.10 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Mariners Harbor 
(MHRN6) 
(40.64N 74.16W) 
 
 
04/1612 
39 
(46 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Bergen Point West 
Research (BGNN6) 
(40.64N 74.14W) 
04/1812 
996.9 
 
 
 
4.91 
 
1.7 
 
Kings Point (KPTN6) 
(40.81N 73.77W) 
04/1918 
998.1 
04/1742 
44 
(9 m) 
59 
2.28 
4.92 
1.3 
 
The Battery (BATN6) 
(40.70N 74.01W) 
04/1824 
997.8 
 
 
 
4.49 
3.84 
1.6 
 
Weatherflow 
Bannerman Island 
(XBAN) 
(41.46N 73.99W) 
04/1839 
995.6 
04/1829 
38 
(5 min, 19 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Bayville (XBAY) 
(40.91N 73.63W) 
04/1939 
995.0 
04/2019 
48 
(14 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Blue Point (XBLU) 
(40.74N 73.03W) 
04/1758 
1000.3 
04/1829 
51 
(1 min, 12 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     46 
 
Breezy Point (XBRZ) 
(40.55N 73.93W) 
04/1826 
994.0 
04/1718 
47 
(1 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Croton (XCRO) 
(41.20N 73.88W) 
04/1850 
995.1 
04/2040 
30 
(14 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
East Moriches Inlet CG 
(XMOR) (40.79N 72.74W) 
04/1731 
1004.4 
04/1918 
50 
(1 min, 10 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Eatons Neck (XEAT) 
(40.96N 73.39W) 
04/1925 
993.6 
04/1655 
28 
(1 min, 22 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Fire Island CG (XFIR) 
(40.62N 73.26W) 
04/1859 
999.1 
04/1824 
51 
(1 min, 10 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Fishers Island (XFSH) 
(41.26N 72.03W) 
04/1955 
1005.7 
04/2129 
43 
(1 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Great Gull Island (XGUL) 
(41.20N 72.12W) 
04/2047 
1003.7 
04/2047 
54 
(1 min, 16 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Great South Bay (XHCK) 
(40.66N 73.40W) 
04/1903 
999.4 
04/1818 
49 
(5 min, 11 m) 
65 
 
 
 
 
Jones Beach (XJON) 
(40.60N 73.55W) 
04/1844 
996.3 
04/1755 
43 
(1 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Kingston (XRND) 
(41.92N 73.96W) 
04/2003 
995.7 
04/1940 
34 
(1 min, 10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Larchmont Harbor (XLAR) 
(40.92N 73.73W) 
04/1935 
998.8 
04/1819 
52 
(1 min, 12m) 
67 
 
 
 
 
Mecox Bay (XMCX) 
(40.91N 72.31W) 
04/1949 
1005.5 
04/2027 
40 
(1 min, 10 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Napeague (XNAP) 
(41.01N 72.05W) 
04/2000 
1006.7 
04/1845 
28 
(10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Point O’Woods Yacht 
Club (XPOW) (40.66N 
73.13W) 
04/1901 
999.9 
04/2000 
44 
(1 min, 6 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Shinnecock Light (XSHN) 
(40.84N 72.47W) 
04/1951 
1000.8 
04/1952 
49 
(1 min, 12m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Sinai Harbor (XSIN) 
(40.96N 73.04W) 
04/1948 
999.8I 
04/1824 
41I 
(1 min, 8 m) 
51I 
 
 
 
 
State Boat Channel 
(XGRS) 
(40.65N 73.30W) 
04/1854 
998.8 
04/1833 
46 
(1 min, 5 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Tappan Zee Light (XTPZ) 
(41.14N 73.87W) 
04/1841 
994.7 
04/1806 
43 
(1 min, 13 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Baiting Hollow (E4141) 
(40.97N 72.71W) 
04/1933 
1002.4 
04/1808 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
Bay Shore (F0858) 
(40.72N 73.23W) 
04/1947 
1001.4 
04/1821 
32 
46 
 
 
 
 
Blue Point (E8546) 
(40.75N 73.04W) 
04/1916 
1003.4 
04/2001 
 
49 
 
 
 
 
Brookhaven (E4378) 
(40.76N 72.91W) 
04/1901 
1000.0I 
04/1830 
39I 
52I 
 
 
 
 
Cutchogue (D5360) 
(41.00N 72.44W) 
04/1945 
1003.7 
04/2235 
31 
46 
 
 
 
 
Eastport (F1522) 
(40.85N 72.73W) 
041929 
1011.8 
04/1929 
29 
48 
 
 
 
 
Hampton Bays (E9356) 
(40.85N 72.49W) 
04/2034 
1005.8 
04/2007 
40 
52 
 
 
 
 
Jackson Heights 
(Queens) (D9152)  
(40.75N 73.88W) 
04/1907 
997.3 
04/1812 
32 
63 
 
 
 
 
Manhattan 
Beach/Brooklyn (F1729) 
(40.58N 73.93W) 
04/1826 
998.6 
04/1617 
32 
49 
 
 
 
 
Muttontown (C0028) 
(40.83N 73.56W) 
04/1931 
998.6 
04/1825 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
Orient (F2389) 
(40.75N 73.88W) 
04/1846 
1000.0 
04/2101 
43 
56 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     47 
 
Stony Brook (E5678) 
(40.91N 73.12W) 
 
 
04/1900 
31 
65 
 
 
 
 
Valley Stream (C3340) 
(40.65N 73.69W) 
04/1911 
998.3 
04/1746 
25 
49 
 
 
 
 
West Gilgo Beach 
(F3143) 
(40.61N 73.42W) 
04/1901 
999.7 
04/1800 
46 
66 
 
 
 
 
West Islip (C0354) 
(40.71N 73.31W) 
04/1909 
1000.0 
04/1909 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
National Estuarine Research Reserve System (NERRS) Sites 
Turkey Point Hudson 
River (TKPN6)  
(42.01N 73.94W) 
04/2036 
997.4 
04/1806 
19 
27 
4.2 
 
1.5 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Albany 1 SW (NY-AB-23) 
(42.66N 73.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.35 
Tannersville 4.5 SSE (NY-
GR-13)  
(42.14N 74.09W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.37 
Wurtsboro (NY-SV-8) 
(41.57N 74.49W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.45 
Public/Other 
Bronx – Lehman College 
(NYSMBRON)  
(40.88N 73.89W) 
 
 
04/1810 
25 
(10 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Brooklyn College 
(NYSMBKLN)  
(40.64N 73.95W) 
 
 
04/1740 
29 
(10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
NYC Hunter College 
(NYSMMANH)  
(40.77N 73.96W) 
 
 
04/1745 
26 
(10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Otisville (NYSMOTIS) 
(41.49N 74.50W) 
 
 
04/2055 
36 
(10 m) 
 
 
 
 
 
Princetown 
(42.78N 74.06W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.47 
Queens College 
(NYSMQUEE)  
(40.74N 73.81W) 
 
 
04/1750 
35 
(10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Somers (NYSMSOME) 
(41.32N 73.76W) 
 
 
04/1820 
28 
(10 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Staten Island 
(NYSMSTAT) 
(40.61N 74.14W) 
 
 
04/1945 
26 
(10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Stony Brook 
(NYSMSTON) 
(40.92N 73.13W) 
 
 
04/1840 
 
48 
(10m) 
 
 
 
 
Suffern (NYSMSUFF) 
(41.14N 74.08W) 
 
 
04/2040 
20 
(10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Tannersville 5 SSE 
(42.14N 74.09W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.92 
Wantagh (NYSMWANT) 
(40.66N 73.50W) 
 
 
04/1740 
37 
(10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Warwick (NYSMWARW) 
(41.25N 74.39W) 
 
 
04/1810 
25 
(10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
CONNECTICUT 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Bridgeport (KBDR) 
(41.17N 73.12W) 
04/1952 
1000.1 
04/2100 
38I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
54I 
 
 
 
 
Chester (KSNC) 
(41.38N 72.51W) 
04/2055 
1003.9 
04/2015 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     48 
 
Danbury (KDXR) 
(41.37N 73.48W) 
04/1957 
998.8 
04/1745 
30 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Groton (KGON) 
(41.33N 72.04W) 
04/2105 
1005.1 
04/2056 
39 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Hartford (KHFD) 
(41.74N 72.65W) 
04/1942 
1001.6I 
04/1909 
29 
(2 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Mediden (KMMK) 
(41.51N 72.82W) 
04/2045 
1000.6 
04/2020 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
New Haven (KHVN) 
(41.26N 72.88W) 
04/2035 
1001.9 
04/1957 
33I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
49I 
 
 
 
 
Oxford (KOXC) 
(41.48N 73.13W) 
04/2010 
1000.9 
04/1900 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Willimantic (KIJD) 
(41.74N 72.18W) 
04/2150 
1003.8 
04/2010 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Windsor Locks (KBDL) 
(41.94N 72.68W) 
04/2151 
1000.5 
04/2030 
39 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Bridgeport (BRHC3) 
(41.17N 73.18W) 
04/1954 
999.1 
04/1842 
39 
(8 m) 
59 
2.43 
 
 
 
New Haven (NWHC3) 
(41.28N 72.91W) 
04/2024 
1001.3 
04/1936 
38 
(7 m) 
48 
2.61 
 
 
 
New London (NLNC3) 
(41.36N 72.09W) 
04/2100 
1005.8 
04/2030 
31 
(8 m) 
45 
2.46 
 
 
 
Weatherflow 
Lighthouse Point (XLTH) 
(41.25N 72.90W) 
04/2023 
999.7 
04/1918 
42 
(5 min, 8 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Norwalk Light (XNOR) 
(41.08N 73.38W) 
04/1953 
997.6 
04/1825 
45 
(5 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Stonington Outer 
Breakwater 4 (XSTO) 
(41.32N 71.91W) 
04/2057 
1004.5 
04/2122 
36 
(5 min, 11 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
US Coast Guard 
Academy (XCGA)  
(41.38N 72.09W) 
04/2059 
1003.8 
04/2109 
35 
(1 min, 17 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Bethany (E0704) 
(41.40N 73.03W) 
04/1919 
1001.0 
04/2137 
52 
56 
 
 
 
 
Bridgeport (E6717) 
(41.03N 73.53W) 
04/1946 
1001.7 
04/1815 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
Fairfield (AU922) 
(41.14N 73.24W) 
04/1930 
999.3I 
04/1745 
35I 
58I 
 
 
 
 
Greenwich (E3387) 
(41.01N 73.57W) 
04/1946 
997.6 
04/1800 
45 
58 
 
 
 
 
RHODE ISLAND 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Block Island (KBID) 
(41.17N 71.58W) 
04/1939 
1008.4 
04/2005 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Newport (KUUU) 
(41.53N 71.28W) 
04/2110 
1008.5 
04/2050 
28 
(2 min, 10 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
North Kingston (KOQU) 
(41.60N 71.41W) 
04/2025 
1004.0 
04/2025 
45 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Providence (KPVD) 
(41.72N 71.43W) 
04/2025 
1006.3 
04/2025 
36 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Westerly (KWST) 
(41.35N 71.80W) 
04/2053 
1008.1 
04/1941 
28 
(2 min, 10 m) 
44 
 
 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Providence (PVDR1) 
(41.79N 71.38W) 
04/2024 
1006.7 
04/2030 
40 
53 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 

Hurricane Isaias     49 
 
Conimicut Light (CPTR1) 
(41.72N 71.34W) 
04/2024 
1006.9 
 
 
 
2.61 
 
 
 
Newport (NWPR1) 
(41.50N 71.33W) 
04/2024 
1008.5 
04/2042 
32 
(8 min, 8 m) 
43 
1.66 
 
 
 
Providence (FOXR1) 
(41.81N 71.40W) 
04/2030 
1006.8 
04/1942 
39 
(8 min, 18 m) 
53 
3.32 
 
 
 
Quonset (QPTR1) 
(41.59N 71.41W) 
04/2012 
1007.7 
04/2042 
39 
(8 min, 7 m) 
51 
1.88 
 
 
 
Weatherflow 
Block Island Jetty (XBLK) 
(41.19N 71.59W) 
04/1943 
1006.2 
04/2004 
42 
(1 min, 11 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Bristol Harbor (XCAS) 
(41.65N 71.29W) 
04/2017 
1006.0 
04/2140 
41 
(1 min, 9 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Fogland (XFOG) 
(41.56N 71.22W) 
04/2037 
1005.6 
04/2053 
45 
(1 min, 26 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Halfway Rock (XHLF) 
(41.53N 71.31W) 
 
 
04/2011 
40 
(1 min, 9 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Ninigret Pond (XNIN) 
(41.34N 71.69W) 
04/2003 
1006.8 
04/1951 
43 
(1 min, 11 m) 
48 
 
 
 
 
Pt. Judith (XJUD) 
(41.36N 71.50W) 
04/2004 
1006.6 
04/2021 
42 
(1 min, 16 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Rose Island (XROS) 
(41.50N 71.34W) 
04/2020 
1007.9 
04/2045 
34 
(5 min, 11 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Sabin Point (XSBN) 
(41.77N 71.39W) 
04/2030 
1002.9 
04/2047 
44 
(1 min, 9 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Sakonnet Vineyards 
(XSAK) 
(41.53N 71.19W) 
04/2038 
1003.8 
04/2118 
23 
(1 min, 10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
URI (XURI) 
(41.49N 71.42W) 
04/1959 
1006.6 
04/2011 
39 
(1 min, 10 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Charlestown (NINR1) 
(41.38N 71.58W) 
 
 
04/2125 
26 
(6 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Providence (E0927) 
(41.83N 71.40W) 
 
 
04/2030 
 
50 
 
 
 
 
MASSACHUSETTS 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Bedford (KBED) 
(42.47N 71.29W) 
04/2216 
1006.1 
04/2035 
30 
(2 min, 10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Boston (KBOS) 
(42.36N 71.01W) 
04/2235 
1006.8 
05/0000 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Chicopee (KCEF) 
(42.19N 72.54W) 
04/2226 
1001.1 
04/2056 
25 
(2 min, 10 m) 
48 
 
 
 
 
Fitchburg (KFIT) 
(42.55N 71.76W) 
04/2152 
1003.5 
04/2250 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Marshfield (KGHG) 
(42.10N 70.67W) 
04/2235 
1008.5 
04/2135 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Milton (KMQE) 
(42.21N 71.11W) 
04/2151 
1007.5 
04/2151 
34 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
New Bedford (EWB) 
(41.68N 70.96W) 
04/2053 
1008.5 
04/2110 
28 
(2 min, 10 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Norwood (KOWD) 
(42.19N 71.17W) 
04/2225 
1006.4 
04/2100 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
44 
 
 
 
 
Orange (KORE) 
(42.57N 72.29W) 
04/2152 
1001.8 
05/0025 
32 
(2 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Pittsfield (KPSF) 
(42.73N 73.29W) 
04/2054 
996.6 
04/2315 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Plymouth (KPYM) 
(41.91N 70.73W) 
04/2240 
1009.0 
04/2100 
22 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     50 
 
Taunton (KTAN) 
(41.87N 71.02W) 
04/2100 
1007.7 
04/2050 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Westfield (KBAF) 
(42.16N 72.72W) 
04/2040 
1000.0I 
04/2025 
23I 
(2 min, 10 m) 
54I 
 
 
 
 
Worcester (KORH) 
(42.27N 71.88W) 
04/2154 
1004.1 
04/2030 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Borden Flats Light 
(BLTM3) 
(41.70N 71.17W) 
04/2048 
1008.0 
04/2100 
34 
(8 min, 16 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Buzzards Bay (BUZM3) 
(41.40N 71.03W) 
04/2100 
1009.7 
04/2100 
43 
(10 min, 25 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Fall River (FRVM3) 
(41.70N 71.16W) 
04/2048 
1008.5 
 
 
 
2.78 
 
 
 
Woods Hole (BZBM3) 
(41.52N 70.67W) 
 
 
 
 
 
2.05 
 
 
 
Weatherflow 
Carson Beach (XCAR) 
(42.33N 71.05W) 
04/2117 
1004.0 
04/2117 
26 
(1 min, 14 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Chapin (XCHP) 
(41.73N 70.23W) 
04/2237 
1010.2 
04/2257 
29 
(1 min, 9 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Children’s Island (XCHD) 
(42.51N 70.82W) 
05/0035 
1002.9 
05/0037 
39 
(1 min, 9 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Courageous Sailing 
(XCOR) 
(42.37N 71.05W) 
04/2217 
1003.9 
04/2109 
37 
(1 min, 22 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Deer Island (XDER) 
(42.31N 70.89W) 
04/2125 
1004.3 
04/2130 
43 
(1 min, 18 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Dog Bar Breakwater 
(XDOG) 
(42.58N 70.67W) 
04/2253 
1002.3 
04/2153 
46 
(1 min, 14 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Duxbury (XDUX) 
(42.06N 70.65W) 
04/2115 
1006.3 
04/2129 
43 
(1 min, 12 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Duxbury Bay (XDXB) 
(42.04N 70.67W) 
04/2232 
1007.0 
04/2105 
40 
(1 min, 14 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
East Boston (XSHP) 
(42.36N 71.04W) 
04/2121 
1005.0 
04/2111 
27 
(1 min, 8 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Fenway Park (XFEN) 
(42.35N 71.10W) 
04/2225 
1000.6 
04/2040 
24 
(1 min, 30 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Harvard Bridge (XHRV) 
(42.36N 71.09W) 
 
 
05/0027 
28 
(1 min, 8 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Hatch Beach (XHCH) 
(41.82N 70.00W) 
04/2217 
1009.8 
04/2202 
26 
(1 min, 10 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Horseneck Beach 
(XHOR) 
(41.51N 71.09W) 
04/2054 
1004.0 
04/2054 
43 
(5 min, 11 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Hull (XHUL) 
(42.31N 70.89W) 
04/2124 
1000.8 
04/2139 
43 
(1 min, 12 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Kalmus (XKAL) 
(41.63N 70.28W) 
04/2259 
1009.3 
04/2214 
38 
(1 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Mt. Tom (XTOM) 
(42.25N 72.65W) 
04/2052 
 
04/2346 
37 
(1 min, 17 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Ned’s Point (XNED) 
(41.65N 70.78W) 
04/2048 
1009.0 
04/2107 
37 
(5 min, 7 m) 
48 
 
 
 
 
Pleasure Bay (XPLB) 
(42.33N 71.02W) 
04/2134 
1003.0 
04/2137 
47 
(1 min, 9 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Vineyard Haven (XVIN) 
(41.46N 70.59W) 
04/2227 
1008.4 
04/2057 
28 
(1 min, 10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
West Dennis (XWDN) 
(41.65N 70.17W) 
04/2232 
1009.8 
04/2232 
35 
(1 min, 13 m) 
39 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     51 
 
West Falmouth (XWFL) 
(41.60N 70.65W) 
04/2222 
1009.1 
04/2108 
36 
(1 min, 10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
West Island (XWST) 
(41.58N 70.82W) 
04/2210 
1008.3 
04/2100 
38 
(5 min, 10 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Woods Hole Passage 
Light (XWHL)  
(41.52N 70.68W) 
04/2047 
1007.0 
04/2059 
41 
(1 min, 12 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Clarksburg (C2493) 
(42.73N 73.07W) 
04/2143 
999.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.85 
Fairhaven (D4678) 
(41.59N 70.83W) 
04/2232 
1010.2 
04/2100 
37 
 
 
 
 
 
Milton (C2236) 
(42.21N 71.11W) 
04/2226 
1006.4 
04/2216 
36 
63 
 
 
 
 
New Bedford (AV436) 
(41.59N 70.91W) 
 
 
04/2055 
41 
 
 
 
 
 
Palmer (D7801) 
(42.19N 72.35W) 
04/2215 
1000.0 
04/2315 
 
51 
 
 
 
 
Provincetown (F5907) 
(42.07N 70.15W) 
04/2230 
1008.1 
04/2215 
36 
53 
 
 
 
 
Rockport (AV086) 
(42.64N 70.58W) 
05/0015 
1004.7 
04/2200 
36 
51 
 
 
 
 
Truro (F6034) 
(41.99N 70.01W) 
04/2258 
1010.5 
04/2118 
30 
45 
 
 
 
 
Woods Hole (F2970) 
(41.53N 70.68W) 
04/2231 
1011.1 
04/2100 
29 
50 
 
 
 
 
Wrentham (AT213) 
(42.04N 71.41W) 
04/2213 
1006.8 
04/2338 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
Public/Other 
Savoy 
(42.60N 73.04W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.00 
NEW HAMPSHIRE 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Berlin (KBML) 
(44.58N 71.17W) 
05/0252 
1003.1 
05/0045 
26 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Jaffrey (KAFN) 
(42.80N 71.99W) 
04/2200 
1002.9 
04/2205 
22 
(2 min, 10 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Lebanon (KLEB) 
(43.63N 72.31W) 
04/2250 
998.7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.29 
Manchester (KMHT) 
(42.93N 71.44W) 
04/2353 
1004.2 
05/0110 
29 
(2 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Mount Washington 
(KMWN) 
(44.28N 71.30W) 
 
 
04/2210 
84 
128 
 
 
 
2.59 
Portsmouth (KPSM) 
(43.09N 70.81W) 
05/0156 
1006.3 
04/2230 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
44 
 
 
 
 
Rochester (KDAW) 
(43.28N 70.92W) 
05/0051 
1005.3 
04/2240 
23 
(2 min, 10 m) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Whitefield (KHIE) 
(44.35N 71.52W) 
05/0030 
1001.1 
05/0005 
25 
(2 min, 10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Isle of Shoals (IOSN3) 
(42.97N 70.62W) 
04/2300 
1005.8 
04/2240 
44 
(10 min, 19 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Gilford (D3310) 
(43.56N 71.35W) 
04/2330 
1003.0 
05/0301 
29 
51 
 
 
 
 
Hudson (F4199) 
(42.81N 71.38W) 
04/2235 
1003.7 
04/2235 
 
68 
 
 
 
 
VERMONT 

Hurricane Isaias     52 
 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Bennington (KDDH) 
(42.89N 73.25W) 
04/2125 
997.9 
04/2141 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
1.40 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Charlotte (E9454) 
(44.27N 73.31W) 
05/0003 
998.6 
05/0003 
33 
44 
 
 
 
2.02 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Braintree 3 SW (VT-OG-
10) 
(43.94N 72.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.16 
Pomfret 3 N (VT-WR-2) 
(43.74N 72.53W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.35 
Warren 3 SSE (VT-WS-
22) 
(44.07N 72.83W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.15 
MAINE 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Bar Harbor (KBHB) 
(44.45N 68.37W) 
05/0556 
1011.1 
05/0330 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
38 
 
 
 
 
Frenchville (KFVE) 
(47.28N 68.31W) 
05/0925 
1005.5 
05/0905 
25 
(2 min, 10 m) 
37 
 
 
 
 
Greenville (KGNR) 
(45.46N 69.56W) 
05/0456 
1005.8 
05/0156 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Portland (CASM1) 
(43.66N 70.24W) 
05/0206 
1007.3 
05/0318 
31 
40 
 
 
 
 
Wells (WELM1) 
(43.32N 70.56W) 
05/0200 
1007.2 
04/2300 
29 
36 
1.18 
 
 
 
Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) 
Denmark (E9735) 
(44.02N 70.86W) 
05/0231 
1004.7 
04/2331 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
Portland (E2983) 
(43.65N 70.28W) 
05/0245 
1012.2 
05/0245 
29 
49 
 
 
 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Andover 4 W 
(44.64N 70.83W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.93 
 
a  Date/time is for sustained wind when both sustained and gust are listed. 
b  Except as noted, sustained wind averaging periods for C-MAN and land-based reports are 2 min; buoy averaging 
periods are 8 min. 
c  Storm surge is water height above normal astronomical tide level. 
d  For most locations, storm tide is water height above the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). Storm 
tide is water height above the Puerto Rico Vertical Datum of 2002 (PRVD02) and the Virgin Islands Vertical Datum 
of 2009 (VIVD09) for NOS stations in Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, respectively. 
e  Estimated inundation is the maximum height of water above ground. For NOS tide gauges, the height of the water 
above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW) is used as a proxy for inundation.  For USGS water level sensors, the 
data are converted to above MHHW. 
I Incomplete Data 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     53 
 
Table 4. 
Number of hours in advance of formation associated with the first NHC Tropical 
Weather Outlook forecast in the indicated likelihood category. Note that the timings 
for the “Low” category do not include forecasts of a 0% chance of genesis. 
 
Hours Before Genesis 
48-Hour Outlook 
120-Hour Outlook 
Low (<40%) 
108 
150 
Medium (40%-60%) 
96 
126 
High (>60%) 
78 
102 
 
 
 
Table 5a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) track 
forecast errors (n mi) for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 2020.  Mean errors 
for the previous 5-yr period are shown for comparison.  Official errors that are 
smaller than the 5-yr means are shown in boldface type. 
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
22.1 
36.0 
54.7 
73.4 
82.2 
97.7 
124.0 
183.1 
OCD5 
44.0 
91.4 
125.8 
157.3 
179.6 
183.2 
242.4 
405.5 
Forecasts 
22 
20 
18 
16 
14 
12 
8 
4 
OFCL (2015-19) 
24.1 
36.9 
49.6 
65.1 
80.7 
96.3 
133.2 
171.6 
OCD5 (2015-19) 
44.7 
96.1 
156.3 
217.4 
273.9 
330.3 
431.5 
511.9 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     54 
 
Table 5b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected track forecast guidance models (in n mi) 
for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 2020. Errors smaller than the NHC official 
forecast are shown in boldface type.  
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
22.1 
36.0 
54.7 
73.4 
82.2 
97.7 
124.0 
183.1 
OCD5 
44.0 
91.4 
125.8 
157.3 
179.6 
183.2 
242.4 
405.5 
TABS 
68.4 
128.3 
171.0 
213.3 
263.3 
327.3 
567.3 
916.6 
TABM 
35.1 
49.6 
51.3 
61.6 
90.3 
125.2 
250.6 
506.6 
TABD 
32.7 
61.3 
95.6 
142.1 
197.4 
240.8 
351.6 
458.8 
TVDG 
21.8 
32.2 
51.0 
72.0 
83.0 
91.8 
101.1 
177.9 
TVCA 
22.4 
33.7 
53.0 
73.9 
86.1 
96.1 
120.2 
218.9 
GFEX 
22.7 
35.4 
54.1 
74.6 
87.0 
99.7 
113.7 
235.9 
TVCX 
21.5 
33.0 
53.6 
73.4 
84.6 
92.8 
101.7 
184.1 
FSSE 
22.6 
33.9 
50.6 
68.6 
87.4 
102.0 
124.4 
108.5 
HCCA 
21.5 
35.4 
56.3 
78.3 
87.1 
96.7 
99.4 
148.0 
AEMI 
25.2 
46.5 
70.7 
94.0 
106.9 
116.6 
143.4 
261.8 
NVGI 
32.5 
54.4 
78.6 
90.0 
114.9 
147.3 
218.5 
402.8 
CMCI 
30.6 
53.5 
73.1 
88.8 
94.0 
93.7 
130.8 
124.8 
EMXI 
23.0 
41.3 
64.6 
88.8 
100.3 
113.2 
169.3 
304.1 
EGRI 
29.2 
39.3 
71.3 
101.1 
121.2 
135.0 
164.5 
258.9 
HWFI 
21.9 
37.8 
51.5 
69.9 
90.3 
130.8 
276.6 
627.1 
HMNI 
22.0 
40.3 
64.2 
105.6 
158.8 
240.9 
462.4 
667.1 
GFSI 
25.7 
38.7 
53.6 
71.4 
98.3 
139.2 
260.9 
421.1 
Forecasts 
22 
20 
18 
16 
14 
12 
8 
4 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     55 
 
Table 6a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) intensity 
forecast errors (kt) for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 2020.  Mean errors for 
the previous 5-yr period are shown for comparison.  Official errors that are smaller 
than the 5-yr means are shown in boldface type.   
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
7.5 
11.0 
11.4 
11.2 
7.9 
7.1 
3.8 
8.8 
OCD5 
9.0 
12.9 
16.1 
16.5 
13.4 
12.4 
16.5 
13.0 
Forecasts 
22 
20 
18 
16 
14 
12 
8 
4 
OFCL (2015-19) 
5.2 
7.7 
9.4 
10.7 
11.9 
13.0 
14.4 
15.5 
OCD5 (2015-19) 
6.8 
10.8 
14.1 
17.0 
18.8 
20.6 
22.5 
24.6 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     56 
 
Table 6b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected intensity forecast guidance models (in kt) 
for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 2020. Errors smaller than the NHC official 
forecast are shown in boldface type. 
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
60 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
7.5 
11.0 
11.4 
11.2 
7.9 
7.1 
3.8 
8.8 
OCD5 
9.0 
12.9 
16.1 
16.5 
13.4 
12.4 
16.5 
13.0 
IVDR 
6.6 
9.1 
9.3 
8.4 
6.1 
6.2 
8.5 
11.5 
IVCN 
7.2 
10.1 
10.3 
9.5 
6.7 
6.5 
9.4 
14.0 
ICON 
7.8 
10.6 
11.1 
10.7 
7.9 
7.7 
10.0 
13.8 
LGEM 
9.9 
14.3 
15.8 
16.8 
14.5 
14.2 
18.0 
22.8 
DSHP 
9.6 
13.0 
13.6 
13.9 
12.9 
12.9 
17.4 
22.0 
FSSE 
6.8 
9.1 
9.4 
8.6 
7.2 
8.3 
9.1 
12.5 
HCCA 
6.7 
8.8 
8.7 
7.6 
5.1 
7.2 
7.9 
8.0 
CMCI 
8.1 
10.3 
12.2 
14.1 
14.1 
17.2 
22.2 
17.8 
EMXI 
6.5 
7.6 
8.9 
12.9 
13.9 
14.8 
19.6 
27.5 
EGRI 
8.1 
10.5 
12.1 
14.6 
12.1 
16.6 
17.5 
21.0 
HWFI 
6.6 
8.2 
8.2 
7.1 
9.7 
12.6 
13.5 
5.8 
HMNI 
9.0 
9.1 
10.4 
11.9 
12.1 
15.2 
13.1 
17.2 
GFSI 
6.3 
8.7 
11.4 
12.9 
12.5 
12.9 
13.8 
8.8 
Forecasts 
22 
20 
18 
16 
14 
12 
8 
4 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     57 
 
Table 7. 
Wind watch and warning summary for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 2020. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Cabo Engano to Northern Dominican 
Republic/Haiti Border 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Antigua/Barbuda/British Virgin 
Islands/Montserrat 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
St. Kitts/Nevis 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Guadeloupe/Martinique/St. Martin 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Saba/St. Eustatius 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
St. Maartin 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Anguilla/St. Barthelemy 
28 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Dominica 
28 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch 
discontinued 
Cabo Engano to Northern Dominican 
Republic/Haiti Border 
28 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Southern Dominican Republic/Haiti 
Border to Cabo Caucedo 
28 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Cabo Caucedo to Northern Dominican 
Republic/Haiti Border 
29 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Turks and Caicos 
29 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Dominica 
29 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Turks and Caicos to Southeast 
Bahamas 
29 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Central Bahamas 

Hurricane Isaias     58 
 
29 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Antigua/Barbuda 
29 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Guadeloupe/Martinique/St. Martin 
29 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
South coast of the Dominican Republic 
west of Cabo Caucedo to Southern 
Dominican Republic/Haiti Border 
29 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Montserrat 
29 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
St. Kitts/Nevis 
30 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Central Bahamas 
30 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Northwestern Bahamas 
30 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Anguilla 
30 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
St. Martin 
30 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Saba/St. Eustatius 
30 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
St. Maartin 
30 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
St. Barthelemy 
30 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
British Virgin Islands 
30 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin Islands 

Hurricane Isaias     59 
 
30 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Northwestern Bahamas 
30 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Ocean Reef to Sebastian Inlet, including 
Lake Okeechobee 
31 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning changed 
to Hurricane Warning 
Northwestern Bahamas 
31 / 0400 
Tropical Storm Warning changed 
to Hurricane Warning 
Central and Southeastern Bahamas 
31 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Le Mole St Nicholas to Northern 
Dominican Republic/Haiti Border 
31 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Ocean Reef to Sebastian Inlet 
31 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Dominican Republic 
31 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Deerfield Beach to Volusia/Brevard 
County Line 
31 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Flagler/Volusia County Line to Ponte 
Vedra Beach 
31 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Ocean Reef to Boca Raton 
31 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Volusia/Brevard County Line to 
Flagler/Volusia County Line 
31 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Hallandale to Boca Raton 
31 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Boca Raton to Volusia/Brevard County 
Line 
 1 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Turks and Caicos 
 1 / 0000 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Northwestern Bahamas to Central 
Bahamas 

Hurricane Isaias     60 
 
 1 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Boca Raton to Flagler/Volusia County 
Line 
 1 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Flagler/Volusia County Line to Ponte 
Vedra Beach 
 1 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Ponte Vedra Beach to Altamaha Sound 
 1 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Ponte Vedra Beach to South Santee 
River 
 1 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Lake Okeechobee 
1 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Hallandale to Boca Raton 
 2 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
South Santee River to Surf City 
 2 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Ocean Reef to Hallandale 
 2 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Hallandale to South Santee River 
 2 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Boca Raton to Flagler/Volusia CL 
 2 / 1200 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
All 
 2 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Surf City to Duck 
 2 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Hallandale to Jupiter Inlet, including 
Lake Okeechobee 
 2 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
South Santee River to Surf City 
 2 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Ocracoke Inlet to Watch Hill 
 2 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Jupiter Inlet to Sebastian Inlet 
 2 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Surf City to Ocracoke Inlet 
 2 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
South Santee River to Surf City 

Hurricane Isaias     61 
 
 3 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Fenwick Island to Watch Hill 
 3 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Sebastian Inlet to Fenwick Island 
 3 / 0600 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Volusia/Brevard County Line to 
Sebastian Inlet 
 3 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
South Santee River to Surf City 
 3 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Watch Hill to Stonington 
 3 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
West of Watch Hill, Tidal Potomac south 
of Cobb Island, Chesapeake Bay south 
of North Beach, Delaware Bay, Long 
Island, Long Island Sound 
 3 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
West of Watch Hill to the mouth of the 
Merrimack River, including Martha’s 
Vineyard, Nantucket, and Block Island 
 3 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Merrimack River to Eastport 
 3 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Remainder of the Chesapeake Bay and 
Tidal Potomac River north of Cobb 
Island 
 3 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Volusia/Brevard County line to Altamaha 
Sound 
 3 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Mouth of Merrimack River to Stonington 
 3 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Altamaha Sound to Savannah River 
 4 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Savannah River to Edisto Beach 
 4 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Edisto Beach to South Santee River 

Hurricane Isaias     62 
 
 4 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
North of Stonington to Eastport 
 4 / 0600 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Little River Inlet to Surf City 
 4 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
All 
 4 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Duck to North of Surf City, including 
Pamlico and Albemarle Sounds 
 4 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Chincoteague to Eastport 
 4 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to  
South of Sandy Point, New Jersey to 
Stonington 
 5 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Watch Hill to Stonington 
 5 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning modified 
to 
Merrimack River to Stonington 
 5 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Block Island 
 5 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Nantucket Island 
 5 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Marthas Vineyard 
 5 / 0600 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
All 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     63 
 
Table 8. 
Storm Surge watch and warning summary for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 
2020. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
31 / 2100 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Jupiter Inlet to Ponte Vedra 
Beach, FL 
2 / 0900 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Edisto Beach, SC to Cape Fear, 
NC 
2 / 1500 
Storm Surge Watch discontinued 
Jupiter Inlet to Ponte Vedra 
Beach, FL 
2 / 2100 
Storm Surge Watch changed to Storm 
Surge Warning 
Edisto Beach, SC to Cape Fear, 
NC 
3 / 1500 
Storm Surge Watch changed to Storm 
Surge Warning 
Neuse and Pamlico Rivers in 
NC, and Oregon Inlet, NC to the 
North Carolina/Virginia border. 
4 / 0000 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
Folly Beach to Edisto Beach, SC  
4 / 0300 
Storm Surge Watch changed to Storm 
Surge Warning 
Ocracoke Inlet to Oregon Inlet, 
NC 
4 / 0600 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
Little River Inlet to Folly Beach, 
SC  
4 / 0900 
Storm Surge Watch discontinued 
Cape Fear to Surf City, NC  
4 / 1200 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
Neuse River in NC  
4 / 1200 
Storm Surge Watch discontinued 
All  
4 / 1500 
Storm Surge Warning discontinued 
All  

Hurricane Isaias     64 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Best track positions for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 2020.  

Hurricane Isaias     65 
 
 
Figure 2. 
Selected wind observations and best track maximum sustained surface wind speed curve for Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–
4 August 2020.  Advanced Dvorak Technique estimates represent the Current Intensity at the nominal observation time. 
SATCON intensity estimates are from the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies. Aircraft observations 
have been adjusted for elevation using 90%, 80%, and 80% adjustment factors for observations from 700 mb, 850 mb, 
and 1500 ft., respectively. Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC, and the solid vertical lines correspond to 
landfalls. 

Hurricane Isaias     66 
 
 
Figure 3. 
Selected pressure observations and best track minimum central pressure curve Hurricane Isaias, 30 July–4 August 
2020. Advanced Dvorak Technique estimates represent the Current Intensity at the nominal observation time. SATCON 
intensity estimates are from the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies. KZC P-W refers to pressure 
estimates derived using the Knaff-Zehr-Courtney pressure-wind relationship. Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 
UTC, and the solid vertical lines correspond to landfalls. 

Hurricane Isaias     67 
 
. 
 
Figure 4.  
Select wind gusts (mph) and interpolated values (shaded) across the NWS WFO Wakefield, VA area of responsibility. 
Image courtesy of NWS WFO Wakefield.  

Hurricane Isaias     68 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  
Select wind gusts (mph) across the NWS WFO New York, NY area of responsibility. Image courtesy of NWS WFO New 
York.  
 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     69 
 
 
Figure 6.  
48-h rainfall estimates (inches) ending 31 July at 1200 UTC for Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Image courtesy 
of NWS WFO San Juan.  
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     70 
 
 
Figure 7.  
Isaias’ flash flooding damage in the Dominican Republic. Photo credit Getty Images. 
 

Hurricane Isaias     71 
 
 
Figure 8.  
Hurricane Isaias total rainfall map (inches) over the U.S. compiled from 6,167 rain gauges from 31 July–4 August 2020. 
Image courtesy of the NOAA Weather Prediction Center. 

Hurricane Isaias     72 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  
Isaias’ flash flooding in Conshohocken, Pennsylvania. Photo credit WHYY News. 
 
 

Hurricane Isaias     73 
 
 
Figure 10. 
Maximum water levels measured from NOS tide gauges (circles) and USGS water level sensors (squares) during 
Hurricane Isaias. Water levels are referenced as feet above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW), which is used as 
a proxy for inundation (above ground level) on normally dry ground along the immediate coastline. 

Hurricane Isaias     74 
 
 
Figure 11. 
Maximum water levels measured from NOS tide gauges (circles) and USGS water level sensors (squares) during 
Hurricane Isaias. Water levels are referenced as feet above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW), which is used as 
a proxy for inundation (above ground level) on normally dry ground along the immediate coastline. 

Hurricane Isaias     75 
 
 
Figure 12.  
Map of tornado reports from Hurricane Isaias with the cyclone’s track overlaid.  

Hurricane Isaias     76 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  
Tornado damage in Bertie County, NC. Photo credit NWS WFO Wakefield, VA.  

Hurricane Isaias     77 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14.  
Storm surge damage in Brunswick County, NC. Photo credit Town of Southport.  
 

Hurricane Isaias     78 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15.  
Storm surge damage in Bayview, NC. Image courtesy of North Carolina Department of Transportation.   

Hurricane Isaias     79 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16.  
NOS water level stream gauge data from Chesapeake Bay at Cambridge, Virginia.  

Hurricane Isaias     80 
 
 
 
Figure 17.  
Tornado damage in Stockton, MD. Photo credit NWS WFO Wakefield, VA. 
 

Hurricane Isaias     81 
 
 
Figure 18.  
A water rescue in Delaware. Photo credit John J. Jankowski Jr. 
 

Hurricane Isaias     82 
 
 
Figure 19. 
Selected intensity model forecasts (kt) for Isaias at 0000 UTC 29 July 2020. The best track intensity (kt) is given by the 
solid white line, with intensity values marked with a cyclone symbol at 6 h interval. 

Hurricane Isaias     83 
 
 
Figure 20. 
Selected intensity model forecasts (kt) for Isaias at 0000 UTC 2 August 2020. The best track intensity (kt) is given by 
the solid white line, with intensity values marked with a cyclone symbol at 6 h interval. 

Hurricane Isaias     84 
 
 
Figure 21. 
Maximum water levels measured during Hurricane Isaias from tide gauges (circles) and USGS water level sensors 
(squares), and areas covered by storm surge watches (lavender) and warnings (magenta). Water levels are 
referenced as feet above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW), which is used as a proxy for inundation (above ground 
level) on normally dry ground along the immediate coastline. Black markers denote water levels less than 3 ft 
above ground level, and white markers denote water levels 3 ft or higher above ground level. 
