 
NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER 
TROPICAL CYCLONE REPORT 
 
 
HURRICANE IRMA
 
(AL112017) 
 
30 August–12 September 2017 
 
John P. Cangialosi, Andrew S. Latto, and Robbie Berg 
National Hurricane Center 
24 September 20211 
 
VIIRS SATELLITE IMAGE OF HURRICANE IRMA WHEN IT WAS AT ITS PEAK INTENSITY AND MADE LANDFALL ON BARBUDA AT 0535 
UTC 6 SEPTEMBER. 
Irma was a long-lived Cape Verde hurricane that reached category 5 intensity on the 
Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale.  The catastrophic hurricane made seven landfalls, 
four of which occurred as a category 5 hurricane across the northern Caribbean Islands.  
Irma made landfall as a category 4 hurricane in the Florida Keys and struck southwestern 
Florida at category 3 intensity.  Irma caused widespread devastation across the affected 
areas and was one of the strongest and costliest hurricanes on record in the Atlantic basin.  
                                               
1 Original report date 9 March 2018.  Second version on 30 May 2018 updated casualty statistics for Florida, 
meteorological statistics for the Florida Keys, and corrected a typo.  Third version on 30 June 2018 corrected the year 
of the last category 5 hurricane landfall in Cuba and corrected a typo in the Casualty and Damage Statistics section. 
This version corrects the maximum wind gust reported at St. Croix Airport (TISX).  

Hurricane Irma     2 
 
Hurricane Irma 
 
30 AUGUST–12 SEPTEMBER 2017 
 
SYNOPTIC HISTORY 
 
 
Irma originated from a tropical wave that departed the west coast of Africa on 27 August.  
The wave was then producing a widespread area of deep convection, which became more 
concentrated near the northern portion of the wave axis on 28 and 29 August.  By 0000 UTC 30 
August, satellite images indicated that a well-defined surface circulation had developed and since 
deep convection was already sufficiently organized, it is estimated that the system became a 
tropical depression at this time when it was centered about 120 n mi west-southwest of São 
Vicente in the Cabo Verde Islands.  Banding features increased after genesis, and the depression 
became a tropical storm 6 h later.  The “best track” chart of Irma’s path is given in Fig. 1, with the 
wind and pressure histories shown in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively.  The best track positions and 
intensities are listed in Table 12. 
 
 
While moving westward to the south of a mid-level ridge over the eastern Atlantic, Irma 
strengthened rapidly in environmental conditions of low vertical wind shear and a fairly moist lower 
troposphere while it was over marginally warm sea surface temperatures (SSTs).  Irma developed 
a ragged eye around the time it became a hurricane near 0600 UTC 31 August, which was only 
30 h after it became a tropical depression.  Irma reached hurricane strength when it was still 
located over the eastern Atlantic about 400 n mi west of the Cabo Verde Islands.  Later on 31 
August, Irma turned west-northwestward as the ridge to the north of the cyclone weakened a little.  
Meanwhile, Irma continued to rapidly strengthen, and it reached major hurricane status (>= 100 
kt) by 0000 UTC 1 September, only two days after genesis.  This 70-kt increase in intensity over 
a 48-h period is a remarkable rate that is only achieved by a small fraction of Atlantic tropical 
cyclones (about 1 in 30).  Although Irma was a very intense hurricane at this time, the inner core 
was quite compact with hurricane-force winds estimated to extend no more than 15 n mi from the 
center (Fig 4). 
 
After becoming a category 3 hurricane, Irma’s intensification paused with the eye 
occasionally becoming cloud filled and deep convection in the eyewall appearing less intense.  
Irma fluctuated between category 2 and 3 strength from 0000 1 September to 0000 UTC 4 
September.  The main causes for the intensity fluctuations were likely eyewall replacement cycles 
and intrusions of dry air.  Meanwhile, the hurricane turned west-southwestward in response to a 
strong high pressure system to its north (Fig 5a), and lost 2.5° of latitude between 2 and 4 
September.  This south of west motion was very significant because it brought the cyclone over 
higher SSTs and in a position poised to affect the northern Leeward Islands.   
                                               
2 A digital record of the complete best track, including wind radii, can be found on line at 
ftp://ftp.nhc.noaa.gov/atcf. Data for the current year’s storms are located in the btk directory, while previous 
years’ data are located in the archive directory. 

Hurricane Irma     3 
 
 
By early on 4 September, Irma’s eye was growing in size and becoming better defined, 
and deep convection around the eye was gaining symmetry.  Irma was on a strengthening trend 
once again, likely due to the completion of an eyewall replacement cycle, and it was headed 
toward the northern Leeward Islands.  Irma turned west-northwestward, due to the erosion of the 
western side of the mid-level ridge (Fig 5b), and went through another round of rapid 
intensification.  The hurricane reached its maximum intensity of 155 kt around 1800 UTC 5 
September, when it was located about 70 n mi east-southeast of Barbuda.  As a category 5 
hurricane, Irma made landfall on Barbuda around 0545 UTC 6 September with maximum winds 
of 155 kt and a minimum pressure of 914 mb (Fig. 6a). 
 
After crossing Barbuda, Irma continued to exhibit an impressive satellite appearance and 
made its second landfall on St. Martin at 1115 UTC that day, with the same wind speed and 
pressure as for its Barbuda landfall.  Still moving west-northwestward to the south of a mid-level 
ridge, Irma made its third landfall on the island of Virgin Gorda in the British Virgin Islands at 1630 
UTC 6 September still as a 155-kt category 5 hurricane.  Later that day, as Irma moved away 
from the Virgin Islands, reconnaissance data from the Air Force indicated that the major hurricane 
had weakened slightly and had a double wind maximum, indicative of concentric eyewalls.  The 
double eyewall structure was also evident in Doppler radar data from San Juan, Puerto Rico (Fig. 
7).  Even though Irma was no longer at its peak intensity, it remained a category 5 hurricane with 
a larger wind field than it had previously (Fig. 4).  The eye of Irma tracked about 50 n mi to the 
north of the northern shore of Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic from 1800 UTC 6 
September to 1800 UTC 7 September, with the strongest winds to the north of the center.    
 
The eye of Irma passed just south of the Turks and Caicos Islands around 0000 UTC 8 
September, and it made landfall on Little Inagua Island in the Bahamas at 0500 UTC that day at 
category 4 intensity, with estimated maximum winds of 135 kt and a minimum pressure of 924 
mb.  This slight weakening ended Irma’s 60-h period of sustained category 5 intensity, which is 
the second longest such period on record (behind the 1932 Cuba Hurricane of Santa Cruz del 
Sur).  Irma then turned slightly to the left, due to a building subtropical ridge, and moved toward 
the northern coast of Cuba (Fig. 5c).   Reconnaissance and microwave data indicate that the inner 
core had become better organized, and it is estimated that Irma strengthened to a category 5 
hurricane again around 1800 UTC 8 September, only 18 h after weakening below that threshold.    
 
Irma then intensified a little more and made its fifth landfall near Cayo Romano, Cuba, at 
0300 UTC 9 September, with estimated maximum winds of 145 kt (Fig. 6b).  This marked the first 
category 5 hurricane landfall in Cuba since Huracan sin Precedentes in 1924.  Irma tracked along 
the Cuban Keys throughout that day, and its interaction with land caused it to weaken significantly, 
first to a category 4 storm a few hours after landfall in the Cuban Keys and then down to a category 
2 hurricane by 1800 UTC that day when the eye was very near Isabela de Sagua.  Shortly after 
that time, the forward speed of Irma slowed, and it began to make a turn to the northwest, which 
caused the core of the hurricane to move over the Florida Straits early on 10 September. 
 
When Irma moved over the warm waters of the Florida Straits, the hurricane reintensified 
once again.  Data from the Air Force Hurricane Hunters indicate that Irma became a category 4 
hurricane by 0600 UTC 10 September when it was centered about 55 n mi south-southeast of 
Key West, Florida.  Meanwhile, Irma had turned to the north-northwest in the flow between a 
subtropical ridge over the western Atlantic and a mid- to upper-level low pressure system over 
the Gulf of Mexico (Fig 5d).  The category 4 storm made yet another landfall near Cudjoe Key in 

Hurricane Irma     4 
 
the lower Florida Keys around 1300 UTC that day with maximum winds of 115 kt and a minimum 
pressure of 931 mb (Fig 6c).   
 
The convective pattern of the hurricane then became more ragged, likely due to increasing 
southwesterly vertical wind shear, and in response, Irma weakened to a category 3 hurricane 
around 1800 UTC 10 September.  Irma made its final landfall near Marco Island, Florida, at 1930 
UTC 10 September (Fig. 6d), with estimated maximum winds of 100 kt and minimum pressure of 
936 mb.  Once inland over southwestern Florida, Irma weakened quickly, due to the influences of 
land and strong wind shear, while moving north-northwestward on the east side of a large cyclonic 
gyre that was centered over the Gulf of Mexico.  Irma’s center tracked just east of Naples and Ft. 
Myers by 0000 UTC 11 September as a category 2 hurricane and passed between Tampa and 
Orlando by 0600 UTC that day as a category 1 storm.  Although Irma was weaker while over 
Florida, the wind field of the hurricane spread out significantly, with tropical-storm-force winds 
extending up to 360 n mi from the center (Fig. 4). 
 
Irma weakened to a tropical storm by 1200 UTC 11 September when it was centered 
about 20 n mi west of Gainesville, Florida.  While Irma was moving across northern Florida, most 
of the deep convection was located well to the northeast of the center, and the strongest winds 
were confined to the northeast coast of Florida and southeastern Georgia.   The center of Irma 
moved over southern Georgia just west of Valdosta around 1800 UTC that day with maximum 
winds of 45 kt, and the system became a remnant low with 25-kt winds once it crossed into 
Alabama by 0600 UTC 12 September.  The remnant low continued northwestward while 
weakening and dissipated shortly after 1200 UTC 13 September over southeastern Missouri.  
 
 
 
METEOROLOGICAL STATISTICS 
 
  
Observations in Irma (Figs. 2 and 3) include subjective satellite-based Dvorak technique 
intensity estimates from the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch (TAFB) and the Satellite 
Analysis Branch (SAB), and objective Advanced Dvorak Technique (ADT) estimates from the 
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies/University of Wisconsin-Madison.  Data 
and imagery from NOAA polar-orbiting satellites including the Advanced Microwave Sounding 
Unit (AMSU), the NASA Global Precipitation Mission (GPM), the European Space Agency’s 
Advanced Scatterometer (ASCAT), and Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) 
satellites, among others, were also useful in constructing the best track of Irma. 
Aircraft observations include flight-level, stepped frequency microwave radiometer 
(SFMR), and dropwindsonde observations from 15 flights (including 56 center fixes) of the 53rd 
Weather Reconnaissance Squadron of the U.S. Air Force Reserve Command and 8 flights 
(including 26 center fixes) of the NOAA Aircraft Operations Center (AOC).  In addition, the NOAA 
AOC G-IV aircraft flew 8 synoptic surveillance flights around Irma. 
National Weather Service WSR-88D Doppler radar data from San Juan, Puerto Rico; 
Miami, Florida; Key West, Florida; Melbourne, Florida; Jacksonville, Florida; Tampa, Florida; and 
Tallahassee, Florida, were used to make center fixes and obtain velocity data while Irma was 

Hurricane Irma     5 
 
near the U. S. coast.  Météo-France radar data from Guadeloupe and Martinique as well as radar 
data from the Institute of Meteorology of Cuba were also helpful in tracking the center of Irma. 
Selected ship reports of winds of tropical storm force or greater associated with Irma are 
given in Table 2, and selected surface observations from land stations and data buoys are given 
in Table 3. 
Winds and Pressure 
Irma’s estimated peak intensity of 155 kt from 1800 UTC 5 September to 1200 UTC 6 
September is based on a blend of multiple SFMR surface wind estimates and flight-level winds 
observed by the Air Force Reserve and NOAA Hurricane Hunters during that time period. The 
highest unflagged SFMR surface wind estimate from the Air Force Reserve was 160 kt at 1633 
UTC 5 September.  The flight-level winds measured during that mission were around the same 
speed.  The peak 700-mb flight-level winds of 164 kt, which correspond to a peak surface wind of 
145–150 kt, were measured by the Air Force Reserve early on 6 September.  The NOAA 
Hurricane Hunters measured maximum 750-mb flight-level winds of 167 kt, which correspond to 
about 150 kt at the surface, and peak SFMR winds of 152 kt.  It should be noted that this intensity 
estimate is somewhat uncertain given the disparity between the peak SFMR winds and the 
intensity supported by the highest flight-level winds.  The 155-kt peak intensity of Irma is 5 kt lower 
than the operational assessment in favor of blending the flight-level and SFMR reports.   
Irma’s estimated minimum central pressure of 914 mb at 0600 UTC 6 September is based 
on a dropwindsonde surface pressure measurement of 915 mb at 0503 UTC 6 September, which 
was accompanied by a surface wind of 15 kt. This estimate is also consistent with a weather 
station on St. Barthelemy that reported a minimum pressure of 915.9 mb, and a station on 
Barbuda that reported a minimum pressure of 916.1 mb.  The Barbuda station reported sustained 
winds of 105 kt and a gust of 139 kt when it was in the southern eyewall.  Also, an unofficial 
observation in St. Barthelemy reported a maximum wind gust of 173 kt.   
Caribbean Islands  
Around 1700 UTC 6 September, the center of Irma passed just north of Buck Island in the 
U.S. Virgin Islands, where sustained winds of 92 kt and a gust of 119 kt were reported. 
Irma’s center passed about 50 n mi north of San Juan, Puerto Rico, just before 0000 UTC 
7 September.  The lowest pressure observed on mainland Puerto Rico during Irma was from a 
National Ocean Service (NOS) station in Fajardo, which recorded a pressure of 980.1 mb at 2118 
UTC 6 September.  The highest wind speed reported in Puerto Rico was 48 kt with a gust of 64 
kt at an NOS site at La Puntilla in San Juan Bay at 2230 UTC 6 September. 
The Turks and Caicos Islands experienced the northern eyewall of Hurricane Irma around 
0000 UTC 8 September.  However, no observations were available from these locations due to 
failure of the observing equipment.  
The hurricane then took a long duration track along or near the northern coast of Cuba 
from 8 September through early 10 September.  Irma approached the northern coast of eastern 
Cuba late on 8 September, with sustained 10-minute winds of 44 kt and a peak gust of 63 kt 
observed in the town of Velasco at 1959 UTC.  The lowest pressure recorded on land that day 

Hurricane Irma     6 
 
was 991.0 mb at 2100 UTC in La Jiquima, Holguin.  Irma tracked near or over the Cuban Keys 
on 9 September and, at 1430 UTC, a coastal station at Caibarien recorded sustained winds of 85 
kt with an accompanying gust of 122 kt, and a minimum pressure of 969.9 mb when Irma’s center 
passed approximately 15 n mi northeast of that location.  The lowest recorded pressure in Cuba 
during Irma was 933.1 mb at Cayo Coco at 0520 UTC 9 September, which was in the eye of the 
hurricane at that time.  The western eyewall was also sampled at that station, with sustained 
winds of 83 kt and a gust of 105 kt observed at 0500 UTC that day. The highest wind speed 
recorded in Cuba was just inland of Cayo Coco at a station near Camilo, Cienfuegos, where 
sustained winds of 108 kt and a gust of 138 kt were measured at 0720 UTC 9 September.  Early 
on 10 September, Irma departed the coastal region of central Cuba as it turned north-
northwestward toward Florida. Tropical storm conditions continued over a portion of Cuba that 
day, with sustained winds of 49 kt and a gust of 73 kt observed at San Antonio de los Banos.  
Although observations were not available from Havana, two observations recorded tropical-storm-
force winds just southeast of the capital city. 
United States 
The earliest significant report of high winds in Florida came from an observation at Alligator 
Reef Light at 1159 UTC 10 September, where sustained winds of 62 kt and a gust of 81 kt were 
measured.  At 1204 UTC that day, a minimum pressure of 977.0 mb was recorded at that same 
station when the center of Irma was nearly 50 n mi to its west-southwest. The lowest pressure 
reported in the Florida Keys was 933.7 mb at 1216 UTC by a spotter in Big Pine Key.  The 
strongest wind speed in the Florida Keys was reported by an automated station on Big Pine Key, 
where a 104-kt gust at an observing site of 6 meter elevation was recorded (10 m is standard 
height).  
Irma made its final landfall near Marco Island, Florida, at 1930 UTC 10 September.  A 
spotter in Marco Island reported a minimum pressure of 936.9 mb, with maximum sustained winds 
of 97 kt and a gust of 112 kt.  In addition, the Marco Island Police Department reported a wind 
gust of 113 kt at 1900 UTC, and the Naples Municipal Airport reported a 123-kt wind gust around 
the same time.  Sustained hurricane force winds extended well inland over the southern Florida 
peninsula.  At Government Cut off of Miami Beach sustained winds of 65 kt at an elevation of 23 
meters occurred, and a wind gust of 97 kt was measured at Deerfield Beach.  Nearly all of the 
inland observations in the Miami-Dade and Broward County metro area reported sustained winds 
just below hurricane force.   At 1903 UTC that day, the Opa Locka Airport reported 2-minute 
averaged sustained winds of 56 kt with a gust of 74 kt, and several other nearby stations reported 
similar wind speeds.  
The hurricane continued northward across central Florida with hurricane conditions 
decreasing in areal coverage when Irma’s center approached the Orlando and Tampa areas.  
Tropical storm conditions were experienced on both the west and east coasts of the state on 10 
and 11 September.  The center passed near Plant City at 0509 UTC 11 September, where a 
spotter reported a minimum pressure of 964.4 mb.  At 0142 UTC, a couple of hours before the 
eyewall and strongest winds arrived, that spotter measured 10-second 7-meter winds of 63 kt and 
a gust to 71 kt.  Reports from both sides of the state confirmed Irma’s expansive wind field.  For 
example, buoy 42036 offshore of Tampa in the Gulf of Mexico measured 44 kt sustained winds 
at 5-meters with a 10-min averaging period at 0420 UTC 11 September.   Also in the Gulf of 
Mexico, at 0823 UTC that day, buoy 42039 offshore of Pensacola measured 37 kt sustained winds 

Hurricane Irma     7 
 
at an elevation of 4 meters.  Off the east coast, buoy 41009 off of Cape Canaveral measured 
sustained winds of 56 kt at 4 meters.  
Irma moved across north-central Florida through early 11 September and then moved into 
southeastern Georgia late that day and early 12 September.  Tropical storm conditions were 
reported across much of northern Florida, especially to the east of the center. The Jacksonville 
International Airport measured sustained 2-minute 10-meter winds of 51 kt at 1053 UTC 11 
September with a gust of 75 kt.  At the Gainesville Regional Airport, closer to where the center 
passed, a minimum pressure of 979.5 mb was observed at 1053 UTC with maximum sustained 
2-minute 10-meter winds of 40 kt.  
Several sites in Georgia and South Carolina reported tropical storm conditions from Irma 
on 11 September.  These reports include locations as far north as the Atlanta International Airport, 
which measured 2-minute 10-meter winds of 39 kt at 1910 UTC and a gust of 56 kt.  At 1609 
UTC, Charleston International Airport in South Carolina measured 2-minute 10-meter winds of 42 
kt and a gust of 52 kt.   
Figure 8 shows observed maximum sustained wind speeds during Hurricane Irma for 
Cuba and portions of the southeastern United States, and Fig. 9 show maps of maximum wind 
gusts for the same geographical areas. 
Landfall Intensity Estimates 
Barbuda: The estimated landfall intensity of 155 kt at 0545 UTC 6 September is based on 
a blend of SFMR surface wind values near 160 kt and flight-level winds of 161 kt, which reduce 
to about 145 kt at the surface, measured by the Air Force Hurricane Hunters around the time of 
landfall.  The lowest pressure observed in Barbuda was 916.1 mb. 
St. Martin: The estimated landfall intensity of 155 kt at 1115 UTC 6 September is based 
on similar data to the Barbuda landfall with SFMR values around 155 kt. 
British Virgin Islands:  The estimated landfall intensity of 155 kt at 1630 UTC 6 September 
on Virgin Gorda is based on SFMR winds around 155 kt. 
Bahamas: The estimated landfall intensity of 135 kt on Little Inagua Island at 0500 UTC 8 
September is based on flight-level winds reported by the Air Force of 147 kt, which reduce to 132 
kt at the surface, and an ADT estimate of 7.0/140 kt.   
Cuba:  The estimated landfall intensity of 145 kt near Cayo Romano at 0300 UTC 9 
September is based on SFMR winds of 145 kt measured by the Air Force a few hours before 
landfall. 
Florida Keys: The estimated landfall of 115 kt at 1300 UTC 10 September near Cudjoe 
Key is based on SFMR winds between 110 and 120 kt just prior to landfall. 
Southwest Florida: The estimated landfall intensity of 100 kt at 1930 UTC 10 September 
near Marco Island is based on a sustained surface wind measurement of 97 kt from a nearby 
weather spotter. 
 

Hurricane Irma     8 
 
Storm Surge3 
 
Caribbean 
Significant storm surge occurred on the island of Barbuda, where Irma made landfall as a 
category 5 hurricane.  A tide gauge on the island, maintained by the Antigua and Barbuda 
Meteorological Service, recorded a peak water level of 7.9 ft Mean Higher High Water (MHHW), 
suggesting that inundation of at least 8 ft above ground level occurred on parts of the island. 
Significant storm surge likely occurred on the U.S. Virgin Islands, especially on St. Thomas 
and St. John.  However, specific inundation amounts are not available.  The NOS tide gauge at 
Charlotte Amalie on St. Thomas went offline during the storm and did not transmit a peak water 
level, and the other tide gauge reports are likely not representative of the highest inundation on 
the islands.  Maximum inundation levels of 1 to 2 ft above ground level occurred along the coast 
of Puerto Rico.  The highest water level observation there from a tide gauge was 1.5 ft MHHW at 
Arecibo along the north coast of Puerto Rico. 
 
The Instituto de Meteorología de Cuba reports that Irma produced significant coastal 
flooding along the north coast of Cuba due to storm surge and large waves.  In Ciego de Ávila 
Province, the sea rose by 3 to 3.5 m (~10 to 11.5 ft) and penetrated inland more than 800 m (0.5 
miles) from the coast.  Wave heights on Cayo Coco were estimated to be between 5 and 6 m (16 
to 20 ft) high.  In Camagüey Province, water reached a height of 2 m (6.5 ft) and pushed inland 
200 m (650 ft) from the coast on Cayo Romano, where Irma made landfall as a category 5 
hurricane.  Wave heights there were observed to be over 8 m (26 ft) high.  In Puerto Piloto, the 
sea retreated offshore by 10 to 12 m (33 to 39 ft) due to the southerly winds on the eastern side 
of Irma’s circulation.  The sea rose by as much as 3 m (10 ft) in Caibarién in Villa Clara Province, 
and the surge penetrated approximately 2 km (1.2 miles) inland in Isabela de Sagua.  
Unprecedented storm surge flooding occurred in portions of La Habana Province, in some cases 
surpassing the coastal floods produced by the Storm of the Century (March 1993) and Hurricane 
Wilma (October 2005).  Water levels reached 2.25 m (7.4 ft) in some locations. 
Florida Keys   
The combined effect of storm surge and the tide produced maximum inundation levels of 
5 to 8 ft above ground level for portions of the Lower Florida Keys from Cudjoe Key eastward to 
Big Pine Key and Bahia Honda Key, near and to the east of where Irma’s center made landfall.  
NHC and WFO Key West conducted a survey of the area and found a high water mark of 6.0 ft 
above ground level in a garage on Big Pine Key.  Accounting for land elevation at the house, the 
                                               
3 Several terms are used to describe water levels due to a storm. Storm surge is defined as the abnormal 
rise of water generated by a storm, over and above the predicted astronomical tide, and is expressed in 
terms of height above normal tide levels. Because storm surge represents the deviation from normal water 
levels, it is not referenced to a vertical datum. Storm tide is defined as the water level due to the 
combination of storm surge and the astronomical tide, and is expressed in terms of height above a vertical 
datum, i.e. the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) or Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW). 
Inundation is the total water level that occurs on normally dry ground as a result of the storm tide, and is 
expressed in terms of height above ground level. At the coast, normally dry land is roughly defined as areas 
higher than the normal high tide line, or Mean Higher High Water (MHHW). 

Hurricane Irma     9 
 
high water mark measurement converts to 7-8 ft MHHW, implying that maximum inundation 
heights were 8 ft above ground level at the lowest spots near the shoreline on Big Pine Key.  
Several high water marks of at least 4 ft above ground level were also surveyed by the United 
States Geological Survey (USGS) in this area, with the highest mark being 5.45 ft above ground 
level (6.71 ft North American Vertical Datum (NAVD88) / 6.8 ft MHHW) on Little Torch Key.   
 
Maximum inundation levels of 4 to 6 ft above ground level occurred across the Middle and 
Upper Keys.  A high water mark of 4.11 ft above ground level was surveyed in Key Largo, and a 
mark of 3.72 ft above ground level was recorded in Marathon.  The NOS tide gauge on Vaca Key 
measured a peak water level of 2.6 ft MHHW.  Farther south, maximum inundation levels of 2 to 
4 ft above ground occurred on the Lower Keys west of Cudjoe Key to Key West.  The NOS gauge 
on Key West recorded a peak water level of 2.7 ft MHHW. 
 Southwestern Florida 
The combined effect of storm surge and the tide produced maximum inundation levels of 
6 to 10 ft above ground level along the unpopulated coast of southwestern Florida between Cape 
Sable and Cape Romano, within Everglades National Park and the Ten Thousand Islands 
National Wildlife Refuge (Fig. 10).  In Everglades City, a USGS storm tide sensor recorded a 
wave-filtered water level of 8.31 ft NAVD88 (which converts to 7.5 ft MHHW).  The USGS also 
surveyed two high water marks in Everglades City that were greater than 5 ft above ground level.  
In Goodland, a USGS storm tide sensor measured a water level of 7.03 ft NAVD88 (6.1 ft MHHW), 
and several high water marks of 2-3 ft above ground level were surveyed in the area.  Since Irma’s 
eastern eyewall moved onshore between Everglades City and Goodland, peak inundation along 
that portion of the coast could have been as much as 10 ft above ground level; however, there 
were no observations in that area to definitively corroborate this estimate.  Inundation of at least 
6 ft above ground level likely occurred along the coast of the remainder of Everglades National 
Park south of Everglades City.  Observations from stream gauges jointly funded by the National 
Park Service and South Florida Water Management District indicate that water levels reached 
7.01 ft NAVD88 (6.1 ft MHHW) at Shark River, 5.3 ft NAVD88 (5.5 ft MHHW) at Garfield Bight, 
and 5.5 ft NAVD88 at Lostmans River. 
 
Maximum inundation levels of 3 to 5 ft above ground level occurred along the remainder 
of the southwestern coast of Florida from Marco Island northward through Naples to Ft. Myers, 
an area which was affected by weakened onshore winds within Irma’s deteriorating western 
eyewall.  The National Ocean Service (NOS) tide gauge at Naples measured a water level of 4.25 
ft MHHW, while the gauge at Ft. Myers on the Caloosahatchee River recorded a water level of 
3.28 ft MHHW.  In addition, USGS storm tide sensors in Naples and at Delnor-Wiggins State Park 
near Naples Park measured water levels of 5.06 ft NAVD88 (4.5 ft MHHW) and 3.90 ft NAVD88 
(3.4 ft MHHW), respectively. 
 
Before inundation occurred along portions of the southwestern coast of Florida, strong 
offshore winds on the northern side of Irma’s circulation initially blew water away from the coast 
and caused water levels to recede below normal levels.  The NOS tide gauge at Naples recorded 
a minimum water level of 4.8 ft below MHHW (2.0 ft below Mean Lower Low Water [MLLW]) 
before Irma’s center arrived.  Once the center moved north of Naples and the winds shifted to 
onshore, the water level at the site increased by 9 ft in only 3 hours, and 6 ft within the first hour. 

Hurricane Irma     10 
 
Florida East Coast 
The combined effect of storm surge and the tide produced maximum inundation levels of 
4 to 6 ft above ground level for portions of Miami-Dade County in southeastern Florida, especially 
along Biscayne Bay.  A USGS storm tide sensor at Matheson Hammock Park in Miami measured 
a peak water level of 5.75 ft NAVD88 (5.6 ft MHHW), consistent with a high water mark of 5.1 ft 
above ground level which was surveyed in the park.  The NOS tide gauge on Virginia Key 
recorded a peak water level of 3.7 ft MHHW.   
Significant flooding occurred in downtown Miami; however, the flooding was likely caused 
by a combination of heavy rainfall and urban runoff, wave overwash becoming trapped behind 
seawalls, and seawater coming up from below through the city’s drainage systems.  Soil samples 
were collected by the Physical Oceanography Division of NOAA’s Atlantic Oceanographic and 
Meteorological Laboratory (AOML) in the Brickell area of downtown Miami two days after Irma, 
and their analysis indicates that there was a notable gradient of soluble salts and electrical 
conductivity of the soil from the bayfront to Brickell Avenue.  Along Brickell Bay Drive, directly 
adjacent to the bay, soluble salt concentrations averaged around 3400 parts per million (ppm), 
with an average electrical conductivity of 6-7 millisiemens per centimeter (mS/cm).  Similar 
concentration and conductivity values were analyzed from soil samples collected up to one block 
from the coast on Key Biscayne.  These soil samples can be characterized as being moderately 
saline.  The highest sampled conductivity along Brickell Bay Drive was 9.83 mS/cm, characterized 
as strongly saline.  Along Brickell Avenue, a few blocks inland from the bay, soluble salt 
concentrations averaged around 1000 ppm, with an average electrical conductivity of about 2 
mS/cm, on the threshold between non-saline and slightly saline.  AOML’s analysis suggests that 
saltwater inundation in Downtown Miami was largely confined within a block or two of the bay, 
and much of the flooding that occurred in other parts of the downtown area, including along 
Brickell Avenue, was the result of rainfall runoff that was unable to drain into the bay due to 
elevated water levels caused by the storm surge. 
 
Maximum inundation levels of 2 to 4 ft above ground level occurred across coastal 
sections of northern Miami-Dade, Broward, and Palm Beach Counties.  A storm tide sensor 
mounted to an electrical pole at a park on Biscayne Bay just north of downtown Miami measured 
a wave-filtered water level of 1.5 ft above ground level (3.35 ft NAVD88 / 3.1 ft MHHW), while a 
sensor along a canal in Pompano Beach (Broward County) recorded a wave-filtered water level 
of 3.4 ft NAVD88 (3.1 ft MHHW).  In Palm Beach County, a storm tide sensor along the 
Intracoastal Waterway in Boca Raton recorded a wave-filtered water level of 3.05 ft NAVD88 (2.7 
ft MHHW), and the NOS tide gauge at Lake Worth measured a peak water level of 1.5 ft MHHW.  
Farther north, maximum inundation levels of 1 to 3 ft above ground level occurred across coastal 
sections of Martin, St. Lucie, Indian River, and southern Brevard Counties. 
 
Even though Irma made landfall along the southwestern coast of Florida, the hurricane’s 
large wind field produced significant storm surge flooding along the northeastern coast of Florida, 
where a maximum of 3 to 5 ft of inundation above ground level occurred from Cape Canaveral 
northward to the Florida-Georgia border.  The NOS tide gauge on Trident Pier at Port Canaveral 
measured a peak water level of 4.2 ft MHHW, and a USGS storm tide sensor at Ormand Beach 
recorded a water level of 4.37 ft NAVD88 (4.5 ft MHHW).  Farther north, a storm tide sensor on 
the Matanzas River south of St. Augustine recorded a wave-filtered water level of 6.65 ft NAVD88 
(4.8 ft MHHW), and the USGS surveyed several high water marks of 2 to 4 ft above ground level 

Hurricane Irma     11 
 
in that area.  The highest was a mark of 3.3 ft above ground level near Vilano Beach.  Along the 
coast of extreme northeastern Florida, a storm tide sensor at Jacksonville Beach recorded a 
wave-filtered water level of 6.55 ft NAVD88 (4.1 ft MHHW).  In addition, the NOS gauges at 
Mayport (Bar Pilots Dock) and Fernandina Beach both measured peak water levels of 3.6 ft 
MHHW. 
 
Significant flooding occurred along the banks of the St. Johns River, likely due to a 
combination of storm surge and rainfall runoff into the river.  The NOS gauge at the I-295 bridge 
on the south side of Jacksonville measured a peak water level of 5.3 ft MHHW, while gauges at 
Southbank Riverwalk in Downtown Jacksonville and at Racy Point recorded peak water levels of 
4.9 ft MHHW and 4.0 ft MHHW, respectively.  As an illustration of the combined effect of storm 
surge and rainfall runoff, observations from a USGS station in downtown Jacksonville showed 
that salinity within the river gradually increased from less than 5 parts per thousand (ppt) on 8 
September to about 30 ppt (just a little less than the average salinity of the ocean) late on 10 
September.  These data indicate that the initial water rises were likely due to easterly winds ahead 
of Irma pushing seawater upstream in the St. Johns River.  However, the USGS data then showed 
salinity decreasing rapidly back to normal levels at the downtown site on 11 September, while the 
water level at the site continued to increase and reached its maximum about six hours after the 
salinity peak.  This suggests that the freshwater input from rainfall runoff was also a significant 
contributor to the flooding that occurred along the St. Johns River. 
Florida Central West Coast   
The combined effect of storm surge and the tide produced maximum inundation levels of 
1 to 2 ft above ground level along the west coast of Florida north of Charlotte Harbor to Apalachee 
Bay.  NOS tide gauges along the west coast, including within Tampa Bay, generally recorded 
peak water levels of a little more than 1 ft MHHW, with the highest observation being 1.7 ft MHHW 
at the McKay Bay Entrance near Downtown Tampa. 
 
Offshore winds on the northern side of Irma’s circulation initially caused water levels to 
recede below normal levels along much of the west coast of Florida, including Tampa Bay.  In 
fact, some normally submerged areas went virtually dry, allowing people to (inadvisably) walk out 
onto the sea or bay floor, while also stranding marine vessels and even manatees (Fig. 11).  At 
the McKay Bay Entrance near Downtown Tampa, the NOS tide gauge measured a minimum 
water level of 7.4 ft below MHHW (4.7 ft below MLLW), which was more than 6 ft below normal 
tide levels.  The water level in Tampa Bay at St. Petersburg was about 5 ft below normal, reaching 
a minimum of 6.0 ft below MHHW (3.7 ft below MLLW), and the water level was so low at Old 
Port Tampa that the gauge was unable to obtain a reading for several hours. 
Georgia and South Carolina   
The combined effect of storm surge and the tide produced maximum inundation levels of 
3 to 5 ft above ground level along the coast of Georgia and much of South Carolina.  In Georgia, 
the NOS tide gauge at Fort Pulaski measured a peak water level of 4.7 ft MHHW, while in South 
Carolina, the NOS gauge at Charleston recorded a peak water level of 4.2 ft MHHW.  Water levels 
of 3.4 ft MHHW and 2.9 ft MHHW were also reported at the tide gauges at Oyster Landing and 
Springmaid Pier (Myrtle Beach), respectively.  Although the storm surge produced by Irma was 
less than that produced by Hurricane Matthew (2016) along the coast of South Carolina, slightly 

Hurricane Irma     12 
 
higher tides, as well as closer timing of high tide with the peak storm surge, caused water levels 
at the Charleston and Springmaid Pier NOS gauges to exceed those observed during Matthew. 
 
 
Rainfall and Flooding  
Even though Puerto Rico did not experience a direct hit from Irma, rainfall totals between 
10 and 15 inches occurred over high elevations in the central portion of the island between 5 and 
7 September.  Irma also produced very heavy rainfall across a large portion of Cuba.  Instituto de 
Meteorología de Cuba provided multiple reports over 10 inches, with the maximum observed 
rainfall of 23.90 inches measured in Topes De Collantes.  The second highest report was in Sancti 
Spiritus where 19.02 inches was measured.  Several rivers in Cuba reached major flood stage.  
In particular, the Zaza River, in the municipality of Cabaiguán, was the most affected as Irma 
caused one of the largest measured floods of this river on record.  
Irma produced heavy rain across much of the state of Florida, and rainfall totals of 10 to 
15 inches were common across the peninsula and the Keys (Fig. 12).  The maximum reported 
storm-total rainfall was near Ft. Pierce, Florida, in St. Lucie County, where 21.66 inches of rain 
was measured between 9 and 12 September.  The heavy rainfall caused flooding of streets and 
low-lying areas across much of the Florida peninsula.  In Indian River County, 12 people were 
rescued from flood waters, and in Orange County residents were rescued from flooded homes.   
Heavy rains of 6 to 10 inches occurred across the Florida Keys.  Flooding occurred on most rivers 
in northern Florida, and major or record flood stages were reported at rivers in Bradford, Clay, 
Marion, Flagler, Duval, Putnam, St. Johns, Nassau, and Alachua counties.  The St. John’s River 
set record flood stages at many locations in Duval County, causing major flooding in the 
Jacksonville metropolitan area, where hundreds of people were rescued.  Similar flooding 
occurred in Bradford County where record flood stages were set at Alligator Creek, Hampton 
Lake, Lake Sampson, and New River.   
In Georgia, major flooding occurred in St. Simon’s Island and along the Satilla River.  
Rainfall totals were generally between 5 and 10 inches in coastal Georgia, and the maximum 
rainfall measured in the state was 10.34 inches in Nahunta in Brantley County from 11 to 12 
September.  Lesser rainfall amounts occurred over inland Georgia and South Carolina where 
rainfall totals between 3 and 7 inches were common.  In South Carolina, the maximum rainfall 
total was 9.07 inches in Beaufort from 10 to 13 September.  These rains caused some flash 
flooding and minor to moderate river flooding in South Carolina.  Several rescues occurred in 
Chatham County in Georgia and in Jasper County in South Carolina due to the flooding.  Even 
after Irma became a remnant low pressure system it still produced heavy rains in Alabama, where 
up to 5 inches accumulated.  Rainfall totals near 6 inches occurred in the mountains of western 
North Carolina. 
Tornadoes 
  
Irma produced 25 confirmed tornadoes:  21 in Florida and 4 in South Carolina (Fig 13).   
Of the tornadoes, 3 were EF-2 (on the Enhanced Fujita Scale), 15 were EF-1, and 7 EF-0.  The 
majority of the tornadoes occurred along the east coast of central and northern Florida.   One of 

Hurricane Irma     13 
 
the EF-2 tornadoes touched down in Mims, Florida, with estimated winds of 100 to 110 kt.  This 
tornado caused severe roof damage to numerous homes and uprooted many trees in the area.  
An EF-2 tornado struck near Crescent Beach, Florida, with peak winds between 95 and 115 kt.  
This tornado caused significant structural damage to vacation rentals in the area.  Another EF-2 
tornado hit Polk City, Florida, knocking down seven high power transmission poles.  
 
Weaker but still notable tornadoes in Florida included an EF-1 that went through Miramar 
and caused tree and roof damage.  An EF-1 tornado affected St. Augustine causing significant 
damage to a cemetery.  Another EF-1 tornado with peak winds in the 85 to 95 kt range occurred 
in Merritt Island and damaged numerous homes and a church. 
 
In South Carolina, the strongest tornado that occurred from Irma was an EF-1 in John’s 
Island.  This tornado caused home and tree damage along a 0.5 mile path.   
 
CASUALTY AND DAMAGE STATISTICS 
 
  
Irma caused 47 direct deaths4 as a result of its strong winds, heavy rains, and high surf 
across the Caribbean Islands and the southeastern United States.  The majority of the causalities 
were in the Caribbean Islands, where Irma’s winds were the strongest.  Eleven direct deaths were 
reported combined in Saint Martin and Saint Barthelemy, 9 in Cuba, 4 in Sint Maarten, 4 in the 
British Virgin Islands, 3 in the U.S. Virgin Islands, 3 in Barbuda, 1 in Barbados, 1 in Haiti, and 1 
in Anguilla.    
In the United States, 10 direct deaths were reported, and an additional 82 indirect deaths 
occurred, 77 of which were in Florida.  Hundreds more were injured before, during, or after the 
hurricane.  About 6 million residents in Florida were evacuated from coastal areas.  
Barbuda  
 
This small island took a direct hit from Irma at its peak intensity.  Irma’s catastrophic winds 
caused destruction across the island, damaging or destroying about 95% of the structures, 
including the local airport (Fig 14).  The island had no water or communications after the storm, 
and was considered nearly uninhabitable.  Irma caused most Barbudans to leave their island for 
Antigua, with the remaining islanders evacuating soon thereafter when Hurricane Jose 
threatened, leaving Barbuda uninhabited for the first time in 300 years.  Few residents have 
returned as of February 2018.  Preliminary estimates of property damage on the island are 
between 150 and 300 million USD.  
 
 
                                               
4 Deaths occurring as a direct result of the forces of the tropical cyclone are referred to as “direct” deaths. 
These would include those persons who drowned in storm surge, rough seas, rip currents, and freshwater 
floods. Direct deaths also include casualties resulting from lightning and wind-related events (e.g., 
collapsing structures). Deaths occurring from such factors as heart attacks, house fires, electrocutions from 
downed power lines, vehicle accidents on wet roads, etc., are considered indirect” deaths. 

Hurricane Irma     14 
 
Saint Martin/Sint Maarten 
 
Like Barbuda, Saint Martin took a direct hit from the catastrophic category 5 hurricane.   
Total damage on the island is estimated to be around 1.5 billion USD.   According to media 
reports, on the Saint Martin (French) side of the island, 90% of the structures were damaged with 
60% of those being considered uninhabitable.  Irma’s intense winds heavily damaged the marina 
and ripped trees out of the ground.  Total losses are estimated to be near 1 billion USD.   
 
On the Dutch side of the island (Sint Maarten), Irma caused severe damage to the airport 
and damaged or destroyed about 70% of the structures.  In addition to the 4 deaths, the hazards 
from Irma injured 23 people. 
St. Barthelemy  
 
St. Barthelemy was in the southern eyewall of Hurricane Irma and suffered significant 
damage, like the surrounding islands.  Preliminary assessments from the French government 
indicate that economic losses could exceed 480 million USD. 
Anguilla 
 
The northern eyewall of Irma passed over Anguilla and caused widespread damage and 
one death.  Most homes and schools were destroyed, and the only hospital on the island was 
severely damaged.  About 90% of the roads were impassable, and the strong winds uprooted 
numerous trees and power poles.  Economic losses from the hurricane are estimated to be at 
least 190 million USD.   
U.S. and British Virgin Islands 
 
Irma was responsible for three deaths in the U.S. Virgin Islands.  Damage in the U.S. 
Virgin Islands was most notable in St. Thomas and St. John (Fig 14).  In both of these islands, 
widespread catastrophic damage was reported, and the islands were stripped of most of their 
foliage.  Numerous reports of collapsed homes, businesses, and power lines were reported.  In 
addition, the fire and police stations collapsed and the hospitals experienced major damage.  In 
St. Croix, although the damage was not as severe, about 70% of the homes and structures 
suffered damage.   
 
Irma’s direct hit on the British Virgin Islands caused extensive damage there.  Four deaths 
occurred during the storm there, and numerous buildings and roads were destroyed in Tortola.  
Authorities from the islands reported that it would take several months to restore electricity.  
Puerto Rico 
 
Although Irma’s eyewall passed to the north of Puerto Rico, tropical-storm-force winds 
and heavy rains caused widespread power outages and minor damage to homes and businesses.   
Weak structures on the island collapsed and numerous trees were uprooted.  There was also a 
near-total loss of electricity and water supply for several days.  Three indirect deaths occurred in 
Puerto Rico from Hurricane Irma.  

Hurricane Irma     15 
 
In the island of Culebra, there was also a near-total power and water loss.  Many homes 
on the island were destroyed or suffered major damage, and widespread uprooted trees were 
reported.    
Turks and Caicos Islands  
 
Irma’s northern eyewall passed near or over the Turks and Caicos Islands, causing 
significant damage to the islands’ structures and communication infrastructure.  In particular, the 
island of Providenciales, including its hospital, was heavily damaged.  No deaths occurred during 
Irma, but the damage was estimated to be at least 500 million USD. 
The Bahamas 
Most of the southeastern Bahamian islands experienced hurricane conditions.  According 
to media reports, Irma damaged about 70% of the homes on Great Inagua Island, and widespread 
damage also occurred on Crooked Island. The central and northwestern Bahamas were well 
outside of Irma’s most intense winds, but many of these islands experienced tropical storm 
conditions and minor damage.    
Dominican Republic and Haiti 
 
The island of Hispaniola was not directly impacted by Irma, as the eye of the hurricane 
passed to the north of the Dominican Republic and Haiti, and damage there was minor compared 
to some of the surrounding islands.  One death was reported in Haiti from Irma. 
Cuba 
 
Irma struck a portion of the Cuban Keys as a category 5 hurricane.  Nine direct deaths in 
Cuba are blamed on Irma.  During the storm, two women on a Havana bus were killed when a 
balcony tumbled onto the vehicle.  Two men died when their home collapsed on them in Havana, 
and three men died in their individual homes in the provinces of Matanzas, Ciego de Avila, and 
Camagüey.  Also, an 89-year-old woman was found drowned in the water in front of her Vedado 
home, her death likely due to Irma’s storm surge.   
 
In terms of damage, the tourist areas of Cayo Coco, Cayo Guillermo, Cayo Santa Maria 
and the town of Calibarien (Fig. 14) were hit the hardest, with widespread damage reported in 
those areas.  Severe damage also occurred in the provinces of Ciego de Ávila and Villa Clara.  
More than 150,000 homes were damaged with nearly 15,000 completely destroyed by Irma in 
Cuba.  Irma also greatly affected the country’s poultry farms with 466 of them being destroyed.  
Across the island, uninsured losses from damage caused by Irma is estimated to be near 200 
million USD, which is the highest value in Cuba during the past 55 years. 
United States  
There were 10 direct deaths in the United States, and a breakdown by state is as follows: 
Florida – seven, Georgia – two, South Carolina – one. The NOAA National Centers for 
Environmental Information (NCEI) estimates that wind and water damage in the United States 
caused by Irma totaled approximately 50.0 billion USD, with a 90% confidence interval of 37.5 to 
62.5 billion USD. This makes Irma the fifth-costliest hurricane to affect the United States, behind 
Katrina (2005), Harvey (2017), Maria (2017) and Sandy (2012). 

Hurricane Irma     16 
 
Loss of life and specific damage by state is discussed below: 
Florida  
 There were seven direct deaths in Florida from Hurricane Irma.  The Monroe County 
Medical Examiner reported that three adult males drowned in the middle or lower Florida Keys 
during Hurricane Irma’s passage.  Two of the victims were found near the boats on which they 
lived just offshore.  The remaining circumstances and events responsible for the deaths are not 
known.  The locations where the victims were found had been subjected to extreme wind and 
ocean conditions, including large waves and storm surge.  Given the presence of multiple 
possible contributing factors, storm-related and otherwise, we are not able to conclusively 
attribute these "direct" deaths primarily to any particular hazard. 
Two direct deaths occurred in Duval County, where a 59-year-old male and a 54-year-old 
female drowned due to fresh water flooding when their tent was submerged in water in the woods.  
An 89-year-old male drowned in Manatee County when he went outside during the hurricane to 
secure his boat to the dock and fell into a canal.  In Broward County, an 86-year-old male opened 
the front door during the hurricane and a gust of wind caused him to fall and hit his head fatally.   
Of the 80 indirect deaths in Florida, a combination of falls during preparations for Irma’s approach, 
vehicle accidents, carbon monoxide poisoning from generators, chainsaw accidents, and 
electrocutions were mainly to blame.  In Broward County, 14 indirect deaths occurred in one 
nursing home due to overheating when air conditioners failed as power faltered.  
The damage was the most severe in the Florida Keys where Irma struck as a category 4 
hurricane.  In the Middle and Lower Keys, most homes were badly damaged or destroyed, and 
many structures became uninhabitable.  There were widespread power outages and extensive 
tree damage throughout the island chain.  More than 40 injuries were reported after the storm.  
More than 1,300 boats were damaged or destroyed, and many of them were displaced due to the 
storm surge.  Estimates from FEMA indicate that 25% of buildings were destroyed, 65% were 
significantly damaged, and 90% of houses sustained some damage.  Approximately 75% of the 
residents in the Keys evacuated before Irma. 
In Collier County, Florida, where Irma came ashore near Marco Island as a category 3 
hurricane, there was significant damage.  The majority of the structures in Everglades City 
suffered major wind and/or water damage.  At least 88 buildings were destroyed county-wide, and 
1,500 buildings were badly damaged.  There was heavy tree and power pole damage in Marco 
Island, Golden Gate, and portions of Naples.   
In Miami-Dade County, about 1,000 homes sustained major damage.  About 50% of the 
agricultural industry was damaged with estimated losses near 245 million USD.  Otherwise, there 
was widespread tree and power pole damage in the Miami-Fort Lauderdale metro area, and some 
damage occurred along the Biscayne Bay shoreline due to storm surge.  
Although Irma was weakening while it moved northward over Florida, there was still a fair 
amount of damage in the central portion of the state.  A combination of Irma’s strong winds, 
embedded tornadoes, and heavy rains caused minor to moderate damage to many structures 
and widespread tree damage.  In Brevard County, more than 7,000 homes sustained damage, 
including 450 that were destroyed or suffered major damage.  Moderate to locally severe beach 
erosion was observed at the coast.  Near Orlando, in Osceola County, about 4,000 structures 

Hurricane Irma     17 
 
were damaged, and the estimated cost in that county is near 100 million USD.  Irma also caused 
significant damage to the southwest and central Florida orange groves, totaling about 760 million 
USD. 
In northern Florida, flooding was the biggest issue.  Heavy rains and rivers that reached 
major or record flood stage caused significant flooding in the Jacksonville area.  Flood waters 
rushed into the city’s streets and reached up to 5 ft deep in some locations.  The flooding in 
Jacksonville was record-breaking in some locations, and overall Irma was responsible for one of 
the worst flooding events in the city’s 225+ year history.  The northeastern portion of the state 
also experienced hurricane-force wind gusts and embedded tornadoes that caused structural 
damage to homes and businesses.   There was also widespread tree and power line damage 
across the area. 
Figure 15 shows examples of some of the damage from across the state of Florida. 
Georgia 
 
Tropical-storm-force winds and heavy rains from Irma caused two direct deaths in 
Georgia.  In Fulton County, a 55-year-old man was crushed by a tree that fell on his home while 
he slept.  A 67-year-old woman in Forsythe County perished when a tree fell on her vehicle while 
she was in her driveway.  An indirect death occurred when a man in Worth County had a heart 
attack while he was climbing off the roof of his shed during Irma.   
 
In Camden County, numerous trees and power lines were damaged due to the strong 
winds.  Dozens of people were rescued by boats near the coast from flooding caused by storm 
surge and rainfall.   Across the state, there were widespread downed trees, and over 1.5 million 
people lost power during the storm. 
South Carolina 
 
One direct death occurred from Irma in South Carolina.  A 57-year-old man was fatally 
struck by a falling tree limb during the storm.  Two indirect deaths occurred from vehicle accidents 
during the storm, and another person died of carbon monoxide poisoning.   
In Beaufort County, numerous trees and power lines were downed from tropical-storm- 
force winds and tornadoes.  Storm surge damaged Fripp Island, where the sea wall was breached 
and homes were inundated.  On Lady’s Island, strong winds damaged the airport infrastructure, 
and runways were inundated.  Storm surge also caused minor damage in downtown Charleston 
and surrounding areas within the tidal zone.  Severe beach erosion occurred on the Folly Beach, 
Isle of Palms, and Sullivan Island.   
 
FORECAST AND WARNING CRITIQUE 
 
Genesis 
The genesis predictions for Irma were somewhat successful, but the cyclone formed 
sooner than predicted.  Table 4 provides the number of hours in advance of formation associated 

Hurricane Irma     18 
 
with the first NHC Tropical Weather Outlook (TWO) forecast in each likelihood category.  The 
tropical wave that led to the development of Irma was introduced in the TWO and given a low 
(<40%) chance of genesis during the next five days 78 h before Irma formed.  The system was 
given a medium (40-60%) and high chance (> 60%) 48 h and 36 h before genesis, respectively.  
For the short term (48-h) forecasts, NHC gave the disturbance a low and medium chance of 
genesis 42 h and 30 h before it formed, respectively, but it was not assessed to a have a high 
chance until 12 h before genesis occurred.  The global models were not consistent in showing 
development of Irma, and most of them were too slow in predicting its formation.  This was the 
main cause for the limited lead time of formation in the NHC forecasts. 
Track   
A verification of NHC official track forecasts for Irma is given in Table 5a.  Official forecast 
track (OFCL) errors were roughly 30-40% lower than the mean official errors for the previous 5-
yr period for all forecast times.  At 96 and 120 h, the climatology and persistence model (OCD5) 
errors were larger than their 5-yr averages, which suggests that Irma was a more difficult 
hurricane than usual to forecast at those longer time periods.  Figure 16 shows OFCL forecasts 
plotted against the best track for Irma.  The NHC forecasts had a slight left-of-track bias while the 
hurricane was over the central Atlantic, as the subtropical ridge to the north of the tropical cyclone 
weakened a little more than anticipated during the early stages of Irma’s lifecycle.  A moderate 
right-of-track bias in the NHC forecasts is evident while Irma was over the western Atlantic and 
when it was forecast to move over the southeastern United States.  Irma moved west of many of 
the predicted tracks because the subtropical ridge built westward more than expected (Fig 5c), 
which delayed the northward turn toward Florida. 
A homogeneous comparison of the official track errors with selected guidance models is 
given in Table 5b and illustrated in Fig. 17.  Among the individual models, the European Centre 
for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts model (EMXI) was the best-performing model and the only 
one to consistently beat the NHC official forecasts.  The NOAA HFIP Corrected Consensus 
Approach (HCCA) model and the Florida State Superensemble (FSSE) also performed very well 
and had lower average errors than the official forecasts at most time periods.  Figure 18 shows 
the tracks of the typically better-performing models when Irma was forecast to be near the 
Bahamas, Cuba, and the southeastern United States.  Among the guidance shown, all of the 
models had a right-of-track bias and predicted Irma to turn northward sooner and farther east over 
Florida, but the bias was the smallest in the ECMWF and UKMET models, which handled the 
large-scale steering features better than the GFS and HWRF models. 
Intensity 
A verification of NHC official intensity forecasts for Irma is given in Table 6a.  The NHC 
official intensity forecast errors were larger than their 5-yr means at all forecast times, but the 
OCD5 errors were also notably larger than their respective 5-yr means at all forecast times, 
indicating that Irma’s intensity was more difficult to forecast than for a typical tropical cyclone.   
The NHC forecasts during the early stages of Irma’s lifecycle were too low because the extended 
period of rapid intensification was under-forecast.  Conversely, the NHC forecasts did not expect 
Irma to interact with Cuba as much as it did, and consequently, Irma weakened more than 
expected when it was near that island.   

Hurricane Irma     19 
 
A homogeneous comparison of the official intensity errors with selected guidance models 
is given in Table 6b and illustrated in Fig 19.   Among the individual models, the Hurricane Weather 
Research and Forecast System (HWFI), Hurricanes in a Multi-scale Ocean-coupled Non-
hydrostatic model (HMNI), and the Coupled Ocean/Atmosphere Mesoscale Prediction System 
Tropical Cyclone model (CTCI) had similar or slightly lower errors than the NHC official forecasts.  
On the other hand, the Statistical Hurricane Intensity Prediction Scheme (DSHP), Logistic Growth 
Equation Model (LGEM), Global Forecast System (GFSI), and EMXI all had notably larger errors 
than the NHC official forecasts.  An illustration of selected intensity model biases is given in Fig 
20.  All of the models shown had a low bias beyond 36 h, with DSHP and LGEM having a 
significant low bias of around 20 kt at 96 and 120 h, which was not surprising given that Irma 
maintained its category 5 intensity for an unusually long time.  The NHC official forecasts had a 
small high bias through 48 h, and a slight low bias at later forecast hours.  
Watches and Warnings 
Coastal tropical storm and hurricane watches and warnings associated with Irma are listed 
in Table 7 and illustrated in Fig. 21.  Storm surge watches and warnings are given in Table 8.   
NHC provided support to many government meteorological services for areas around the 
Caribbean Sea, including Barbados (which has responsibility for Dominica), France (for 
Martinique, Guadeloupe, and St. Martin), Antigua (which also has responsibility for Montserrat, 
St. Kitts, Nevis, Barbuda, Anguilla and the British Virgin Islands), the Netherlands (which has 
responsibility for Saba and St. Eustatius), St. Maarten, Dominican Republic, the Bahamas, and 
Cuba.  
For the United States, a hurricane watch was first issued for the southern Florida coastline 
from Jupiter Inlet southward on the east coast and from Bonita Beach southward on the west 
coast, including the Florida Keys, at 1500 UTC 7 September.  Since sustained tropical-storm-
force winds first reached the Florida Keys within the hurricane watch area around 2100 UTC 9 
September, a lead time of 54 h was provided. The hurricane watch area was upgraded to a 
hurricane warning at 0300 UTC 8 September, a lead time of 42 h before the tropical-storm-force 
winds began.  Hurricane watches and warnings were subsequently issued at various times for 
much of the remainder of Florida.  Tropical storm watches and warnings were issued for the 
Georgia coast and much of the coast of South Carolina.   
Storm surge watches and warnings associated with Irma are given in Table 8.   At various 
points in time, the NWS issued storm surge warnings for most of the Florida coast—from the 
Florida-Georgia border southward on the east coast and from the Ochlockonee River southward 
on the west coast, including the Florida Keys, Tampa Bay, and the lower portion of the St. Johns 
River north of the I-295 bridge.  Storm surge warnings were also issued for the coast of Georgia 
and for the coast of South Carolina south of the South Santee River (Fig. 22).  NWS issued the 
initial storm surge watch for Irma along the Florida coast from Jupiter Inlet to Bonita Beach, 
including the Florida Keys, at 1500 UTC 7 September, and that same area was upgraded to a 
storm surge warning at 0300 UTC 8 September.  Storm surge watches and warnings were 
subsequently extended and modified northward along both the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts, 
encompassing almost the entire coastline from the South Santee River to the Ochlockonee River 
by 0300 UTC 10 September.  Water level observations and high water mark surveys indicate that 

Hurricane Irma     20 
 
at least 3 ft of inundation (which NHC uses at a 10% probability of occurrence as a first-cut 
threshold for the storm surge watch/warning) occurred in areas within the bounds of the storm 
surge warning area roughly from Charlotte Harbor southward around the Florida Peninsula to 
Miami-Dade and Broward Counties, including the Florida Keys.  At least 3 ft of inundation also 
occurred within the storm surge warning area from near Cape Canaveral northward to the South 
Santee River. 
 
The Storm Surge Warning north of Charlotte Harbor to the Ochlockonee River, including 
Tampa Bay, did not verify, as water level observations suggested inundations of less than 3 ft 
above ground level occurred in that area.  However, the storm surge warning along that portion 
of the coast was necessary, given that a slight westward deviation in Irma’s track, or the 
continuation of strong winds on the back side of the storm, would have produced significantly 
more inundation (Fig. 22).  Elsewhere, some portions of the southeastern coast of Florida 
generally had 3 ft or less of inundation.  The Storm Surge Warning was discontinued from North 
Miami Beach to Jupiter Inlet at 0300 UTC 10 September in anticipation of the fact that coastal 
inundation within that area would likely not reach warning criteria. 
 
NHC’s first forecast for maximum storm surge heights in Florida (at 1500 UTC 7 
September) was 5 to 10 ft above ground level within the storm surge watch area from Jupiter Inlet 
to Bonita Beach, including the Florida Keys.  By the next day, the risk of significant storm surge 
increased for the southwestern coast of Florida, and NHC’s forecast was increased to 6 to 12 ft 
above ground level from Cape Sable to Captiva at 1500 UTC 8 September and then 10 to 15 ft 
above ground level at 1500 UTC 9 September.  Maximum inundation heights from Irma were 
analyzed to be around 10 ft above ground level, at the lower end of the forecast range, in the 
unpopulated area between Cape Sable and Cape Romano.  Storm surge inundation forecasts for 
the Florida Keys (5 to 10 ft), extreme southeastern Florida (4 to 6 ft), the east coast of Florida (2 
to 4 ft), and Georgia and South Carolina (4 to 6 ft) were generally accurate, with the highest 
observations falling within each of those ranges.  However, storm surge inundation forecasts were 
generally too high for the rest of the west coast of Florida, largely because Irma made landfall 
well to the south on Marco Island.  Had the hurricane deviated only slightly to the west and made 
landfall farther up the west coast, inundation from storm surge would have been significantly 
higher in those areas (Fig. 23), and potentially devastating for the Naples-Fort Myers area. 
NHC does not have responsibility for issuing warnings for inland flooding, but coordinates 
with the Weather Prediction Center (WPC) on hazard statements included in NHC public 
products.  The risk of life-threatening flash flooding from Florida to South Carolina was first 
mentioned in the NHC Public Advisory at 1500 UTC 7 September. The threat of inland flooding 
was included as a “Key Message” in NHC’s Tropical Cyclone Discussion beginning the following 
day. 
 
Impact-Based Decision Support Services (IDSS) and Public Communication 
The NHC began providing IDSS to emergency managers on 1 September, several days 
before Irma neared the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico, and the service continued through 11 
September, when Irma was inland over the southeastern United States. The IDSS included calls 
and briefings coordinated through the FEMA Hurricane Liaison Team, embedded at NHC. The 
briefings included the territories of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, the states of Florida, 

Hurricane Irma     21 
 
Georgia, South Carolina, and FEMA Regions 4 and 2, as well as Federal/State video-
teleconferences.  At the request of the state of Florida, the NHC began to provide the state with 
twice-daily IDSS coordination calls beginning September 4, six days before landfall.  That day, 
the Florida governor declared a state of emergency. 
The NHC also collaborated with the affected NWS offices to ensure a consistent message, 
and NWS meteorologists provided IDSS for local and state emergency management offices 
during this event.   
Although the average track errors for Irma were fairly small, there were differences in the 
details of the numerical model forecasts that were key to the implied magnitude and location of 
the greatest impacts in South Florida and the Florida Keys, including whether the center would 
move closer to the east or west coast of the Florida peninsula.  Despite those differences, the 
NHC forecasts were relatively steady in showing an increasing risk for the area as Irma 
approached. Language in advisory products such as the Tropical Cyclone Discussion (TCD) and 
in media and emergency management briefings emphasized the threat and the accompanying 
uncertainty.  For example, four days before landfall, the TCD stated that "Irma is forecast to turn 
northwestward and northward, but there is still a fair amount of uncertainty regarding the exact 
timing and location of recurvature", and one of the TCD "Key Messages" at that time said, "Direct 
impacts from wind, storm surge, and rainfall are possible in the Florida Keys and portions of the 
Florida Peninsula beginning later this week and this weekend. However, given the forecast 
uncertainty at these time ranges, it is too soon to specify the location and magnitude of these 
impacts." Two days before landfall in the Keys, the TCD said "This turn will occur, but the precise 
moment is still uncertain, and that is why NHC emphasizes that nobody should focus on the exact 
track of the center."   
Due to the possibility of Irma affecting NHC in Miami, a back-up operation was initiated, 
which included a deployment of three NHC forecasters and two Central Pacific Hurricane Center 
forecasters to the NOAA Center for Weather and Climate Prediction in the Washington, D.C. area. 
While NHC maintained operations for Hurricane Irma in Miami, forecasters at the back-up location 
produced advisories for Hurricanes Jose and Katia, which were active at the same time 
as Irma.  The rest of the NHC staff continued Irma and other forecast operations, remaining within 
the office during a 36-h shelter-in-place activation coinciding with Irma’s local threat and impact. 
In addition, an NHC media pool was in operation from 5–10 September to provide live 
briefings to national and local television outlets in both English and Spanish.  NHC provided 
around 300 live interviews through the pool, comprising 201 to local television stations, 78 to 
network TV, 14 to radio stations, and 10 to print media.  It also gave more than 200 media 
interviews by phone.  NHC was also active on social media to keep the public informed in real-
time on the latest NHC/NWS forecasts and warnings, with posts on Twitter generating 98 million 
impressions and Facebook posts reaching more than 18.9 million users and causing more than 
12.9 million post engagements.  Regarding the NHC website, over 500 million pages were viewed 
between 1–30 September resulting in approximately 9 billion hits, primarily due to 
Hurricane Irma.  Just prior to Irma's landfall in Florida, the NHC website had approximately 1.1 
billion hits (57 million page views) on one day, equaling the total number of hits received during 
the entirety of Hurricane Matthew in 2016.  At advisory times, over 200,000 users were 
simultaneously accessing information on the NHC website.  The 7 billion hits attributed to Irma is 
approximately 3 times the traffic ever handled by the NHC website during a single storm event. 

Hurricane Irma     22 
 
The above-noted activities were conducted in addition to previously-mentioned support 
that NHC provided to government meteorological partner agencies in the Caribbean. 
  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
 
Data in Table 3 were compiled from Post Tropical Cyclone Reports issued by the NWS 
Forecast Offices (WFOs) in San Juan, Miami, Tampa Bay/Ruskin, Melbourne, Tallahassee, 
Jacksonville, and Charleston.  Additional data were used from reports sent by WFOs in Peachtree 
City and Columbia.  Data from the Weather Prediction Center, National Data Buoy Center, NOS 
Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services, United States Geological Survey, 
Storm Prediction Center, and the Cuban Meteorological Service were also used in this report.  
Jose Rubiera from the Cuban Meteorological Service was very helpful in sending data and 
damage information from Cuba. The authors would also like to thank the following individuals at 
the National Hurricane Center: Laura Paulik for creating the storm surge figures, Jeri Schwietert 
for producing the wind watch/warning graphic, Lixion Avila for collecting data and reports from 
Caribbean countries, Jack Beven for helping collect and quality control surface observations, and 
Gladys Rubio for translating information from Spanish to English.  Brad Klotz of the Hurricane 
Research Division was also very helpful in analyzing some of the aircraft data. 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     23 
 
Table 1. 
Best track for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 2017. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
30 / 0000 
16.1 
26.9 
1008 
30 
tropical depression 
30 / 0600 
16.2 
28.3 
1007 
35 
tropical storm 
30 / 1200 
16.3 
29.7 
1006 
45 
" 
30 / 1800 
16.3 
30.8 
1004 
50 
" 
31 / 0000 
16.3 
31.7 
999 
55 
" 
31 / 0600 
16.4 
32.5 
994 
65 
hurricane 
31 / 1200 
16.7 
33.4 
983 
80 
" 
31 / 1800 
17.1 
34.2 
970 
95 
" 
01 / 0000 
17.5 
35.1 
967 
100 
" 
01 / 0600 
17.9 
36.1 
967 
100 
" 
01 / 1200 
18.4 
37.3 
967 
100 
" 
01 / 1800 
18.8 
38.5 
967 
100 
" 
02 / 0000 
19.1 
39.7 
967 
100 
" 
02 / 0600 
19.1 
41.1 
967 
100 
" 
02 / 1200 
18.9 
42.6 
973 
95 
" 
02 / 1800 
18.7 
44.1 
973 
95 
" 
03 / 0000 
18.5 
45.5 
973 
95 
" 
03 / 0600 
18.2 
46.7 
973 
95 
" 
03 / 1200 
17.9 
47.9 
969 
100 
" 
03 / 1800 
17.6 
49.2 
965 
100 
" 
04 / 0000 
17.3 
50.4 
959 
100 
" 
04 / 0600 
17.0 
51.5 
952 
105 
" 
04 / 1200 
16.8 
52.6 
945 
110 
" 
04 / 1800 
16.7 
53.9 
944 
115 
" 
05 / 0000 
16.6 
55.1 
943 
125 
" 
05 / 0600 
16.6 
56.4 
933 
135 
" 

Hurricane Irma     24 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
05 / 1200 
16.7 
57.8 
929 
150 
" 
05 / 1800 
16.9 
59.2 
926 
155 
" 
06 / 0000 
17.3 
60.6 
915 
155 
" 
06 / 0600 
17.7 
61.9 
914 
155 
" 
06 / 1115 
18.1 
63.1 
914 
155 
" 
06 / 1200 
18.1 
63.3 
915 
155 
" 
06 / 1800 
18.6 
64.7 
916 
150 
" 
07 / 0000 
19.2 
66.2 
916 
150 
" 
07 / 0600 
19.7 
67.6 
920 
145 
" 
07 / 1200 
20.2 
69.0 
921 
145 
" 
07 / 1800 
20.7 
70.4 
922 
145 
" 
08 / 0000 
21.1 
71.8 
919 
140 
" 
08 / 0600 
21.5 
73.2 
925 
135 
" 
08 / 1200 
21.8 
74.7 
927 
135 
" 
08 / 1800 
22.0 
76.0 
925 
140 
" 
09 / 0000 
22.1 
77.2 
924 
145 
" 
09 / 0600 
22.4 
78.3 
930 
130 
" 
09 / 1200 
22.7 
79.3 
941 
110 
" 
09 / 1800 
23.1 
80.2 
938 
95 
" 
10 / 0000 
23.4 
80.9 
932 
100 
" 
10 / 0600 
23.7 
81.3 
930 
115 
" 
10 / 1200 
24.5 
81.5 
931 
115 
" 
10 / 1800 
25.6 
81.7 
936 
100 
" 
11 / 0000 
26.8 
81.7 
942 
80 
" 
11 / 0600 
28.2 
82.2 
961 
65 
" 
11 / 1200 
29.6 
82.7 
970 
50 
tropical storm 
11 / 1800 
30.9 
83.5 
980 
45 
" 

Hurricane Irma     25 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
12 / 0000 
31.9 
84.4 
986 
35 
" 
12 / 0600 
32.9 
85.6 
997 
25 
low 
12 / 1200 
33.8 
86.9 
1000 
20 
" 
12 / 1800 
34.8 
88.1 
1003 
15 
" 
13 / 0000 
35.6 
88.9 
1004 
15 
" 
13 / 0600 
36.2 
89.5 
1004 
15 
" 
13 / 1200 
36.8 
90.1 
1005 
15 
" 
13 / 1800 
 
 
 
 
dissipated 
06 / 0600 
17.7 
61.9 
914 
155 
maximum wind and 
minimum pressure 
06 / 0545 
17.7 
61.8 
914 
155 
landfall on Barbuda 
06 / 1115 
18.1 
63.1 
914 
155 
landfall on St. Martin 
06 / 1630 
18.5 
64.4 
915 
155 
landfall on Virgin 
Gorda, British Virgin 
Islands 
08 / 0500 
21.5 
73.0 
924 
135 
landfall on Little 
Inagua, Bahamas 
09 / 0300 
22.3 
77.9 
924 
145 
landfall near Cayo 
Romano, Cuba 
10 / 1300 
24.7 
81.5 
931 
115 
landfall on Cudjoe 
Key, Florida 
10 / 1930 
25.9 
81.7 
936 
100 
landfall near Marco 
Island, Florida  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     26 
 
Table 2. 
Selected ship reports with winds of at least 34 kt for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–
12 September 2017.  Note that many wind observations are taken from 
anemometers located well above the standard 10 m observation height.  
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Ship call 
sign 
Latitude 
(N) 
Longitude 
(W) 
Wind 
dir/speed (kt) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
02 / 0700 
BATFR1 
 18.6 
  42.0 
310 /  41 
1002.8 
05 / 1600 
J8PE3  
 13.6 
  61.0 
170 /  38 
1009.1 
06 / 0900 
C6FM9  
 13.2 
  59.9 
290 /  35 
1014.2 
09 / 0600 
3FOB5  
 23.2 
  82.5 
030 /  42 
1005.0 
09 / 0700 
3FOB5  
 23.2 
  82.8 
030 /  35 
1006.0 
09 / 1800 
CQGZ   
 19.4 
  80.4 
260 /  35 
1004.7 
10 / 0300 
J8PE4  
 19.4 
  80.3 
250 /  38 
1005.0 
10 / 0600 
C6FZ8  
 20.6 
  81.9 
250 /  35 
1001.0 
10 / 0600 
PLSF1  
 24.7 
  82.8 
040 /  50 
 993.4 
10 / 2000 
C6FN5  
 26.6 
  88.3 
050 /  40 
1005.1 
10 / 2100 
WMCU   
 25.9 
  77.8 
130 /  45 
1003.6 
10 / 2100 
SAUF1  
 29.9 
  81.3 
060 /  38 
1007.5 
11 / 0000 
WDD612 
 26.2 
  78.6 
120 /  64 
1000.1 
11 / 0000 
C6FN5  
 27.8 
  88.8 
060 /  52 
1006.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     27 
 
Table 3. 
Selected surface observations for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 
2017. 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Barbuda NOS Site      
(BARA9 - 9761115) 
(17.59N 61.82W) 
06/0536 
916.1 
06/0454 
105 
139 
7.94 
 
7.9 
 
Virgin Islands 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Henry E Rohlsen AP    
(TISX) 
(17.68N 64.90W) 
06/1653 
995.9 
06/1843 
33 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Cyril E. King AP 
(TIST)                 
(18.33N 64.97W) 
 
 
06/1153 
51* 
(2 min, 10 m) 
76* 
 
 
 
 
*Site damaged during storm 
Weatherflow Sites 
Buck Island      
(XBUK) 
(18.28N 64.90W) 
06/1653 
969.6 
06/1723 
92 
(12.1 m) 
119 
 
 
 
 
Rupert Rock     
(XRUP)               
(18.33N 64.93W) 
 
 
06/1750 
72 
(5.5 m) 
115 
 
 
 
 
Sandy Point NWR 
(XCRX) 
(17.68N 64.90W) 
 
 
06/1903 
36 
(14 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Savana Island  
(XSAV) 
(18.34N 65.08W) 
 
 
06/1815 
50 
(6.1 m) 
77 
 
 
 
 
NOS Sites 
Charlotte Amalie,  
St. Thomas  
(CHAV3 - 9751639)     
(18.34N 64.92W) 
06/1742 
967.5 
06/1736 
55 
85 
1.45J 
1.71J 
1.3J 
 
Lameshur Bay,  
St. John   
(LAMV3 - 9751381) 
(18.32N 64.72W) 
06/1736 
945.1 
 
 
 
1.62 
1.60 
1.2 
 
Christiansted Harbor,  
St. Croix   
(CHSV3 - 9751364) 
(17.75N 64.71W) 
06/1706 
995.0 
06/1642 
33 
50 
2.28 
2.01 
1.7 
 

Hurricane Irma     28 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Lime Tree Bay,  
St. Croix  
(LTBV3 - 9751401) 
(17.69N 64.75W) 
06/1706 
996.4 
06/1848 
43 
53 
0.60 
0.80 
0.5 
 
Puerto Rico 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Luis Munoz Marin Intl 
AP  (TJSJ) 
(18.45N 66.00W) 
06/1656 
993.4 
06/1828 
42 
(2 min, 10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Roosevelt Roads AP 
(TJNR) 
(18.25N 65.64W) 
06/1654 
991.0 
06/1905 
42 
(2 min, 10 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Weatherflow Sites 
Del Rey Marina 
(XREY) 
(18.29N 65.63W) 
 
 
06/1215 
35 
(5 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Isla Culebrita Light 
(XCUL) 
(18.34N 65.08W) 
06/1840 
952.1 
06/1815 
50 
(5min, 10 m) 
77 
 
 
 
 
Las Mareas      
(XMRS)              
(17.94N 66.26W) 
 
 
07/0104 
39 
(5 min, 10 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
San Juan NAVAID 
(XJUA) 
(18.29N 65.63W) 
 
 
06/2140 
41 
(5 min, 14.3 m) 
46 
 
 
 
 
NOS Sites 
Arecibo            
(AROP4 - 9757809) 
(18.48N 66.70W) 
07/0036 
998.7 
07/0130 
38 
47 
1.37 
 
1.5 
 
Esperanza, Vieques 
Island  
(ESPP4 - 9752695) 
(18.09N 65.47W) 
06/2006 
991.9 
06/2130 
45 
56 
1.44 
1.57 
1.2 
 
Fajardo         
(FRDP4 - 9753216) 
(18.33N 65.63W) 
06/2118 
980.1 
06/1930 
35 
50 
1.21 
 
1.2 
 
Isabel Segunda, 
Vieques Island 
(VQSP4 - 9752619)  
(18.15N 65.44W) 
 
 
06/2000 
42 
55 
1.80 
 
1.0 
 

Hurricane Irma     29 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
La Puntilla,  
San Juan Bay  
(SJNP4 - 9755371) 
(18.46N 66.12W) 
06/2300 
989.3 
06/2230 
48 
64 
1.55 
2.10 
1.3 
 
Culebra  
(CLBP4 - 9752235 
(18.30N 65.30W) 
06/1948 
981.5 
 
 
 
1.74 
 
1.0 
 
Yabucoa Harbor  
(YABP4 – 9754228) 
(18.06N 65.83W) 
 
 
06/2224 
22 
37 
1.11 
 
0.8 
 
Magueyes Island  
(MGIP4 – 9759110) 
(17.97N 67.05W) 
07/0012 
1001.9 
07/0354 
29 
39 
0.56 
 
0.7 
 
Mayaguez  
(MGZP4 – 9759394) 
(18.22N 67.16W) 
07/0018 
1001.5 
07/0606 
27 
36 
1.37 
2.00 
1.3 
 
Mona Island 
(MISP4 – 9759938) 
(18.09N 67.94W) 
07/0630 
 
 
 
 
1.47 
1.50 
1.1 
 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Barranquitas   
(USAP4) 
(18.18N 66.31W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.05 
Bayamon        
(BAYP4) 
(18.38N 66.16W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.04 
Ciales               
(VILP4) 
(18.33N 66.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.27 
Comerio        
(COMP4) 
(18.22N 66.22W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.07 
Orocovis           
(OROP4) 
(18.22N 66.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.13 
San Lorenzo    
(SLGP4) 
(18.19N 65.97W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.35 
Utuado             
(VIVP4) 
(18.27N 66.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.74 
Villalba             
(VINP4) 
(18.13N 66.48W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.50 

Hurricane Irma     30 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Cuba 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Frank País/Holguin 
Arpt (78372) 
(20.79N 76.32W) 
08/2015 
991.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.08 
Hermanos Ameijeiras/ 
Las Tunas Arpt 
(MUVT/78357) 
(20.99N 76.94W) 
08/2200 
992.9 
08/2225 
38 
(1 min, 10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
4.10 
MUCA, Venezuela 
(78346) 
(22.03N 78.79W) 
09/0700 
981.3 
09/0800 
36 
(1 min, 10 m) 
62 
 
 
 
8.33 
MUTD, Trinidad 
(78337) 
(21.78N 79.98W) 
09/1250 
983.4 
09/1417 
40 
(1 min, 10 m) 
62 
 
 
 
12.46 
Punta de Maisí Arpt 
(MUMA/78369) 
(20.24N 74.14W) 
08/0825 
996.7 
06/1612 
35 
(1 min, 10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
2.96 
Other Sites 
Aguada De Pasajeros 
(78335) 
(22.38N 80.85W) 
09/2055 
981.2 
10/0225 
36 
46 
 
 
 
6.05 
Bauta                
(78376) 
(22.97N 82.53W) 
10/0800 
997.5 
10/0235 
40 
51 
 
 
 
3.07 
Caibarien         
(78348) 
(22.52N 79.45W) 
09/1200 
969.9 
09/1430 
85 
122 
 
 
 
17.11 
Camaguey 09 
(78355/elev.122m) 
(21.40N 77.85W) 
09/0300 
982.2 
09/0350 
38 
67 
 
 
 
7.53 
Camilo Cienfuegos 
(78347) 
(22.15N 78.75W) 
09/0650 
959.8 
09/0720 
108 
138 
 
 
 
11.50 
Cantarrana       
(78344) 
(21.92N 80.17W) 
09/1800 
981.1 
09/2310 
36 
48 
 
 
 
4.63 
Caujeri             
(78319) 
(20.22N 74.81W) 
08/0400 
998.0 
08/0600 
40 
(1 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
3.41 

Hurricane Irma     31 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Cayo Coco       
(78339) 
(22.52N 78.45W) 
09/0520 
933.1 
09/0500 
83 
105 
 
 
 
 
El Jibaro           
(78341) 
(21.72N 79.22W) 
09/1000 
982.8 
09/1440 
42 
63 
 
 
 
13.79 
El Yabu             
(78343) 
(22.43N 79.98W) 
09/1500 
981.5 
09/1345 
39 
77 
 
 
 
7.56 
Esmeralda       
(78352) 
(21.85N 78.12W) 
09/0400 
965.7 
09/0400 
60 
130 
 
 
 
10.20 
Florida              
(78350) 
(21.52N 78.23W) 
09/0300 
984.2 
09/0500 
43 
73 
 
 
 
6.38 
Guaro                
(78370) 
(20.67N 75.78W) 
08/1830 
994.1 
08/1740 
40 
(1 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
4.20 
Jaguey Grande 
(78331) 
(22.63N 81.27W) 
09/1900 
982.0 
09/1940 
38 
64 
 
 
 
6.57 
Jovellanos        
(78330) 
(22.78N 81.18W) 
09/2200 
979.8 
09/2200 
50 
60 
 
 
 
3.94 
Jucaro              
(78345) 
(21.62N 78.85W) 
09/0700 
984.3 
09/0700 
38 
78 
 
 
 
7.61 
La Jiquima        
(78362) 
(20.93N 76.53W) 
08/2100 
991.0 
09/0412 
37 
(1 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
7.28 
Matanzas 4      
(78326) 
(23.02N 81.52W) 
09/1800 
976.5 
09/1450 
30 
63 
 
 
 
12.49 
Nuevitas             
(78353) 
(21.53N 77.25W) 
09/0000 
977.2 
09/0320 
42 
87 
 
 
 
7.54 
Palenque de Yatera 
(78334) 
(20.45N 74.92W) 
08/1110 
998.0 
08/1015 
23 
(1 min, 10 m) 
43 
 
 
 
16.69 
Palo Seco         
(78354) 
(21.13N 77.32W) 
09/0100 
991.0 
09/0250 
28 
60 
 
 
 
7.93 

Hurricane Irma     32 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Pinares De Miyari 
(78371/elev. 646m) 
(20.48N 75.80W) 
09/1800 
930.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.17 
Puerto Padre     
(78358) 
(21.20N 76.62W) 
09/0850 
993.7 
08/1430 
52 
(1 min, 10 m) 
69 
 
 
 
4.15 
Sagua La Grande 
(78338) 
(22.82N 80.08W) 
09/1800 
963.0 
09/1235 
68 
94 
 
 
 
11.55 
San Antonio Banos  
(78328/MUSA) 
(22.87N 82.51W) 
10/0045 
966.8 
10/0100 
49 
73 
 
 
 
4.47 
Sancti Spiritus   
(78349) 
(21.93N 79.45W) 
09/1200 
977.2 
09/1515 
45 
70 
 
 
 
19.02 
Santiago De Las 
Vegas (78373) 
(22.97N 82.38W) 
 
 
09/2100 
44 
56 
 
 
 
3.20 
Topes De Collantes 
(78342) 
(21.92N 80.02W) 
09/1300 
961.8 
09/1835 
38 
59 
 
 
 
23.90 
Union De Reyes 
(78327) 
(22.77N 81.53W) 
09/2305 
976.9 
09/1830 
41 
68 
 
 
 
4.19 
Velasco            
(78378) 
(21.08N 76.30W) 
08/1959 
998.6 
08/1728 
44 
(1 min, 10 m) 
63 
 
 
 
7.44 
NOAA and Marine Partner Buoys 
Canaveral        
(41009) 
(28.50N 80.18W) 
11/0230 
993.7 
11/0245 
56 
(1 min, 4 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
COMPS C12    
(42022)              
(27.50N 83.74W) 
 
 
 
48        
(? min, 3.1 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Edisto                
(41004) 
(32.50N 79.10W) 
11/1850 
1003.1 
11/1505 
45 
(1 min, 4 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Grays Reef        
(41008) 
(31.40N 80.87W) 
11/1450 
995.1 
11/0910 
44 
(10 min, 5 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
NE Puerto Rico 
(41043) 
(21.13N 64.86W) 
06/2200 
1007.5 
06/2346 
39 
(1 min, 4 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     33 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Pensacola        
(42039) 
(28.79N 86.01W) 
11/1050 
1000.9 
11/0823 
37 
(1 min, 4 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
San Juan         
(41053) 
(18.50N 66.10W) 
06/1900 
988.9 
06/1900 
39 
(1 min, 4 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
S. of St. John, VI 
(41052) 
(18.30N 64.80W) 
06/1100 
992.4 
06/1500 
44 
(1 min, 4 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Viques Island    
(41056) 
(18.30N 65.50W) 
06/2030 
985.7 
06/2110 
43 
(1 min, 4 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
West Tampa    
(42036)  
(28.50N 84.52W) 
11/0850 
990.9 
11/0420 
44 
(10 min, 5 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
United States 
Florida 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Albert Whitted Airport 
(KSPG) 
(27.77N 82.63W) 
11/0453 
973.8 
11/0053 
47 
(2 min, 10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Cape Canaveral AFD 
Skid Strip (KXMR) 
(28.46N 80.56W) 
11/0441 
990.1 
11/0207 
51 
(2 min, 10 m) 
70 
 
 
 
12.08 
Craig Municipal Airport 
(KCRG) 
(30.33N 81.52W) 
11/1153 
987.0 
11/1227 
40 
(2 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Daytona Beach Intl  
(KDAB) 
(29.18N 81.05W) 
11/0937 
984.8 
11/0246 
47 
(2 min, 10 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Fort Myers Page Field 
(KFMY) 
(26.58N 81.97W) 
10/2253 
952.4 
10/2216 
50 
(2 min, 10 m) 
73 
 
 
 
10.60 
Fort Pierce/St. Lucie 
Co Intl (KFPR) 
(27.49N 80.36W) 
11/0238 
987.8 
10/2306 
62 
(2 min, 10 m) 
77 
 
 
 
15.88 
Ft. Lauderdale 
Executive (KFXE) 
(26.20N 80.17W) 
10/2202 
989.5 
10/1847 
53 
(2 min, 10 m) 
72 
 
 
 
9.57 
Ft. Lauderdale 
International (KFLL) 
(26.07N 80.15W) 
10/2120 
989.0 
10/0153 
46 
(2 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     34 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Gainesville Regional 
Airport (KGNV) 
(29.68N 82.27W) 
11/1053 
979.5 
11/0527 
40 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
12.40 
Hollywood North Perry 
Airport (KHWO) 
(26.00N 80.24W) 
10/1701 
993.3 
10/1651 
49 
(2 min, 10 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Jacksonville Intl 
Airport (KJAX) 
(30.49N 81.69W) 
11/1156 
986.6 
11/0748 
51 
(2 min, 10 m) 
75 
 
 
 
9.20 
Jacksonville Naval Air 
Station (KNIP) 
(30.24N 81.68W) 
11/1153 
984.6 
11/1053 
43 
(2 min, 10 m) 
63 
 
 
 
7.08 
Key West Intl Airport 
(KEYW) 
(24.56N 81.76W) 
 
 
10/1115 
52 
(2 min, 10 m) 
82 
 
 
 
 
Leesburg Intl Airport 
(KLEE) 
(28.82N 81.80W) 
11/0820 
977.0 
11/0735 
42 
(2 min, 10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Mayport Naval Station 
(KNRB) 
(30.39N 81.42W) 
11/1152 
988.5 
11/0738 
59 
(2 min, 10 m) 
76 
 
 
 
7.96 
Melbourne Intl Airport 
(KMLB) 
(28.10N 80.64W) 
11/0532 
988.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.84 
Miami Executive/West 
Kendall (KTMB) 
(25.65N 80.43W) 
10/1718 
986.8 
10/1110 
48 
(2 min, 10 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Miami International 
(KMIA) 
(25.80N 80.29W) 
10/2116 
988.8 
10/1313 
46 
(2 min, 10 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Naples Municipal 
Airport (KAPF) 
(26.15N 81.77W) 
10/1932 
959.4 
10/1801 
53 
(2 min, 10 m) 
71 
 
 
 
 
Okeechobee County 
AP (KOBE) 
(27.26N 80.85W) 
 
 
11/0315 
40 
(2 min, 10 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 
Opa Locka Airport 
(KOPF) 
(25.91N 80.28W) 
10/2112 
988.8 
10/1903 
56 
(2 min, 10 m) 
74 
 
 
 
8.03 
Orlando Executive  
(KORL) 
(28.54N 81.33W) 
11/0804 
981.4 
11/0504 
49 
(2 min, 10 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Orlando Intl Airport 
(KMCO) 
(28.42N 81.31W) 
11/0720 
980.4 
11/0519 
51 
(2 min, 10 m) 
69 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     35 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Orlando/Sanford  
(KSFB) 
(28.77N 81.24W) 
11/0746 
982.1 
11/0651 
48 
(2 min, 10 m) 
65 
 
 
 
 
Pompano Beach 
Airpark (KPMP) 
(26.24N 80.11W) 
10/2205 
990.1 
10/2039 
60 
(2 min, 10 m) 
76 
 
 
 
 
Punta Gorda Airport 
(KPGD) 
(26.92N 81.99W) 
11/0053 
962.7 
10/2153 
44 
(2 min, 10 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Regional Southwest  
(KRSW) 
(26.54N 81.76W) 
10/2353 
958.1 
10/2153 
54 
(2 min, 10 m) 
77 
 
 
 
9.70 
Saint Augustine 
Airport (KSGJ) 
(29.97N 81.33W) 
11/0656 
994.3 
11/0506 
45 
(2 min, 10 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 
Saint Petersburg 
(KPIE) 
(27.91N 82.69W) 
11/0553 
975.0 
11/0553 
43 
(2 min, 10 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Sarasota 
Airport(KSRQ) 
(27.40N 82.55W) 
11/0353 
975.5 
11/0120 
42 
(2 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Tampa International 
Airport (KTPA) 
(28.82N 81.80W) 
11/0553 
971.8 
11/0335 
40 
(2 min, 10 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
West Palm Beach 
International (KPBI) 
(26.68N 80.09W) 
10/2320 
990.2 
10/2101 
57 
(2 min, 10 m) 
79 
 
 
 
 
Winter Haven Airport 
(KGIF) 
(28.05N 81.75W) 
11/0453 
971.5 
11/0445 
44 
(2 min, 10 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
Texas Tech University Hurricane Research Team StickNet (South Florida Observations) 
2 NNW Royal Palm 
Hammock (0111A) 
(26.04N 81.62W) 
 
 
10/2008 
74 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
99 
 
 
 
 
4 E Orangetree 
(0103A) 
(26.29N 81.51W) 
 
 
10/2151 
61 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
77 
 
 
 
 
5 SW Florida City 
(0214A) 
(25.40N 80.56W) 
 
 
10/1558 
66 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
77 
 
 
 
 
6 E Miccosukee 
Village (0105A) 
(25.76N 80.67W) 
 
 
10/1703 
48 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
9 E Miles City  
(0102A) 
(26.16N 81.19W) 
 
 
10/1636 
45 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     36 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
9 ESE Golden Gate 
(0112A) 
(26.15N 81.54W) 
 
 
10/2052 
52 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
77 
 
 
 
 
Miami Beach    
(0104A) 
(25.76N 80.12W) 
 
 
10/2239 
52 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Miles City          
(0220A) 
(26.15N 81.34W) 
 
 
10/2032 
55 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
73 
 
 
 
 
Hollywood Beach  
(0106A) 
(26.05N 80.11W) 
 
 
10/1954 
49 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Station 109A 
(26.05N 80.11W) 
 
 
10/1727 
51 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Station 110A 
(26.37N 81.76W) 
 
 
10/2142 
60 
(1 min, 2.25 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) and NOS Sites  
Clearwater Beach 
(CWBF1)    
(27.98N 82.83W) 
11/0606 
976.2 
11/0548 
62        
(6 min, 6.7 m) 
77 
1.67 
1.85 
0.9 
 
Fort Myers (FMRF1)    
(26.65N 81.87W)  
10/2324 
953.0 
10/2254 
44 
59 
3.88 
3.55 
3.3 
 
Fowey Rock    
(FWYF1) 
(25.59N 80.10W) 
10/1900 
989.5 
10/1830 
73 
(10 min, 44 m) 
87 
 
 
 
 
Fred Howard Park 
COMPS (FHPF1) 
(28.15N 82.80W) 
11/0612 
974.7 
11/0436 
60        
(6 min, 10 m) 
73 
 
 
 
 
Lake Worth Pier 
(LKWF1) 
(26.61N 80.03W) 
 
 
10/2100 
55 
79 
2.23 
2.05 
1.5 
 
Key West (KYWF1) 
(25.55N 81.81W) 
10/1236 
956.6 
10/1224 
63 
(15 m) 
81 
3.29 
2.73 
2.7 
 
Middle Tampa Bay  
(MTBF1)    
27.66N 82.59W)  
 
 
11.0130 
56 
68 
 
 
 
 
Molasses Reef  
(MLRF1) 
(25.01N 80.38W) 
10/1300 
984.7 
10/1200 
60 
(10 min, 16 m) 
78 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     37 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Naples (NPSF1) 
(26.13N 81.81W) 
10/2054 
939.7 
10/2200 
56 
72 
5.14 
4.83 
4.3 
 
Mayport (Bar Pilots 
Dock)  (MYPF1) 
(30.40N 81.43W) 
11/1218 
988.3 
11/0736 
57 
78 
6.44 
5.58 
3.6 
 
Old Port Tampa 
(OPTF1)            
(27.86N 82.55W) 
11/0418 
972.5 
11/0254 
50 
60 
2.37 
 
1.2 
 
Port Manatee 
(PMAF1) 
(27.642N 82.56W) 
11/0418 
973.3 
 
 
 
2.17 
1.87 
1.2 
 
St. Petersburg 
(SAPF1) 
(27.76N 82.63W) 
11/0506 
975.1 
10/2342 
33 
52 
2.17 
1.96 
1.2 
 
McKay Bay Entrance 
(MCYF1) 
(27.91N 82.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
3.07 
2.75 
1.7 
 
Port Canaveral - 
Trident Pier (TRDF1) 
(28.42N 80.59W) 
11/0700 
990.1 
11/0942 
46 
59 
4.60 
5.23 
4.2 
 
Pulaski Shoals Light  
(PLSF1) 
(24.69N 82.77W) 
10/1500 
986.5 
10/1200 
57 
(10 min, 12 m) 
72 
 
 
 
 
St. Augustine          
(SAUF1) 
(29.86N 81.26W) 
11/0700 
986.0 
11/0720 
59 
73 
 
 
 
 
Sand Key       
(SANF1) 
(24.46N 82.77W) 
10/1150 
966.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vaca Key (VCAF1)      
(24.71N 81.1W) 
10/1318 
964.2 
10/1342 
54 
81 
2.72 
2.20 
2.6 
 
Venice             
(VENF1) 
(27.07N 82.45W) 
11/0200 
974.9 
11/0200 
57 
(10 min, 12 m) 
69 
 
 
 
 
Virginia Key (VAKF1) 
(25.73N 80.16W) 
10/1918 
989.0 
10/1900 
46 
62 
3.92 
3.87* 
3.7 
 
Fernandina Beach 
(FRDF1) 
(30.67N 81.47W) 
11/1312 
990.0 
11/1548 
30 
52 
7.78 
6.34 
3.6 
 
Dames Point (DMSF1) 
(30.39N 81.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
5.97 
5.11 
3.7 
 

Hurricane Irma     38 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
I-295 Bridge, St. 
Johns River (BKBF1) 
(30.18N 81.68W) 
11/1142 
983.9 
11/0648 
50 
60 
5.71L 
5.63L 
5.3L 
 
Southbank Riverwalk, 
St. Johns River 
(8720226) 
(30.32N 81.66W) 
 
 
 
 
 
6.61L 
5.56L 
4.9L 
 
Racy Point, St. Johns 
River (RCYF1) 
(29.80N 81.55W) 
 
 
 
 
 
4.72L 
4.60L 
4.0L 
 
Cedar Key (CDRF1) 
(29.13N 83.03W) 
11/0936 
977.2 
11/1536 
31 
47 
2.59 
2.71 
1.2 
 
Apalachicola (APCF1) 
(29.73N 84.98W) 
11/1206 
995.6 
11/0918 
34 
45 
0.93 
1.68 
0.8 
 
Panama City (PACF1) 
(30.15N 85.67W) 
11/1942 
999.3 
11/1918 
25 
39 
0.56 
1.08 
0.3 
 
Panama City Beach 
(PCBF1) 
(30.21N 85.88W) 
11/2206 
999.4 
11/2218 
29 
38 
0.59 
1.28 
0.3 
 
Pensacola (PCLF1) 
(30.40N 87.21W) 
11/2054 
1004.0 
10/2224 
17 
28 
1.00 
1.56 
0.6 
 
Weatherflow Sites 
Alligator Reef Light 
(XALG) 
 (24.85N 80.62W) 
10/1204 
977.0 
10/1159 
62 
81 
 
 
 
 
Biscayne Bay Light 20 
(XKBS) 
(25.65N 80.19W) 
10/1824 
987.2 
10/1824 
53 
75 
 
 
 
 
Boca Raton       
(XBOC) 
(26.37N 80.08W) 
10/2038 
986.2 
10/2058 
44 
69 
 
 
 
 
Boyton Beach   
(XBOY) 
(26.54N 80.05W) 
10/2037 
989.4 
10/2017 
44 
68 
 
 
 
 
Buck Island        
(XJAK) 
(30.39N 81.48W) 
11/1235 
983.0 
11/0735 
55 
69 
 
 
 
 
Carysfort Reef Light 
(XCFL) 
(25.23N 80.21W) 
10/1325 
986.8 
10/1240 
62 
(14.3 m) 
81 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     39 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Cocoa Beach Club 
(XCOA) 
(28.31N 80.63W) 
 
 
11/0022 
47 
72 
 
 
 
 
Crandon Key 
Biscayne (XCRN) 
(25.72N 80.15W) 
10/2120 
990.8 
10/1555 
48 
65 
 
 
 
 
Crescent Beach 
Summerhouse (XHSE) 
(29.71N 81.23W) 
11/1005 
987.0 
11/1025 
47 
60 
 
 
 
 
Dania Pier         
(XDAN) 
(26.05N 80.11W) 
 
 
10/1839 
55 
70 
 
 
 
 
Dinner Key         
(XDIN) 
(25.71N 80.21W) 
10/1803 
990.3 
10/1828 
50 
71 
 
 
 
 
Dodge Island Miami 
(XDGE) 
(25.76N 80.14W) 
10/1917 
987.0 
10/1917 
48 
69 
 
 
 
 
DORAL             
(XURB) 
(25.85N 80.37W) 
10/2111 
984.7 
10/1701 
43 
(15 min, 5 m) 
67 
 
 
 
 
Grant-Valkaria - Indian 
River (XIND) 
(27.96N 80.53W) 
 
 
10/2306 
44 
58 
 
 
 
 
Government Cut 
(XGVT) 
(25.75N 80.10W) 
10/1907 
983.0 
10/1852 
65 
79 
 
 
 
 
Hobe Sound     
(XHOB) 
(27.05N 80.17W) 
 
 
10/2144 
40 
62 
 
 
 
 
Huguenot Park 
(XHUP) 
(30.41N 81.41W) 
11/1116 
985.0 
11/0746 
57 
74 
 
 
 
 
Isles of Capri    
(XCAP) 
(26.03N 81.60W) 
10/2012 
934.8 
10/1957 
62 
86 
 
 
 
 
Jacksonville Beach 
Pier (XJAX) 
(30.29N 81.39W) 
11/1010 
986.0 
11/1310 
49 
65 
 
 
 
 
Jensen Beach    
(XJEN) 
(27.22N 80.20W) 
 
 
10/2345 
48 
61 
 
 
 
 
Juno Beach Pier 
(XJUP) 
(26.89N 80.06W) 
10/2354 
987.9 
10/2354 
61 
74 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     40 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Jupiter               
(XOAK) 
(26.91N 80.07W) 
10/2126 
987.5 
10/2301 
42 
67 
 
 
 
 
Key West Coast 
Guard Sector (XSMS) 
(24.57N 81.79W) 
10/1225 
952.9 
10/1140 
53 
77 
 
 
 
 
Lewis St. Johns 
(XLWS) 
(29.91N 81.33W) 
11/1044 
984.0 
11/1149 
45 
65 
 
 
 
 
Merritt Island - Banana 
River - SR520 (XCCB) 
(28.36N 80.65W) 
 
 
11/0107 
49 
63 
 
 
 
 
Merritt Island - Banana 
River - SR528 (XMER) 
(28.40N 80.66W) 
 
 
11/0120 
51 
82 
 
 
 
 
Melbourne Beach 
Aquarina (XAQU) 
(27.94N 80.49W) 
 
 
10/2302 
48 
65 
 
 
 
 
Miramar             
(XFLM) 
(25.96N 80.30W) 
10/2152 
982.0 
10/1827 
43 
(15 min, 5 m) 
73 
 
 
 
 
Morningside Park 
Miami (XMSP) 
(25.82N 80.18W) 
10/1924 
987.5 
10/1854 
55 
73 
 
 
 
 
New Smyrna Beach 
(XNSB) 
(29.04N 80.90W) 
 
 
11/0309 
53 
71 
 
 
 
 
Port Everglades 
(XPEG) 
(26.08N 80.12W) 
10/2145 
985.2 
10/2005 
61 
74 
 
 
 
 
Port Everglades South 
(XPES) 
(26.06N 80.13W) 
10/2137 
988.1 
10/1852 
40 
71 
 
 
 
 
Smith Shoal Light 
(XSMS) 
(24.72N 81.92W) 
10/1230 
964.6 
10/1210 
67 
84 
 
 
 
 
South Key Largo 
(XSKL) 
(25.10N 80.43W) 
10/1347 
980.8 
10/1347 
54 
74 
 
 
 
 
South Miami     
(XSOM) 
(25.63N 80.30W) 
10/1730 
986.4 
10/1300 
50 
71 
 
 
 
 
St. Lucie Power Plant 
(XSTL) 
(27.35N 80.24W) 
 
 
10/2304 
62 
87 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     41 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Tamarac           
(XCVN) 
(26.19N 80.30W) 
10/2123 
986.1 
10/1853 
43 
(5 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Terminal Channel 
Jacksonville (XTRM) 
(30.33N 81.62W) 
11/1158 
983.0 
11/1143 
40 
65 
 
 
 
 
Titusville - Parrish 
Park North (XPAR) 
(28.63N 80.81W) 
 
 
11/0220 
49 
65 
 
 
 
 
Turkey Point      
(XTKY) 
(25.43N 80.35W) 
10/1726 
977.4 
10/1746 
62 
81 
 
 
 
 
Upper Matecumbe 
Key (XUMK) 
(24.92N 80.64W) 
10/1256 
976.3 
10/1436 
61 
81 
 
 
 
 
US Air Force Sites 
USAF Tower 1 
(KSC0001) 
(28.43N 80.57W) 
 
 
11/0220 
68 
(16.5 m) 
82 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 108 
(KSC0108) 
(28.54N 80.57W) 
 
 
11/0205 
49 
(16.5 m) 
81 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 211 
(KSC0211) 
(28.61N 80.62W) 
 
 
11/0220 
40 
(16.5 m) 
73 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 211 
(KSC0211) 
(28.61N 80.62W) 
 
 
11/0220 
40 
(16.5 m) 
73 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 3 – 
Lower (KSC0003) 
(28.46N 80.53W) 
 
 
11/0202 
49 
(3.7 m) 
 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 3 – 
Upper (KSC0003) 
(28.46N 80.53W) 
 
 
11/0205 
58 
(16.5 m) 
74 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 300 
(KSC0300) 
(28.40N 80.65W) 
 
 
11/0230 
56 
(16.5 m) 
79 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 311 
(KSC0311) 
(28.60N 80.57W) 
 
 
11/0220 
48 
(16.5 m) 
72 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 397 – 
Lower (KSC0397) 
(28.60N 80.57W) 
 
 
11/0015 
81 
(78.9 m) 
94 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     42 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
USAF Tower 397 – 
Upper (KSC0397) 
(28.60N 80.57W) 
 
 
11/0015 
90 
(139.6 m) 
101 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 403 
(KSC0403) 
(28.60N 80.57W) 
 
 
11/0220 
44 
(16.5 m) 
72 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 412 
(KSC0412) 
(28.61N 80.67W) 
 
 
11/0219 
56 
(16.5 m) 
76 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 418 
(KSC0418) 
(28.71N 80.73W) 
 
 
11/0145 
42 
(16.5 m) 
69 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 19 
(KSC0019) 
(28.74N 80.70W) 
 
 
11/0315 
54 
(16.5 m) 
70 
 
 
 
 
USAF Tower 506 
(KSC0506) 
(28.52N 80.64W) 
 
 
11/0130 
42 
(16.5 m) 
72 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) and HADS Sites 
Big Cypress 
Reservation (TS909) 
(26.30N 80.98W) 
 
 
11/0105 
 
49 
 
 
 
8.23 
Big Pine Key     
(TS607) 
(24.72N 81.39W) 
 
 
10/1438 
48 
(10 min, 6.1 m) 
104 
 
 
 
12.54 
Brighton Seminole 3 
NNW (TS896) 
(27.12N 81.08W) 
 
 
 
23        
(6 m) 
47 
 
 
 
7.74 
Chekika          
(CHKF1) 
(25.62N 80.58W) 
 
 
10/1723 
49 
(10 min, 6 m) 
78 
 
 
 
13.63 
Deerfield Beach 
(DFBS1) 
(26.29N 80.12W) 
 
 
10/2200 
51 
(15 m) 
97 
 
 
 
 
Golden Gate Estates 5 
SE (PHWF1) 
(26.15N 81.58W) 
 
 
10/2211 
21        
(10 min, 6 m) 
59 
 
 
 
10.41 
Homestead      
(STDF1) 
(25.50N 80.50W) 
 
 
10/1700 
45 
(15 min, 10 m) 
63 
 
 
 
9.16 
Honeymoon   
(HMRF1) 
(26.19N 81.07W) 
 
 
10/2145 
 
59 
 
 
 
10.55 

Hurricane Irma     43 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Immokalee       
(IMKF1) 
(25.50N 80.50W) 
 
 
10/2300 
56 
(15 min, 10 m) 
72 
 
 
 
14.48 
Loxahatchee NWR 
(LOHF1) 
(26.49N 80.43W) 
 
 
10/2232 
40 
66 
 
 
 
8.08 
Miles City 7 NE   
(RKIF1) 
(26.25N 81.30W) 
 
 
10/2045 
31 
(6 min, 10 m) 
65 
 
 
 
10.23 
North Key Largo 
Handar (KLNF1) 
(25.19N 80.35W) 
10/1400 
987.5 
10/1330 
45 
63 
 
 
 
7.16 
Oasis Ranger Station 
(OASF1) 
(25.86N 81.03W) 
 
 
10/1637 
39 
(10 min, 6 m) 
67 
 
 
 
9.90 
Ochopee        
(OCOF1) 
(25.90N 81.32W) 
 
 
10/1903 
55 
(10 min, 6 m) 
83 
 
 
 
9.61 
Panther East   
(PSTF1) 
(26.17N 81.36W) 
 
 
10/1711 
31 
65 
 
 
 
10.73 
Raccoon Point 
(RACF1) 
(25.98N 80.90W) 
 
 
10/1722 
 
62 
 
 
 
7.72 
Royal Palm Ranger 
Station (LPIF1) 
(25.39N 80.68W) 
 
 
10/1623 
48 
(10 min, 6 m) 
79 
 
 
 
11.31 
South Florida Water Management District Sites 
Ave Maria 
(AVEMARIA) 
(26.30N 81.43W) 
 
 
10/2200 
57 
(15 min, 8 m) 
77 
 
 
 
 
Belle Glade    
(BELLW) 
(26.65N 80.63W) 
 
 
10/2245 
44 
(15 min, 8 m) 
62 
 
 
 
 
Brighton         
(S75WX) 
(27.19N 81.13W) 
 
 
10/2345 
48 
(15 min, 8 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Clewiston         
(CFSW) 
(26.73N 80.89W) 
 
 
10/2300 
43 
(15 min, 8 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Ft. Pierce        
(NCSF1) 
(27.47N 80.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.18 

Hurricane Irma     44 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Golden Gate Estates 
(SGGEW) 
(26.14N 81.58W) 
 
 
10/2130 
47 
(15 min, 8 m) 
84 
 
 
 
10.36 
Kissimmee River 
(S65DWX)        
(27.31N 81.02W) 
 
 
10/2000 
46 
(15 min, 8 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Lake Hatchineha 
(WRWX) 
(28.05N 81.40W) 
 
 
11/0000 
36 
(15 min, 8 m) 
48 
 
 
 
6.78 
Lake Istokpoga    
(S68) 
(27.33N 81.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.82 
Lake Okeechobee 
Center (LZ40) 
(26.90N 80.79W) 
 
 
11/0030 
52 
67 
 
 
 
 
Lake Okeechobee 
North (L001) 
(27.14N 80.79W) 
 
 
11/0115 
52 
65 
 
 
 
 
Lake Okeechobee 
South (L006) 
(26.82N 80.78W) 
 
 
11/0030 
52 
62 
 
 
 
 
Lake Okeechobee 
West (L005) 
(26.96N 80.94W) 
 
 
11/0030 
55 
68 
 
 
 
 
Lake Tohopekaliga 
(S61W)             
(28.14N 81.35W) 
 
 
11/0200 
37 
(15 min, 8 m) 
70 
 
 
 
 
Miccosukee Village 
(3AS3W) 
(25.85N 80.77W) 
 
 
10/1715 
59 
(15 min, 8 m) 
75 
 
 
 
 
North Kissimmee 
River (S65AMW) 
(27.66N 81.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.69 
Ortona               
(S78W) 
(26.79N 81.30W) 
 
 
11/0015 
44 
(15 min, 8 m) 
65 
 
 
 
 
The Redland   
(S331W) 
(25.61N 80.51W) 
 
 
10/1700 
44 
(15 min, 8 m) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Rotenberger WMA 
(ROTNWX) 
(26.33N 80.88W) 
 
 
10/2130 
47 
(15 min, 8 m) 
65 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     45 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Ten Mile Creek 
(TMWF1)          
(27.40N 80.43W) 
 
 
10/1745 
39 
(15 min, 8 m) 
57 
 
 
 
11.82 
West Palm Beach 
Forrest Hill (FHCHSX) 
(26.65N 80.07W) 
 
 
10/1630 
38 
(15 min, 8 m) 
67 
 
 
 
 
Yeehaw Junction - 
(YEHF1) 
(27.68N 81.02W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.61 
United States Geological Survey (USGS) Storm Tide Sensors 
Everglades City        
(FLCOL03237) 
(25.85N 81.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.31 
 
 
Goodland             
(FLCOL03176) 
(25.92N 81.65W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.03 
 
 
Crescent Beach        
(FLSTJ03125) 
(29.76N 81.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.65 
 
 
Jacksonville Beach     
(FLDUV21045) 
(30.29N 81.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.55 
 
 
Miami – Dinner Key     
(FLMIA03335) 
(25.73N 80.24W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.75 
 
 
Lakes by the Bay – 
Black Creek Marina     
(FLMIA03786) 
(25.54N 80.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.61 
 
 
Miami – Matheson 
Hammock Park        
(FLMIA21077) 
(25.68N 80.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.36 
 
 
Marco Island – 
Tigertail Beach         
(FLCOL03171) 
(25.95N 81.74W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.20 
 
 
Naples               
(FLCOL03296) 
(26.13N 81.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.06 
 
 
Port of the Islands – 
Faka Union Canal      
(FLCOL03089) 
(25.96N 81.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.86 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     46 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Miami – Black Creek    
(FLMIA21052) 
(25.55N 80.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.84 
 
 
Bonita Springs         
(FLLEE03292) 
(26.37N 81.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.64 
 
 
Ormond Beach         
(FLVOL03138) 
(29.29N 81.05W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.37 
 
 
Henderson Creek       
(FLCOL03148) 
(26.05N 81.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.12 
 
 
Homestead – Turkey 
Point                
(FLMIA03794) 
(25.44N 80.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.07 
 
 
Delnor-Wiggins State 
Park                
(FLCOL03294) 
(26.28N 81.83W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.90 
 
 
Karl E. Johnson State 
Park                
(FLLEE03288) 
(26.40N 81.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.56 
 
 
Pompano Beach       
(FLBRO03525) 
(26.22N 80.10W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.41 
 
 
Miami – Albert Pallot 
Park                
(FLMIA03213) 
(25.81N 80.19W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.35 
 
 
Boca Raton – Silver 
Palm Park            
(FLPAL03554) 
(26.35N 80.08W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.05 
 
 
CoCoRaHS Sites 
Aberdeen             
(FL-PB-77) 
(26.56N 80.17W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.68 
Aberdeen 2 WNW   
(FL-PB-2) 
(26.58N 80.20W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.96 
Alachua  5.2 NNW   
(FL-AL-56) 
(29.84N 82.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.03 

Hurricane Irma     47 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Apopka               
(FL-OR-16) 
(28.68N 81.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.58 
Apopka               
(FL-OR-43) 
(28.67N 81.46W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.80 
Arcadia 7.1 WSW      
(FL-DS-1) 
(27.18N 81.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.34 
Auburndale 3.0 SSW 
(FL-PK-01) 
(28.03N 81.82W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.00 
Avon Park 0.6 NW   
(FL-HL-10) 
(27.60N 81.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.42 
Babson Park 0.9 NW 
(FL-PK-58) 
(27.84N 81.54W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.85 
Biscayne Park         
(FL-MD-33) 
(25.88N 80.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.19 
Belleview 4.8 E        
(FL-MR-18) 
(29.05N 81.97W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.50 
Bloomingdale 1.3 ESE 
(FL-HB-14) 
(27.87N 82.24W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.32 
Brooksville 1.2 E (FL-
HN-17) 
(28.56N 82.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.59 
Boynton Beach 1 
WNW (FL-PB-70) 
(26.54N 80.10W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.56 
Bunnell 1.0 ENE       
(FL-FL19) 
(29.47N 81.24W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.48 
Chiefland 8.4 ENE     
(FL-LV-9) 
(29.50N 82.72W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.92 
Chuluota              
(FL-SM-8) 
(28.65N 81.12W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.22 
Cudjoe Key 0.9 SSW    
(FL-MN-6) 
(24.66N 81.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.76 

Hurricane Irma     48 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
De Land              
(FL-VL-21) 
(29.04N 81.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.53 
De Land - Cocorahs 
(FL-VL-9) 
(29.10N 81.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.82 
Englewood 3.7 NNW 
(FL-SS-44) 
(27.00N 82.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.30 
Florida Gardens 3 N 
(FL-PB-87) 
(26.67N 80.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.61 
Ft. Pierce             
(FL-SL-41) 
(27.56N 80.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.25 
Gainesville 1.7 SE     
(FL-AL-26) 
(29.65N 82.32W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.94 
Gainesville 2.4 SW   
(FL-AL-50) 
(29.64N 82.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.75 
Gainesville 2.4 NW 
(FL-AL-57) 
(29.69N 82.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.22 
Gainesville 3.8 W     
(FL-AL-10) 
(29.67N 82.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.89 
Gainesville 5.4 W    
(FL-AL-48) 
(29.67N 82.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.87 
Gainesville 7.5 WSW 
(FL-AL-60) 
(29.63N 82.45W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.15 
Gainesville 7.7 W    
(FL-AL-55) 
(29.67N 82.46W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.33 
Hernando 1.6 N       
(FL-CT-11) 
(28.93N 82.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.28 
High Springs 3.2 SW 
(FL-AL-17) 
(29.78N 82.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.23 
Interlachen 8.8 S     
(FL-MR-46) 
(29.48N 81.90W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.51 
Keystone Heights 1.8 
ESE (FL-CY-24) 
(29.76N 82.01W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.36 

Hurricane Irma     49 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Keystone Heights 3.5 
ENE (FL-CY-7) 
(29.79N 81.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.78 
Keystone Heights 10 
NE (FL-CY-38) 
(29.88N 81.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.55 
Key Largo 5.3 SW     
(FL-MN-4) 
(25.05N 80.49W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.98 
Key Largo 6.2 NE     
(FL-MN-25) 
(25.17N 80.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.93 
Key West 1.3 ENE    
(FL-MN-16) 
(24.57N 81.76W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.03 
LaBelle 2 WNW        
(FL-HY-3) 
(26.76N 81.48W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.31 
Lady Lake            
(FL-LK-16) 
(28.89N 81.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.03 
Lake City 7.9 SSW    
(FL-CB-12) 
(30.08N 82.69W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.44 
Lake Wales 0.7 SE     
(FL-PK-59) 
(27.89N 81.58W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.84 
Leesburg             
(FL-LK-30) 
(28.84N 81.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.13 
Marathon 6.8 ENE   
(FL-MN-23) 
(24.74N 80.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.42 
Micanopy 2.1 NNE    
(FL-AL-51) 
(29.53N 82.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.70 
Micanopy  4.6 SSE   
(FL-MR-42) 
(29.44N 82.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.83 
Mims                
(FL-VL-49) 
(28.69N 80.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.87 
Miramar 1 WSW     
(FL-BW-10)         
(25.98N 80.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.92 
North Port 2.6 E        
(FL-SS-34) 
(27.05N 82.15W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.55 

Hurricane Irma     50 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Ocala 1.1 SE          
(FL-MR-54) 
(29.17N 82.12W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.63 
Ocala 10.7 WSW     
(FL-MR-56) 
(29.12N 82.29W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.90 
Ocala 11.2 SW         
(FL-MR-59) 
(29.07N 82.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.96 
Ocala 4.6 N           
(FL-MR-57) 
(29.25N 82.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.12 
Ocala 9.80 SW         
(FL-MR-43) 
(29.08N 82.24W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.91 
Ocala 14.3 S          
(FL-MR-36) 
(28.97N 82.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.65 
Ocklawaha 4.9 NE   
(FL-MR-22) 
(29.09N 81.87W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.00 
Orange               
(FL-OR-23) 
(28.59N 81.11W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.51 
Orange Park 1.8 WSW  
(FL-CY-25) 
(30.15N 81.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.03 
Orlando              
(FL-OR-27) 
(28.59N 81.11W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.51 
Oviedo               
(FL-SM-12) 
(28.66N 81.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.14 
Palm Coast 0.6 ESE 
(FL-FL-21)  
(29.56N 81.20W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.67 
Palm Coast 1.9 S      
(FL-FL-26) 
(29.54N 81.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.72 
Palm Coast 5.9 S     
(FL-FL-25) 
(29.48N 81.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.10 
Palm Bay             
(FL-BV-1) 
(27.95N 80.64W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.10 

Hurricane Irma     51 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Palm Shores          
(FL-BV-2) 
(28.19N 80.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.01 
Penney Farms         
(FL-CY-41) 
(29.98N 81.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.46 
Poinciana Place 2.5 
SSW (FL-PK-53) 
(28.12N 81.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.14 
Port St. Lucie          
(FL-SL-19) 
(27.32N 80.31W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.36 
Riverview 4.8 SSW    
(FL-HB-98) 
(27.80N 82.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.82 
Ruskin 1.8 ESE        
(FL-HB-44) 
(27.71N 82.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.78 
Sebring 4.7 WNW      
(FL-HL-13) 
(27.52N 81.53W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.54 
Starke 0.9 ESE        
(FL-BF-2) 
(29.94N 82.10W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.74 
The Villages 2.7 NNW 
(FL-ST-13) 
(28.90N 81.97W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.18 
Titusville              
(FL-BV-38) 
(28.63N 80.86W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.33 
Trenton 4 NW         
(FL-GC-8) 
(28.63N 80.86W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.53 
Trenton 8.0 ENE      
(FL-GC-1) 
(29.65N 82.69W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.60 
Union Park            
(FL-OR-10) 
(28.59N 81.22W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.79 
Valrico 1.1 SE         
(FL-HB-3) 
(27.93N 82.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.52 
Valrico 2.2 SE         
(FL-HB-4) 
(27.91N 82.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.31 

Hurricane Irma     52 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Vero Beach           
(FL-IR-15) 
(27.64N 80.42W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.00 
Weeki Wachee 7.1 
NNE (FL-HN-24) 
(28.61N 82.54W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.36 
Weston 2 SSE         
(FL-BW-99) 
(26.13N 80.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.80 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Bahia Honda Key 1 
WSW (BPNF1) 
(24.66N 81.28W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.58 
Boca Raton 12 W 
(WBCF1) 
(26.36N 80.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.24 
Buckhead Ridge 7 
WSW (IPEF1) 
(27.09N 81.01W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.18 
Buckhead Ridge 9 SW 
(NWLF1) 
(27.03N 81.00W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.11 
Buckhead Ridge 12 
WSW (BRGF1) 
(27.03N 81.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.30 
Buckhead Ridge 14 
WNW (IPIF1) 
(27.19N 81.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.03 
Buckhead Ridge 15 W 
(IPRF1) 
(27.12N 81.16W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.18 
Carol City 2 NW 
(LLUF1) 
(25.97N 80.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.00 
Coral Springs 3 SW 
(CSGF1) 
(26.23N 80.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.72 
Cutler Bay 3 NE 
(CTRF1) 
(25.61N 80.31W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.48 
Cutler Bay 3 SSE 
(BCPF1) 
(25.54N 80.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.07 

Hurricane Irma     53 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Deerfield Beach 2 
WNW (BORF1) 
(26.33N 80.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.76 
El Portal              
(ELPF1) 
(25.85N 80.19W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.79 
Florida City 5 SW 
(EVGF1) 
(25.40N 80.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.49 
Ft. Lauderdale 4 W 
(FTDF1) 
(26.14N 80.20W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.90 
Ft. Pierce WP     
(FPCF1) 
(27.44N 80.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.66 
Juno Beach        
(JUBF1) 
(26.86N 80.06W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.47 
Jupiter 3 W        
(JPTF1)  
(26.93N 80.14W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.32 
Lake Harbor      
(SLOF1) 
(26.70N 80.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.75 
Lakeport 2 E        
(LKPF1) 
(26.98N 81.09W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.60 
Lauderdale Lakes 1 E 
(LDLF1) 
(26.17N 80.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.68 
Leisure City 5 E 
(BHMF1) 
(25.49N 80.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.88 
Melbourne WFO 
(MLBF1) 
(28.11N 80.65W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.82 
Miami Lakes    
(MMLF1) 
(25.91N 80.32W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.33 
Miami Springs 2 E 
(MINF1) 
(25.81N 80.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.94 
Moore Haven 
(MHVF1) 
(26.84N 81.09W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.70 

Hurricane Irma     54 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Moore Haven 3 NW 
(MRHF1) 
(26.86N 81.14W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.98 
Mt. Plymouth    
(PLTF1) 
(28.79N 81.53W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.59 
Naples 7 E         
(NPLF1) 
(26.17N 81.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.46 
Plantation 2 SE 
(PLAF1) 
(26.09N 80.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.10 
Plantation7 W 
(WSTF1) 
(26.13N 80.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.81 
Pompano Beach 
(PNOF1) 
(26.23N 80.12W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.39 
Princeton           
(PRNF1) 
(25.54N 80.41W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.79 
Richmond Heights 7 
WNW (RHWF1) 
(25.66N 80.48W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.18 
Sanford             
(SFNF1) 
(28.81N 81.28W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.95 
South Bay 13 SSE 
(SWAF1) 
(26.48N 80.65W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.03 
Stuart                
(STRF1) 
(27.19N 80.24W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.53 
Sunrise              
(SNRF1) 
(26.16N 80.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.95 
Sweetwater 9 W 
(TTLF1) 
(25.76N 80.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.11 
Regional Observation Monitoring Program Sites (ROMP) 
Avon Park Romp 
43XX (7174) 
(27.60N 81.48W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.19 

Hurricane Irma     55 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Brownsville Romp 26 
(4334) 
(27.30N 81.82W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.77 
Caspersen Romp TR 
4-1 (8634) 
(27.06N 82.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.71 
Cecil Webb Romp 5 
(2754) 
(26.95N 81.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.86 
Cristina Romp 62 
(8414) 
(27.86N 82.31W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.06 
Cumpressco Romp 89 
(1834) 
(28.36N 82.04W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.34 
Dade City Romp 90 
(6174) 
(28.36N 82.14W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.67 
Davenport Romp 74X 
(8094) 
(28.16N 81.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.64 
Fort Meade Romp 45  
(1354) 
(27.76N 81.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.11 
Fort Ogden Romp 
16.5 (5094) 
(27.06N 81.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.38 
Green Swamp Romp 
87 (1254) 
(28.22N 82.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.61 
Hicoria Romp 14  
(7554) 
(27.15N 81.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.65 
Horse Creek Romp 17  
(1554) 
(27.17N 81.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.94 
Horse Lake Romp 105 
(8454) 
(28.56N 82.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.33 
Josephine Creek 
Romp 28 (2634) 
(27.37N 81.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.18 

Hurricane Irma     56 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Joshua Creek Romp 
16 (1574) 
(27.19N 82.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.04 
Kuka Romp CB-1NW 
(7274) 
(28.43N 82.48W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.47 
Lake Medard Romp 
61 (1854) 
(27.91N 82.16W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.57 
Lake Placid Romp 
28X (1494) 
(27.27N 81.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.82 
Lemon Bay Romp TR 
3-3 (7594) 
(26.93N 82.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.49 
Lily Romp 25       
(7954) 
(27.37N 81.01W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.40 
Long Island Marsh 
Romp 15 (7934) 
(27.21N 81.66W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.80 
Mulberry Romp 60 
(1314) 
(27.89N 81.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.36 
Murdock Romp 18 
(8514) 
(27.19N 82.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.00 
Myakka City Romp 23 
(1474) 
(27.31N 82.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.64 
Myakka Head Romp 
32 (1414) 
(27.47N 82.06W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.14 
North Port Romp 9 
(7834) 
(27.08N 82.15W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.03 
Old Polk City Romp 76 
(8114) 
(28.18N 81.83W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.66 
ONA Romp 31    
(1434) 
(27.45N 81.92W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.34 

Hurricane Irma     57 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Ozello Romp TR 21-2 
(1174) 
(28.85N 82.60W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.43 
Prairie Creek Romp 
12 (2834) 
(27.04N 81.74W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.51 
Ringgold Romp 107 
(1214) 
(28.66N 82.46W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.30 
Rock Ridge Romp 88 
(1874) 
(28.31N 81.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.62 
Romp 35            
(3394) 
(27.29N 82.04W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.95 
Romp 39             
(2594) 
(27.59N 82.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.37 
Romp 131           
(4434) 
(28.33N 82.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.26 
Rutland Romp 112 
(8434)  
(28.88N 82.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.48 
Shell Creek Romp 11 
(1614) 
(26.98N 81.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.79 
Starling Romp 123  
(1374) 
(27.68N 82.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.20 
Tippen Bay Romp 13 
(2614) 
(27.07N 81.62W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.96 
Tsala Apopka Romp 
116 (6734) 
(28.96N 82.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.19 
Romp TR 1-2      
(7754) 
(26.84N 81.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.98 
Romp TR 3-1     
(1594) 
(26.94N 82.22W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.33 

Hurricane Irma     58 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Romp TR 5-3     
(8574) 
(27.16N 82.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.79 
Utopia Romp 22 
(7474) 
(27.31N 82.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.21 
Warner Southern 
Romp 44 (8054) 
(27.82N 81.60W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.46 
Waterbury Romp 33  
(7694) 
(27.46N 82.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.62 
Williston Romp 134 
(6774) 
(28.75N 82.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.77 
Winter Haven Romp 
73 (8034) 
(28.02N 81.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.43 
Zolfo Springs Romp 
30 (2794) 
(27.46N 81.80W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.58 
Other Sites 
Airglades FAWN 
Clewiston (AIRGL)      
(26.73N 81.05W) 
 
 
11/0015 
59 
(15 min, 10 m) 
78 
 
 
 
 
Alachua 5 SE 
(29.72N 82.42W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.51 
Alva (ALVA) 
(26.71N 81.61W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.05 
Apopka - FAWN 
(POPF1) 
(28.64N 81.55W) 
 
 
11/0530 
32 
53 
 
 
 
11.01 
Arcadia – FAWN 
(ARCAD) 
(27.23N 81.84W) 
 
 
11/0130 
41 
67 
 
 
 
9.83 
Avon Park Bomb 
Range (AVONPK) 
(27.63N 81.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.23 
Bellair 4 W 
(29.75N 82.93W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.11 

Hurricane Irma     59 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Belle Glade 3 SE 
FAWN (BLDF1) 
(26.65N 80.64W) 
 
 
10/2245 
44 
57 
 
 
 
10.35 
Belleview 3 SSW 
(29.01N 82.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.64 
Bird Creek          
(4074) 
(29.01N 82.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.33 
Bithlo - USGS 
(WELF1) 
(28.44N 81.17W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.54 
Bonita Springs Utilities 
(BSUTIL) 
(26.34N 81.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.92 
Boca Raton 2 NNW 
(E5514) 
(26.39N 80.11W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.36 
Bowling Green   
(7114) 
(27.64N 81.84W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.94 
Bronson - FAWN       
(BRZF1) 
(29.40N 82.59W) 
 
 
11/0545 
23 
43 
 
 
 
6.81 
Broward County EOC 
(26.12N 80.27W) 
 
 
10/2100 
50 
67 
 
 
 
 
Chinsegut Hill     
(9174) 
(28.62N 82.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.65 
Christmas - Spotter 
(ORA-048) 
(28.57N 81.02W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.44 
Clewiston 7 W 
(CLWF1) 
(26.75N 80.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.65 
Coleman LP-6    
(2774) 
(28.81N 82.09W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.26 
Coley NR Frostproof 
(6070) 
(27.74N 81.53W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.45 

Hurricane Irma     60 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Collier County EOC 
(NPLCC) 
(26.11N 81.69W) 
 
 
10/2000 
71 
106 
 
 
 
 
Coral Springs 
(CRLCG) 
(26.26N 80.30W) 
 
 
10/1900 
43 
77 
 
 
 
 
Creek Ranch 
(CREEKR) 
(28.04N 81.46W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.93 
Cypress Creek TMR-5 
(2734) 
(28.26N 82.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.48 
Dade City - FAWN      
(311) 
(28.35N 82.20W) 
 
 
11/0615 
27 
42 
 
 
 
8.67 
Davie - FAWN         
(FDLF1) 
(26.09N 80.30W) 
 
 
10/1900 
30 
57 
 
 
 
9.68 
Daytona Beach Embry 
Riddle (KFLDAYTO14) 
(29.19N 81.05W) 
 
 
11/0324 
61 
70 
 
 
 
 
Deerfield Beach 
(DRFCE) 
(26.31N 80.15W) 
 
 
10/2200 
61 
87 
 
 
 
 
Doral             
(WFORT) 
(25.79N 80.34W) 
 
 
10/1800 
41 
83 
 
 
 
 
DV-1 Dover         
(1294) 
(27.99N 82.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.95 
DV-2 Dover        
(7714) 
(27.97N 82.15W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.12 
East Palatka 3.5 NNW 
(29.69N 81.62W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.96 
Fernandina Beach 
(30.65N 81.45W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.70 
Fernandina Beach   
0.4 N 
(30.66N 81.45W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.86 

Hurricane Irma     61 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Fernandina Beach    
6.3 S 
(30.56N 81.45W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.92 
Floral City Pool    
(2014) 
(28.75N 82.28W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.52 
Florence 9 N 
(29.86N 81.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.55 
Ft. Wilderness - Reedy 
Creek (M) 
(28.41N 81.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.21 
Gateway    
(GATEWAY) 
(26.57N 81.74W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.38 
Geneva - USGS 
(GNEF1) 
(28.71N 81.04W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.74 
Green Cove Springs 
2.6 WNW 
(30.00N 81.72W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.48 
Hanna Lake       
(7534) 
(28.14N 82.45W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.07 
Hernando Pool    
(2054) 
(28.90N 82.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.13 
Indian Lakes Fire 
(INDIANL) 
(27.79N 81.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.21 
Indian River - FAWN 
(IRVF1) 
(27.62N 80.57W) 
 
 
11/0400 
31 
46 
 
 
 
14.15 
Inverness Pool    
(2034) 
(28.85N 82.32W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.20 
Island Ford Lake 
(1634) 
(28.15N 82.60W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.24 
Jacksonville 6.7 WSW 
(30.30N 81.76W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.37 

Hurricane Irma     62 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Jacksonville 10 SW 
(30.24N 81.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.04 
Jacksonville 12 SSE 
(30.18N 81.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.00 
Jacksonville Heights 5 
WNW 
(30.27N 81.86W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.54 
Johnson Pond    
(2294) 
(29.50N 82.38W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.98 
Joshua - FAWN        
(241) 
(27.26N 81.61W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.72 
Lake Apopka NSRA - 
SJRWMD (M) 
(28.65N 81.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.65 
Lake Arbuckle 
(ARBCKL_P) 
(27.66N 81.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.36 
Lake Buena Vista - 
Reedy Creek (M) 
(28.39N 81.52W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.65 
Lake Gibson 2    
(2434) 
(28.10N 81.95W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.59 
Lake Hamilton    
(1754) 
(28.04N 81.64W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.68 
Lake Henry        
(1814) 
(28.08N 81.66W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.84 
Lakeland L. Field 
(KLAL) 
(27.99N 82.01W) 
 
 
11/0415 
44 
58 
 
 
 
 
Lake Lowery      
(6184) 
(28.13N 81.69W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.41 
Lake Mary - USGS 
(LSPF1) 
(28.79N 81.41W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.46 

Hurricane Irma     63 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Lakes Regional Park 
(LAKES) 
(26.53N 81.89W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.20 
Lauderhill       
(FRBCS) 
(26.12N 80.18W) 
 
 
10/1300 
43 
70 
 
 
 
 
Lecanto - FAWN       
(275) 
(28.83N 82.50W) 
 
 
11/0315 
23 
36 
 
 
 
8.41 
Lehigh Acres      
(LEHI) 
(26.61N 81.65W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.07 
Leslie Heifner     
(6774) 
(28.75N 82.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.72 
Lorida-McArthur 
(MCARTH) 
(27.44N 81.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.79 
Lovers Key 
(LOVERSKE) 
(26.39N 81.87W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.78 
Magic Kingdom - 
Reedy Creek (M) 
(28.43N 81.58W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.29 
Mandarin 4 NNE 
(30.20N 81.61W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.35 
Marco Island PD  
(25.94N 81.71W) 
 
 
10/1900 
 
113 
 
 
 
 
Marco Island – 
(Spotter)  
(25.92N 80.73W) 
 
936.9 
 
97 
112 
 
 
 
 
Big Pine Key –  
(Spotter) 
(21.67N 81.35W) 
10/1216 
933.7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Margate         
(PMPNB) 
(26.25N 80.19W) 
 
 
10/1925 
46 
69 
 
 
 
 
McIntosh            
(5074) 
(28.07N 82.14W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.51 
MIA - ITWS  
(25.80N 80.29W) 
 
 
10/1646 
58 
(1 min, 15 m) 
86 
 
 
 
 
Melbourne Shores 
(KFLMELBO72) 
(27.96N 80.51W) 
 
 
11/0325 
56 
(10.4 m) 
75 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     64 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Middleburg 8.8 E 
(30.04N 81.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.32 
Moore Haven 
(MRHMG) 
(26.83N 81.10W) 
 
 
10/2300 
47 
68 
 
 
 
 
N. Serv          
(NRESV) 
(26.71N 81.84W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.68 
Naples 1 E      
(NPLMP) 
(26.15N 81.77W) 
 
 
10/2000 
81 
123 
 
 
 
 
National Weather 
Service Miami 
(25.76N 80.38W) 
 
989.5 
10/1708 
 
70 
 
 
 
 
Near N Perry Airport 
(CLWCH) 
(26.04N 80.22W) 
 
 
10/1950 
70 
95 
 
 
 
 
North Kissimmee 
River (KREF) 
(27.75N 81.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.48 
North Port - FAWN      
(NPORT) 
(27.14N 82.34W) 
 
 
10/2330 
31 
51 
 
 
 
7.44 
Oakland Park 
(FTPCS) 
(26.20N 80.13W) 
 
 
10/2100 
43 
74 
 
 
 
 
Olga                 
(OLGA) 
(26.72N 81.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.81 
Olustee 3 N 
(30.24N 82.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.76 
Ortega 1 WNW 
(30.27N 81.72W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.11 
Palm Bay Public 
Works - SJRWMD (M) 
(27.99N 80.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.52 
Palm Bay Stp - 
SJRWMD (M) 
(28.02N 80.60W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.67 

Hurricane Irma     65 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Palmdale - FAWN      
(PALF1) 
(26.94N 81.31W) 
 
 
11/0045 
36 
59 
 
 
 
8.38 
Pana Vista Lake 
Panasoffkee (8974) 
(28.81N 82.14W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.98 
Parkland         
(PRKLN) 
(26.30N 80.27W) 
 
 
10/2000 
42 
71 
 
 
 
 
Parrish Park - 
SJRWMD (M) 
(28.76N 80.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.07 
Peace River       
(7394) 
(27.09N 82.01W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.43 
Pembroke Park 
(HLLYW) 
(25.99N 80.16W) 
 
 
10/2200 
47 
75 
 
 
 
 
Pembroke Pines 
(PBRPN) 
(26.01N 80.27W) 
 
 
10/1520 
53 
95 
 
 
 
 
Pierson - USGS 
(LGRF1) 
(29.23N 81.49W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.03 
Plant City 3 W 
(Spotter) 
(28.04N 82.16W) 
11/0509 
964.4 
11/0142 
63 
(10 sec, 7 m) 
71 
 
 
 
 
Raiford 0.9 NE 
(30.04N 82.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.62 
Ransom Rd - NASA - 
SJRWMD (M) 
(28.51N 80.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.34 
Rock Springs Well - 
SJRWMD 
(28.77N 81.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.16 
S-161 Along Harney 
Rd (6614) 
(28.02N 82.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.52 
Saddle Creek     
(1774) 
(27.94N 81.85W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.90 

Hurricane Irma     66 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Satsuma 4 NE 
(29.59N 81.61W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.05 
Sebring - FAWN        
(SEBF1) 
(27.42N 81.40W) 
 
 
11/0300 
 
49 
 
 
 
9.03 
Sebring (SEBRNG) 
(27.46N 81.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.92 
St. Augustine South  
(29.84N 81.31W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.22 
St. George Island 
Bridge (Weatherstem) 
(29.69N 84.89W) 
 
 
11/1210 
47 
47 
 
 
 
 
St Pete 42            
(3014) 
(28.18N 82.52W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.58 
Southwest Ranches 
(WSTNF) 
(26.06N 80.39W) 
 
 
10/1700 
47 
85 
 
 
 
 
Starkey               
(3154) 
(28.25N 82.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.69 
Sunrise            
(FTDST) 
(26.16N 80.25W) 
 
 
10/1700 
45 
71 
 
 
 
 
Sunrise          
(SNRSC) 
(26.16N 80.29W) 
 
 
10/2100 
42 
85 
 
 
 
 
SWFWMD 
Headquarters (7094) 
(28.47N 82.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.46 
Tampa SVC Office 
(9274) 
(28.02N 82.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.87 
Taylor 7 NNW 
(30.53N 82.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.79 
Ten Mile Canal NR 
Daniel (10MILE) 
(26.55N 81.86W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.03 

Hurricane Irma     67 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
The Villages 2.8 ESE 
(28.90N 81.97W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.59 
Tick Island-Kiss. River 
(TICK) 
(27.69N 81.19W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.38 
Umatilla - FAWN 
(UMLF1) 
(28.93N 81.65W) 
 
 
11/1100 
29 
45 
 
 
 
10.49 
University Park    
(MFL) 
(25.75N 80.38W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.96 
Urban Estates 
(NPLLV) 
(26.27N 81.75W) 
 
 
10/2100 
48 
97 
 
 
 
 
Venus          
(VENUSR) 
(27.08N 81.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.40 
Vilano Beach 4 NNW 
(30.02N 81.32W) 
11/0308 
1005.0 
10/2223 
51 
60 
 
 
 
 
Walt Disney World Svc 
Area - Reedy Creek  
(28.38N 81.59W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.21 
Wasteplant      
(WTEP) 
(26.63N 81.76W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.59 
Webster City       
(9074) 
(28.61N 82.05W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.60 
West Miami    
(MMMCH) 
(25.74N 80.30W) 
 
 
10/1540 
59 
81 
 
 
 
 
Wildwood II        
(7034) 
(28.86N 82.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.57 
Whidden Properties 
(WHID) 
(26.95N 81.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.76 
Wilton Manors 1 S 
(D0271) 
(26.14N 80.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.94 

Hurricane Irma     68 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Withlacoochee River 
(6082) 
(28.48N 82.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.31 
Wolfe Nr Jumping 
Gully (7254) 
(28.38N 82.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.49 
Yeehaw Junction - 
SJRWMD (M) 
(27.70N 80.90W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.00 
Yellow Fever Creek 
(YELLOWFE) 
(26.68N 81.90W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.78 
Georgia 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Atlanta International 
Airport (KATL) 
(33.64N 84.43W) 
12/0200 
999.0 
11/1910 
39 
(2 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Bacon County Airport - 
GA (KAMG) 
(31.54N 82.51W) 
 
 
11/1314 
 
38 
 
 
 
6.04 
Brunswick/Clynco 
Airport (KBQK) 
(31.15N 81.47W) 
 
 
11/0915 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Hunter Army Airfield 
(KSVN) 
(32.01N 81.16W) 
 
 
11/1458 
33 
51 
 
 
 
6.47 
Middle Georgia 
Regional AP (KMCN) 
(32.69N 83.65W) 
11/2110 
994.6 
11/1555 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
 
Savannah Intl Airport - 
GA (KSAV) 
(32.13N 81.20W) 
11/1956 
997.6 
11/1152 
38 
(2 min, 10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Valdosta - GA     
(KVLD) 
(30.97N 83.28W) 
11/0953 
996.5 
11/1005 
36 
(2 min, 10 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Valdosta/Moody AFB - 
GA (KVAD) 
(30.97N 83.20W) 
11/1443 
984.8 
11/1214 
38 
(2 min, 10 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN), and NOS Sites  
Fort Pulaski (FPKG1) 
(32.03N 80.90W) 
11/1706 
999.7 
11/1218 
42 
(6.5 m) 
61 
5.63 
8.18 
4.7 
 
Weatherflow Sites 

Hurricane Irma     69 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Jeckyll Island - GA 
(XJEK) 
(31.05N 81.41W) 
11/1322 
988.0 
11/1337 
50 
67 
 
 
 
 
Tybee Island North - 
GA (XTYB) 
(32.02N 80.84W) 
11/1729 
997.0 
11/1219 
43 
(10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Tybee Island South - 
GA (XTYE) 
(31.99N 80.85W) 
11/1702 
997.0 
11/1447 
43 
(9.1 m) 
55 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) and HADS Sites 
Baxley  
(BXTG1) 
(31.71N 82.39W) 
 
 
11/1504 
 
56 
 
 
 
 
Jones Island 
Okefenokee (JONG1) 
(30.82N 82.36W) 
 
 
11/1801 
 
44 
 
 
 
 
Okefenokee NWR 
East (TS818) 
(30.74N 82.13W) 
 
 
11/1801 
 
44 
 
 
 
 
Okefenokee NWR 
West (TT331) 
(30.97N 82.40W) 
 
 
11/1801 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
Sapelo Island Reserve  
(SAXG1) 
(31.42N 81.30W) 
11/1415 
994.0 
11/2000 
35 
(10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
7.20 
Sterling Glynn 
(STRG1) 
(31.25N 81.61W) 
 
 
11/1104 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
Waycross  
(OKEG1) 
(31.24N 82.40W) 
 
 
11/1004 
 
55 
 
 
 
 
CoCoRaHS Sites 
Reevesville 1 SSE 
(SC-DC-18) 
(33.18N 80.64W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.00 
Richmond Hill 1 NE 
(GA-BR-2) 
(31.94N 81.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.66 
Richmond Hill 7 ESE 
(GA-BR-5) 
(31.88N 81.20W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.67 
Rincon 5 NNE 
(GA-EF-18)  
(32.36N 81.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.86 

Hurricane Irma     70 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Darien 7 NNE 
(MERG1) 
(31.45N 81.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.00 
Fort Stewart     
(FSBG1) 
(31.96N 81.46W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.63 
Richmond Hill 3 NE 
(RICG1) 
(31.97N 81.29W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.12 
Sapelo Island (SPIG1) 
(31.39N 81.28W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.53 
Other Sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Atkinson 1 WSW 
(31.21N 81.87W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.74 
Blackshear 5 NNW 
(31.36N 82.28W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.45 
Decatur 
(33.71N 84.24W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.32 
Deenwood 2 W 
(31.25N 82.40W) 
 
 
11/0604 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
Fargo 2 NE 
(30.70N 82.54W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.66 
Folkston 10 SW 
(30.73N 82.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.30 
Homeland 
(30.85N 82.02W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.85 
Jesup 4.2 NNW 
(31.65N 81.92W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.22 
Jesup 10 NNW 
(31.73N 81.95W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.96 

Hurricane Irma     71 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Kingsland 2 SSE 
(30.75N 81.65W) 
 
 
11/0511 
 
49 
 
 
 
 
Kingsland 3 WSW 
(30.77N 81.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.84 
Little Satilla River 
(31.45N 82.05W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.14 
Nahunta 6 S 
(31.12N 81.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.34 
Pearson 3.5 NE 
(31.33N 82.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.50 
Satilla River HWY 158 
(31.30N 82.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.49 
Screven 2.3 ENE 
(31.49N 81.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.56 
Steven Foster St Park 
1 WNW 
(30.83N 82.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.66 
Steven Foster St Park 
11 NNW 
(30.98N 82.40W) 
 
 
11/0510 
 
42 
 
 
 
 
Sun Belt Ag Expo 
Weatherstem  
(31.13N 83.71W) 
 
992.2 
11/1214 
37 
41 
 
 
 
 
Suwanee River US 
Hwy 44  
(30.68N 82.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.44 
Thalmann 5 ESE 
(31.26N 81.61W) 
 
 
11/0704 
 
42 
 
 
 
9.65 
Waycross  
(31.21N 82.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.86 
South Carolina 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 

Hurricane Irma     72 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Beaufort County 
Airport - SC (KARW) 
(32.41N 80.63W) 
11/1355 
1001.4 
11/1235 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Charleston Executive 
Airport  (KJZI) 
(32.70N 80.01W) 
11/2035 
1003.4 
11/1615 
35 
(2 min, 10 m) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Charleston Intl Airport 
(KCHS) 
(32.90N 80.04W) 
11/1846 
1000.6 
11/1609 
37 
(2 min, 10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN), and NOS Sites 
Charleston (CHTS1) 
(32.78N 79.93W) 
11/1654 
1002.8 
11/1654 
42 
(8.8 m) 
53 
4.86 
6.78 
4.2 
 
Oyster Landing (N 
Inlet Estuary) (NIWS1) 
(33.35N 79.19W) 
 
 
 
 
 
4.64 
5.75 
3.4 
 
Springmaid Pier 
(MROS1) 
(33.66N 78.92W) 
12/0224 
1006.6 
 
 
 
3.27 
5.31 
2.9 
 
Folly Beach C-MAN 
(FBIS1) 
 (32.69N 79.89W) 
11/2200 
1004.3 
11/1620 
44 
(10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Sumter/Charleston 
Harbor (XSUM-FT) 
(32.75N 79.87W) 
11/1651 
1001.0 
11/1656 
43 
(12.1 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Weatherflow Sites 
 
Beaufort            
(XBUF) 
(32.34N 80.59W) 
11/1351 
995.0 
11/1356 
49 
(10 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
Charleston/Battery 
Point (XCHA) 
(32.76N 79.95W) 
11/1700 
998.0 
11/1620 
42 
(10 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Folly Beach Pier 
(XFOL) 
(32.65N 79.94W) 
11/2144 
1001.0 
11/1604 
51 
(12.8 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Isle of Palms      
(XIOP) 
(32.78N 79.79W) 
11/1830 
1002.0 
11/1645 
49 
(9.4 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Sullivans Island 
(XSUL) 
(32.77N 79.82W) 
11/1645 
1001.0 
11/1655 
46 
(12.8 m) 
59 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     73 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
CoCoRaHS Sites 
Beaufort 4 NNE     
(SC-BF-35) 
(32.47N 80.67W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.07 
Bluffton 7 W          
(SC-BF-50) 
(32.21N 80.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.13 
Bluffton 6 WNW     
(SC-BF-10) 
(32.26N 80.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.44 
Canadys              
(SC-CL-6) 
(33.05N 80.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.33 
Charleston 2 S      
(SC-CR-88) 
(32.75N 80.00W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.26 
Charleston 2 SE     
(SC-CR-89) 
(32.76N 79.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.95 
Charleston 5 SSE 
(SC-CR-13) 
(32.72N 79.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.82 
Charleston 2 W     
(SC-CR-34) 
(32.78N 80.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.90 
Charleston 3 W     
(SC-CR-11) 
(32.78N 80.05W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.30 
Cottageville 3 NNW 
(SC-CL-17) 
(32.77N 79.82W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.01 
Charleston 6 NW    
(SC-CR-45) 
(32.83N 80.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.53 
Charleston 5 WNW 
(SC-CR-97) 
(32.80N 80.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.86 
Cottageville 6 WSW 
(SC-CL-16) 
(32.89N 80.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.01 
Daniel Island 1 SE 
(SC-BK-48) 
(32.84N 79.90W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.29 

Hurricane Irma     74 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Goose Creek 5 WNW 
(SC-BK-17) 
(33.00N 80.08W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.45 
Hollywood 2 S       
(SC-CR-10) 
(32.75N 80.24W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.38 
Lodge 3 SW           
(SC-CL-9) 
(33.02N 80.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.97 
Meggett 2 W         
(SC-CR-32) 
(32.70N 80.29W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.27 
Moncks Corner 4 E 
(SC-BK-38) 
(33.19N 79.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.28 
Moncks Corner 7 SW 
(SC-BK-25) 
(33.11N 80.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.33 
NWS Charleston   
(SC-CR-49) 
(32.89N 80.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.30 
North Charleston 3 
NW (SC-CR-34) 
(32.92N 80.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.82 
North Charleston 3 
WNW (SC-DC-3) 
(32.92N 80.08W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.87 
Pineville              
(SC-BK-29) 
(33.42N 80.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.10 
Ravenel 2 WNW    
(SC-CR-92) 
(32.78N 80.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.48 
Reevesville 1 SSE 
(SC-DC-18) 
(33.18N 80.64W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.00 
Summerville 2 N     
(SC-DC-41) 
(33.03N 80.17W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.51 
Summerville10 NNE 
(SC-BK-43) 
(33.12N 80.09W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.24 

Hurricane Irma     75 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Summerville 5 NNW 
(SC-BK-46) 
(33.07N 80.22W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.43 
Summerville 2 SSE 
(SC-DC-52) 
(32.97N 80.17W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.28 
Summerville 1 SSW 
(SC-DC-36) 
(32.98N 80.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.02 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Edisto Island 
Middleton (EDSS1) 
(32.60N 80.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.10 
Sullivans Island 
(SULS1) 
(32.76N 79.85W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.26 
Summerville 4 W 
(SMVS1) 
(33.03N 80.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.35 
Yemassee 1 N 
(YEMS1) 
(32.70N 80.85W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.00 
Other Sites 
Bennetts Point 
(ACXS1) 
(32.55N 80.45W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.06 
Charleston 6 NW 
(BEES1) 
(32.83N 80.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.97 
Furman 1 SW 
(YMFS1) 
(32.66N 81.20W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.22 
Mount Pleasant 
(MWPS1) 
(32.80N 79.90W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.44 
 
A  Date/time is for sustained wind when both sustained and gust are listed. 
B  Except as noted, sustained wind averaging periods for C-MAN and land-based reports are 2 min; buoy averaging 
periods are 8 min. 
C  Storm surge is water height above normal astronomical tide level. 
D  Storm tide is water height above the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) in the continental United 
States.  Storm tide is water height above the Puerto Rico Vertical Datum of 2002 (PRVD02) in Puerto Rico and 
above the Virgin Islands Vertical Datum of 2009 (VIVD09) in the U.S. Virgin Islands. 

Hurricane Irma     76 
 
 
 
 
Table 4. 
Number of hours in advance of formation associated with the first NHC Tropical 
Weather Outlook forecast in the indicated likelihood category.  Note that the 
timings for the “Low” category do not include forecasts of a 0% chance of genesis. 
 
 
Hours Before Genesis 
48-Hour Outlook 
120-Hour Outlook 
Low (<40%) 
42 
78 
Medium (40%-60%) 
30 
48 
High (>60%) 
12 
36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E  Estimated inundation is the maximum height of water above ground.  For NOS tide gauges, the height of the water 
above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW) is used as a proxy for inundation. 
F   Last of several occurrences.     
G   Wind speed data missing 0510-0650 UTC 3 October 2016.   
H   All wind data missing 0800-1000 UTC 6 October 2016. 
I   Record water level. 
J   Station went offline and did not transmit a peak water level during the event.  Peak values represent the highest 
transmitted prior to outage. 
K   All wind data missing 1300 UTC 9 October – 0200 10 October 2016. 
L   Water levels within the St. Johns River are were affected by a combination of storm surge and freshwater runoff. 

Hurricane Irma     77 
 
Table 5a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) track 
forecast errors (n mi) for forecasts issued for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 
September 2017.  Mean errors for the previous 5-yr period are shown for 
comparison.  Official errors that are smaller than the 5-yr means are shown in 
boldface type. 
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
14.8 
25.5 
37.6 
50.5 
73.9 
101.8 
135.0 
OCD5 
31.2 
74.3 
122.2 
175.8 
291.7 
463.2 
677.1 
Forecasts 
49 
47 
45 
43 
39 
35 
31 
OFCL (2012-16) 
24.9 
39.6 
54.0 
71.3 
105.8 
155.4 
208.9 
OCD5 (2012-16) 
47.3 
103.9 
167.8 
230.3 
343.1 
442.6 
531.0 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     78 
 
Table 5b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected track forecast guidance models (in n mi) 
for forecasts issued for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 2017.  Errors 
smaller than the NHC official forecast are shown in boldface type. The number of 
official forecasts shown here will generally be smaller than that shown in Table 5a 
due to the homogeneity requirement. 
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
14.5 
25.8 
38.9 
51.8 
74.7 
104.2 
140.2 
OCD5 
29.9 
73.8 
124.2 
181.0 
302.0 
473.4 
691.0 
GFSI 
18.7 
33.7 
50.5 
68.2 
105.5 
153.7 
205.5 
HMNI 
18.1 
31.9 
45.2 
63.8 
110.0 
156.6 
213.6 
HWFI 
20.5 
37.9 
52.5 
67.0 
87.8 
117.1 
150.8 
EGRI 
15.2 
27.1 
43.7 
64.2 
113.8 
170.3 
212.5 
EMXI 
14.3 
23.3 
33.2 
40.3 
54.9 
78.2 
119.5 
CMCI 
20.6 
33.2 
47.8 
61.5 
87.8 
129.5 
182.1 
CTCI 
19.5 
38.8 
58.6 
80.9 
136.5 
208.5 
296.7 
AEMI 
18.9 
32.1 
46.9 
62.7 
94.8 
138.7 
188.5 
HCCA 
14.5 
26.1 
37.7 
47.8 
65.1 
84.7 
106.8 
TVCA 
15.2 
27.6 
40.9 
55.7 
89.2 
129.8 
176.6 
TVCX 
14.1 
26.4 
39.1 
53.0 
82.4 
119.5 
165.1 
FSSE 
14.9 
25.0 
35.7 
43.7 
64.1 
97.0 
120.6 
GFEX 
14.2 
26.1 
39.6 
52.2 
77.9 
111.5 
152.2 
TABS 
29.3 
44.9 
56.9 
64.5 
89.2 
137.8 
190.2 
TABM 
20.1 
33.5 
51.9 
68.7 
99.9 
147.6 
193.4 
TABD 
24.9 
56.7 
75.7 
84.1 
109.2 
154.9 
207.1 
Forecasts 
45 
43 
41 
39 
35 
31 
27 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     79 
 
Table 6a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) intensity 
forecast errors (kt) for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 2017.  Mean 
errors for the previous 5-yr period are shown for comparison.  Official errors that 
are smaller than the 5-yr means are shown in boldface type.   
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
9.0 
12.4 
15.8 
17.4 
18.7 
24.9 
29.7 
OCD5 
11.0 
17.1 
22.3 
27.0 
33.5 
39.8 
39.5 
Forecasts 
49 
47 
45 
43 
39 
35 
31 
OFCL (2012-16) 
5.5 
8.2 
10.5 
12.0 
13.4 
14.0 
14.5 
OCD5 (2012-16) 
7.1 
10.5 
13.0 
15.1 
17.4 
18.2 
20.6 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     80 
 
Table 6b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected intensity forecast guidance models (in kt) 
for forecasts issued for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 2017.  Errors 
smaller than the NHC official forecast are shown in boldface type. The number of 
official forecasts shown here will generally be smaller than that shown in Table 6a 
due to the homogeneity requirement. 
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
9.0 
11.6 
15.1 
17.3 
19.4 
26.1 
30.2 
OCD5 
10.9 
16.1 
21.3 
26.6 
34.3 
40.7 
38.9 
HMNI 
8.9 
9.8 
13.2 
15.8 
19.5 
25.6 
28.1 
HWFI 
8.7 
11.7 
13.2 
14.1 
15.4 
22.1 
30.0 
CTCI 
9.3 
11.9 
14.6 
16.6 
14.7 
15.8 
23.9 
DSHP 
10.0 
14.4 
18.3 
19.0 
23.3 
30.9 
34.4 
LGEM 
9.6 
13.6 
18.1 
18.4 
21.8 
30.1 
33.5 
IVCN 
8.1 
10.4 
13.1 
14.1 
16.1 
23.8 
28.7 
HCCA 
7.9 
10.4 
12.7 
14.0 
16.0 
24.4 
33.1 
FSSE 
8.0 
9.9 
11.6 
12.5 
17.6 
28.7 
33.9 
GFSI 
10.4 
13.8 
16.6 
20.6 
27.3 
32.7 
35.0 
EMXI 
12.8 
19.2 
25.4 
29.6 
33.3 
33.4 
32.5 
Forecasts 
46 
44 
42 
40 
36 
32 
28 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     81 
 
Table 7. 
Hurricane and tropical storm watch and warning summary for Hurricane Irma,  
30 August–12 September 2017. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
3 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Antigua, Barbuda, Anguilla, Montserrat, 
St. Kitts and Nevis 
 3 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Saba, St. Eustatius, and St. Maarten 
 3 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
St. Martin and St. Barthelemy 
 4 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Antigua, Barbuda, Anguilla, Montserrat, 
St. Kitts and Nevis 
 4 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Saba, St. Eustatius, and St. Maarten 
 4 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
St. Martin and St. Barthelemy 
 4 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Dominica 
 4 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Guadeloupe 
 4 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
British Virgin Islands 
 4 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
U.S. Virgin Islands 
 4 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Puerto Rico, Vieques. and Culebra 
 4 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Guadeloupe 
 5 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
British Virgin Islands 
 5 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
U.S. Virgin Islands 
 5 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Puerto Rico, Vieques. and Culebra 
 5 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Dominica 
 5 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Cabo Engano to Isla Saona, Dominican 
Republic 
 5 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Le Mole to Port-Au-Prince, Haiti 
 5 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Cabo Engano, Dominican Republic to 
Northern Border with Haiti 
 5 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Northern border of Haiti and Dominican 
Republic to Le Mole 
 5 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Turks and Caicos Islands 
 5 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Southeastern Bahamas 

Hurricane Irma     82 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
 5 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Cabo Engano to Northern Border with 
Haiti 
 5 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Cabo Engano to Southern Border with 
Haiti 
 6 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Guadeloupe 
 6 / 0000 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Guadeloupe 
 6 / 0000 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Matanzas to Guantanamo, Cuba 
 6 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Turks and Caicos Islands 
 6 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Southeastern Bahamas 
 6 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Dominica 
 6 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Central Bahamas 
 6 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Le Mole to Port-Au-Prince 
 6 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Le Mole to northern border with 
Dominican Republic 
 6 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Antigua, Barbuda, Montserrat, St. Kitts 
and Nevis 
 6 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Guadeloupe 
 6 / 1600 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Saba and St. Eustatius  
 6 / 1800 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Anguilla 
 6 / 1800 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
St. Maarten 
 6 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Central Bahamas 
 6 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Las Tunas to Guantanamo 
 6 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Northwestern Bahamas 
 6 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
St. Martin and St. Barthelemy 
 7 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
British Virgin Islands 
 7 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
U.S. Virgin Islands 
 7 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Northwestern Bahamas 
 7 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Puerto Rico, Vieques, and Culebra 

Hurricane Irma     83 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
 7 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Villa Clara to Guantanamo 
 7 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Jupiter Inlet to Bonita Beach, Florida 
Bay, Lake Okeechobee, and Florida 
Keys 
 7 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Las Tunas to Guantanamo 
 7 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Las Tunas to Guantanamo 
 7 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Villa Clara to Camaguey, Cuba 
 8 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Cabo Engano to Southern Border with 
Haiti 
 8 / 0000 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Cabo Frances Viejo to Northern Border 
with Haiti 
 8 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Jupiter Inlet to Bonita Beach and Florida 
Bay, Lake Okeechobee, and Florida 
Keys 
 
 
 
 8 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Jupiter Inlet to Sebastian Inlet 
 8 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Cabo Frances Viejo to Northern Border 
with Haiti 
 8 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Bonita Beach to Anna Maria Island 
 8 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Le Mole to Port-Au-Prince 
 8 / 1200 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Northern border of Haiti and Dominican 
Republic to Le Mole 
 8 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Jupiter Inlet to Flagler/Volusia County 
Line 
 8 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Bonita Beach to Anclote River 
 8 / 1800 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Turks and Caicos Islands 
 8 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Sebastian Inlet to Flagler/Volusia County 
Line 
 8 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Bonita Beach to Anclote River 
 8 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Anna Maria Island to Suwannee River, 
Florida 
 8 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Sebastian Inlet to Anna Maria Island 
 9 / 0000 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Southeastern Bahamas 

Hurricane Irma     84 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
 9 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Matanzas to Camaguey 
 9 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Las Tunas to Guantanamo 
 9 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
La Habana to Holguin 
 9 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Ciudad de la Habana 
 9 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Las Tunas to Holguin 
 9 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Volusia/Brevard County Line to 
Fernandina Beach 
 9 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Anclote River to Indian Pass 
 9 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Matanzas to Camaguey 
 9 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning modified to  
Volusia/Brevard County Line to Anclote 
River, including Florida Keys, Florida 
Bay, Lake Okeechobee 
 9 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Flagler/Volusia County Line to 
Fernandina Beach 
 9 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Chassahowitzka to Indian Pass 
 9 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning modified to  
Flagler/Volusia County Line to 
Chassahowitzka, Florida Keys, Lake 
Okeechobee, Florida Bay 
9 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
north of Fernandina Beach to Altamaha, 
Georgia 
 9 / 1200 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Central Bahamas 
 9 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning changed to 
Hurricane Warning 
Ciudad de la Habana 
 9 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Edisto Beach to South Santee River 
 9 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Indian Pass to Okaloosa/Walton County 
Line 
 9 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Las Tunas to Holguin 
 9 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Fernandina Beach to Edisto Beach 
 9 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Aucilla River to Indian Pass 
 9 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Northwestern Bahamas 
 9 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
La Habana to Camaguey 
 9 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Andros Island, Bimini, and Grand 
Bahama Island 

Hurricane Irma     85 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
 9 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning modified to  
Fernandina Beach to Aucilla River 
 9 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Indian Pass to Okaloosa/Walton County 
Line 
 9 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued 
All 
 9 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Las Tunas to Holguin 
 9 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Fernandina Beach to South Santee 
River 
 9 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Aucilla River to Indian Pass 
 9 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Las Tunas to Holguin 
 9 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Fernandina Beach to Indian Pass 
10 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Bimini and Grand Bahamas Island 
10 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Andros Island, Bimini, and Grand 
Bahama Island 
10 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
La Habana to Ciego de Avila 
10 / 1200 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
La Habana to Matanzas 
10 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Bimini and Grand Bahamas Island 
10 / 1800 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
La Habana to Matanzas 
10 / 1800 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Ciudad de la Habana 
11 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Florida Bay 
11 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Jupiter Inlet to Bonita Beach 
11 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Jupiter Inlet to Fernandina Beach 
11 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Lake Okeechobee 
11 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Anclote River to Bonita Beach 
11 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Florida Bay 
11 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Bimini and Grand Bahamas Island 
11 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Sebastian Inlet to Fernandina Beach 
11 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Anclote River to Indian Pass 

Hurricane Irma     86 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
11 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Bonita Beach to Okaloosa/Walton 
County Line 
11 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Jupiter Inlet to South Santee River 
11 / 1200 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
All 
11 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Anclote River to Okaloosa/Walton 
County Line 
11 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Volusia/Brevard County Line to South 
Santee River 
11 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Lake Okeechobee 
11 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Suwannee River to Okaloosa/Walton 
County Line 
11 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Flagler/Volusia County Line to South 
Santee River 
11 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
Suwannee River to Okaloosa/Walton 
County Line 
11 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Fernandina Beach to South Santee 
River 
11 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Altamaha Sound to South Santee River 
12 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning 
discontinued 
All 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Irma     87 
 
Table 8. 
Storm surge watch and warning summary for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 
September 2017. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
7 / 1500 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
Jupiter Inlet to Bonita Beach, including 
Florida Keys 
8 / 0300 
Storm Surge Watch changed to 
Storm Surge Warning 
Jupiter Inlet to Bonita Beach, including 
Florida Keys 
8 / 1500 
Storm Surge Warning modified to 
Sebastian Inlet to Venice, including 
Florida Keys 
8 / 1500 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
North of Sebastian Inlet to Ponce Inlet 
8 / 2100 
Storm Surge Watch issued 
north of Venice to Anclote River, 
including Tampa Bay 
8 / 2100 
Storm Surge Watch modified to 
Ponce Inlet to Flagler/Volusia County 
Line 
9 / 0300 
Storm Surge Warning modified to 
Volusia/Brevard County Line to Anclote 
River, including Florida Keys and Tampa 
Bay 
9 / 0300 
Storm Surge Watch modified to   
north of Anclote Rive to Suwanee River 
9 / 0900 
Storm Surge Warning modified to 
Volusia/Brevard County Line to 
Chassahowitzka, Florida Keys, Tampa 
Bay 
9 / 1500 
Storm Surge Warning modified to 
Volusia/Brevard County Line to 
Suwanee River, Florida Keys, Tampa 
Bay 
9 / 1500 
Storm Surge Watch modified to  
north of Volusia/Brevard County line to 
the Isle of Palms, South Carolina 
9 / 1500 
Storm Surge Watch modified to  
north of Suwanee River to Ochlocknee 
River 
9 / 2100 
Storm Surge Warning modified to 
South Santee River to Suwanee River, 
Florida Keys, Tampa Bay 
10 / 0300 
Storm Surge Warning modified to  
South Santee River to Jupiter Inlet, 
North Miami Beach to Ochlocknee River, 
Florida Keys 
11 / 0900 
Storm Surge Warning 
discontinued 
Florida Keys, North Miami Beach to 
Cape Sable 
11 / 1500 
Storm Surge Warning 
discontinued 
Bonita Beach southward 

Hurricane Irma     88 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
11 / 2100 
Storm Surge Warning 
discontinued 
From Fernandina Beach southward, 
from Aucilla River westward, from 
Clearwater Beach southward 
12 / 0300 
Storm Surge Warning 
discontinued  
All 

Hurricane Irma     89 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Best track positions for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 2017. 

Hurricane Irma     90 
 
 
Figure 2. 
Selected wind observations and best track maximum sustained surface wind speed curve for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 
September 2017.  Aircraft observations have been adjusted for elevation using 90%, 80%, and 80% adjustment factors for 
observations from 700 mb, 850 mb, and 1500 ft, respectively.  Dropwindsonde observations include actual 10 m winds (sfc), 
as well as surface estimates derived from the mean wind over the lowest 150 m of the wind sounding (LLM).  Advanced Dvorak 
Technique estimates represent the Current Intensity at the nominal observation time. AMSU intensity estimates are from the 
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies technique.  Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC, and the 
solid vertical lines correspond to landfalls. 

Hurricane Irma     91 
 
 
Figure 3. 
Selected pressure observations and best track minimum central pressure curve for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 
2017.  Advanced Dvorak Technique estimates represent the Current Intensity at the nominal observation time.  AMSU intensity 
estimates are from the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies technique.  KZC P-W refers to pressure 
estimates derived using the Knaff-Zehr-Courtney pressure-wind relationship.  Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC, 
and the solid vertical lines correspond to landfalls. 

Hurricane Irma     92 
 
 
Figure 4. 
Wind swath depicting the radius of 34-, 50-, and 64-kt winds for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 2017. 

Hurricane Irma     93 
 
 
 
Figure 5. 
GFS analyses of 500-mb heights (dam, black contours), 500-mb relative vorticity (x10-5 s-1, color shading) and 500-mb wind (kt, 
barbs) at (a) 0000 UTC 3 September, (b) 0000 UTC 6 September, (c) 1800 UTC 8 September, and (d) 0600 UTC 10 September. 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
L 
Irma 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Irma 
Irma 
Irma 
L 

Hurricane Irma     94 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Figure 6.  
GOES-13 infrared satellite images of selected landfalls of Hurricane Irma, including (a) Barbuda landfall at 0545 UTC 6 
September, (b) just prior to Cuba landfall at 0245 UTC 9 September, (c) around the Florida Keys landfall at 1245 UTC 10 
September, and (d) while making landfall over southwestern Florida at 1915 UTC 10 September. 
0545 UTC 6 Sep
Barbuda landfall 
Cuba landfall
FL Keys landfall 
Southwest FL landfall 
0245 UTC 9 Sep 
1245 UTC 10 Sep 
1915 UTC 10 Sep 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

Hurricane Irma     95 
 
 
Figure 7. 
WSR-88D San Juan Doppler radar reflectivity image at 2115 UTC 6 September showing Hurricane Irma’s concentric 
eyewalls. 
Outer eyewall 
Inner eyewall 

Hurricane Irma     96 
 
    
 
Figure 8. 
Map of selected observed sustained maximum wind speeds (kt) during Hurricane Irma when it passed over Cuba and the 
southeastern United States. 
(a) 
(b) 

Hurricane Irma     97 
 
 
 
Figure 9. 
Map of selected observed maximum wind gusts (kt) during Hurricane Irma when it was near Cuba and the southeastern 
United States. 
(a) 
(b) 

Hurricane Irma     98 
 
 
Figure 10: 
Analyzed storm surge inundation (feet above ground level) along the coasts of Florida, Georgia, and South Carolina from 
Hurricane Irma.  Image courtesy of the NHC Storm Surge Unit. 

Hurricane Irma     99 
 
  
 
Figure 11. 
Pictures showing the depletion of water in Tampa Bay and stranded manatees during Hurricane Irma. 
 

Hurricane Irma     100 
 
 
Figure 12. 
Observed rainfall (inches) from Hurricane Irma over the southeastern United States.  Courtesy of David Roth from NOAA’s 
Weather Prediction Center. 

Hurricane Irma     101 
 
 
 
Figure 13. 
Map of tornado reports from Hurricane Irma.  Courtesy of NOAA’s Storm Prediction Center. 

Hurricane Irma     102 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
Figure 14.  
Examples of damage caused by Hurricane Irma across the Caribbean Islands. 
St. Martin 
St. Thomas 
Caibarien, Cuba 
Barbuda 

Hurricane Irma     103 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Figure 15.  
Examples of damage caused by Hurricane Irma across Florida. 
Sugarloaf Key 
Miami 
Callahan 
Marco Island 

Hurricane Irma     104 
 
 
 
Figure 16.  
(a) NHC official track forecasts (dashed blue lines) from 1200 UTC 30 August to 1800 UTC 4 September. The best track is 
given by the white line with positions given at 6 h interval.  (b) NHC official track forecasts (dashed blue lines) from 0000 UTC 
5 September to 0000 UTC 12 September. The best track is given by the white line with positions given at 6 h interval. 
8/30 1200 UTC – 9/4 1800 UTC 
9/5 0000 UTC – 9/12 0000 UTC 
(a) 
(b) 

Hurricane Irma     105 
 
 
Figure 17. 
NHC and selected model track forecast errors for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 2017. 

Hurricane Irma     106 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Figure 18.  
Selected model tracks from 1800 UTC 5 September to 1800 UTC 9 September.  The best track is given by the white line with 
positions shown at 6 h intervals. 
UKMET 
GFS 
ECMWF 
HWRF 

Hurricane Irma     107 
 
 
Figure 19. 
NHC and selected model intensity forecast errors for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 2017. 

Hurricane Irma     108 
 
 
Figure 20. 
NHC and selected model intensity forecast biases for Hurricane Irma, 30 August–12 September 2017. 

Hurricane Irma     109 
 
  
Figure 21. 
Hurricane and tropical storm warnings issued for Hurricane Irma.   

Hurricane Irma     110 
 
 
Figure 22. 
Maximum water level (feet) measured from tide gauges along the coasts of Florida, Georgia, and South Carolina coasts during 
Hurricane Irma and illustration of the Storm Surge Warning area (magenta).  Water levels are referenced above Mean Higher 
High Water (MHHW), which is used as a proxy of inundation (above ground level) on normally dry ground along the coastline.    
Image courtesy of the NHC Storm Surge Unit.   

Hurricane Irma     111 
 
  
 
Figure 23.   
(a) Simulated storm surge inundation (feet above ground level) based on Irma’s best track, showing that the highest inundation 
occurred within the unpopulated area of the Florida coast between Cape Romano and Cape Sable.  (b) Simulated storm surge 
inundation (feet above ground level) based on the NHC official forecast for Irma issued at 2100 UTC 9 September.  The 
simulation shows that if Irma had moved slightly to the west and made landfall farther up the west coast of Florida, significantly 
higher storm surge inundation (greater than 9 feet above ground level) would have occurred from Naples northward to the Cape 
Coral area.  Images courtesy of the NHC storm surge unit. 
(a) Best Track Simulation 
(b) Forecast Track Simulation 
