 
NATIONAL HURRICANE CENTER 
TROPICAL CYCLONE REPORT 
 
 
HURRICANE MATTHEW 
 
(AL142016) 
 
28 September – 9 October 2016 
 
Stacy R. Stewart 
National Hurricane Center 
7 April 20171 
 
MIMIC MICROWAVE SATELLITE IMAGE OF MATTHEW AS THE EYE OF THE POWERFUL HURRICANE WAS MAKING 
LANDFALL NEAR LES ANGLAIS, HAITI, AT 1100 UTC 4 OCTOBER 2016. IMAGE COURTESY OF UW-CIMSS WISCONSIN. 
Matthew was a category 5 hurricane (on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale) 
that later made landfalls as a major hurricane along the coasts of southwestern Haiti, 
extreme eastern Cuba, and western Grand Bahama Island, and as a category 1 hurricane 
along the central coast of South Carolina. Matthew was responsible for 585 direct deaths, 
with more than 500 deaths occurring in Haiti, making it the deadliest Atlantic hurricane 
since Hurricane Stan in 2005. Matthew reached category 5 intensity at the lowest latitude 
ever recorded in the Atlantic Basin. 
                                                
1 Original report date 3 April 2017.  Revised on 7 April 2017 to update United States and North Carolina casualties. 

Hurricane Matthew     2 
 
Hurricane Matthew 
 
28 SEPTEMBER – 9 OCTOBER 2016 
 
SYNOPTIC HISTORY 
 
     
A vigorous tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa early on 23 September and moved 
westward across the tropical Atlantic at forward speeds of 20-25 kt for the next three days. The 
fast-moving, low-latitude disturbance generally remained south of 10O N latitude until 26 
September, when it slowed down and turned toward the west-northwest. Over the next couple of 
days, the disturbance’s satellite cloud pattern gradually acquired the appearance of a tropical 
cyclone, an indication of the system’s well-defined mid- and upper-level circulations. However, 
scatterometer wind data indicated that the tropical wave did not possess a closed surface 
circulation. This open-wave wind flow pattern was confirmed on 27 September when a U.S. Air 
Force Reserve Unit reconnaissance aircraft was unable to close off a surface circulation during 
its investigative mission. However, aircraft data indicated that surface winds of near 40 kt were 
occurring on the north side of the wave. Early on 28 September when the system was passing 
just north of Barbados, radar imagery in the Lesser Antilles indicated that thunderstorm activity 
was becoming better organized, including pronounced curved convective bands near and to the 
north and northeast of the well-defined mid-level circulation center. Another Air Force Reserve 
Hurricane Hunter aircraft found a closed surface circulation and 50-kt surface winds around 1400 
UTC that day. Based on the aircraft wind data and microwave satellite imagery (not shown), it is 
estimated that a tropical storm formed around 1200 UTC 28 September about 15 n mi west-
northwest of Barbados. The “best track” chart of the tropical cyclone’s path is given in Fig.1, with 
the wind and pressure histories shown in Figs. 2 and 3, respectively.  The best track positions 
and intensities are listed in Table 12. 
 
Under the influence of a strong deep-layer ridge to its north, Matthew turned westward 
and moved across the Windward Islands, passing midway between St. Lucia and St. Vincent 
around 1800 UTC 28 September, and moved into the eastern Caribbean Sea 6 h later. The 
unusually large wind field on the east side of Matthew’s asymmetric circulation resulted in tropical-
storm-force winds occurring on Barbados as late as 0000 UTC 29 September. These conditions 
spread northward across most of the Lesser Antilles, with tropical-storm-force wind gusts 
occurring as far north as the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. As Matthew continued to move 
over the deep, warm waters of the Caribbean Sea, the tropical cyclone gradually strengthened 
within an environment of west-southwesterly 850−200-mb vertical wind shear of about 20 kt, and 
reached hurricane status by 1800 UTC 29 September about 165 n mi northeast of Curaçao.  
Over the next 48 h, the ridging increased to the north and west of Matthew, forcing the 
hurricane towards the west-southwest. Despite moderate vertical wind shear of 15-20 kt, Matthew 
                                                
2 A digital record of the complete best track, including wind radii, can be found on line at 
ftp://ftp.nhc.noaa.gov/atcf. Data for the current year’s storms are located in the btk directory, while previous 
years’ data are located in the archive directory. 

Hurricane Matthew     3 
 
underwent a 24-h period of rapid intensification (RI) between 0000 UTC 30 September and 0000 
UTC 1 October, during which time Matthew’s eye diameter contracted from roughly 30 n mi to 5 
n mi (Fig. 4). The hurricane strengthened an extraordinary 75 kt, reaching an estimated peak 
intensity of 145 kt at 0000 UTC 1 October when located less than 80 n mi north of Punta Gallinas, 
Colombia. This intensity made Matthew the southernmost category 5 hurricane in the Atlantic 
basin, surpassing a record previously set by Hurricane Ivan in 2004.   
Almost immediately after Matthew reached its peak intensity, the powerful category 5 
hurricane began a slow weakening trend. Passive microwave satellite imagery never indicated 
that an eyewall replacement cycle (ERC) occurred during that weakening phase, and 
reconnaissance aircraft wind data confirmed that a secondary wind maximum or ERC did not 
develop. However, upwelling was occurring beneath the hurricane as indicated by satellite-
derived sea-surface temperature (SST) data and also SST data from NOAA buoy 42058. The eye 
of Matthew passed directly over the buoy at approximately 0747 UTC 3 October, which recorded 
a pressure measurement of 942.9 mb. However, the buoy’s SST data (Fig. 5) indicate that 
upwelling and mixing reduced the SSTs beneath the hurricane by more than 3OC. Oceanic cooling 
occurred at the buoy more than 12 h before Matthew’s eye passage, as a result of both the 
strength and size of the hurricane’s wind field.  
The western portion of the subtropical ridge across Cuba and Hispaniola weakened early 
on 2 October, and the hurricane made a small counter-clockwise loop and turned slowly 
northwestward within weak steering currents. During that time, Matthew weakened to an 
estimated intensity of 125 kt by 0600 UTC 2 October, when the cyclone was located about 300 n 
mi south-southwest of Port-au-Prince, Haiti.  
It is worth noting that during Matthew’s post-peak-intensity weakening phase, the 
innermost RMW remained fairly steady at about 5-7 n mi for more than 48 h (Fig.4). Maintenance 
of the small RMW may have contributed to the re-intensification phase that the hurricane 
underwent between 0600 UTC and 1800 UTC on 2 October when Matthew was moving northward 
around the western periphery of a broad deep-layer ridge located over the central subtropical 
Atlantic. During this time, the deep-layer vertical wind shear had decreased to less than 10 kt 
while mid-level humidity values had increased to more than 70 percent (Fig. 6). Now moving away 
from the region of upwelling and over deeper warm water containing a higher oceanic heat 
content, Matthew reached a secondary peak intensity of 135 kt by 1800 UTC 2 October when the 
powerful category 4 hurricane was located about 105 n mi south of Tiburon, Haiti. During this re-
intensification phase, Matthew’s central pressure decreased to its lowest value of 934 mb while 
the RMW increased to 10-15 n mi. Matthew moved slightly east of due north with some minor 
fluctuations in intensity, and was at an intensity of 130 kt when the center of the eye made landfall 
along the southwestern coast of Haiti near Les Anglais around 1100 UTC 4 October (Fig. 7a). 
Matthew was the first major hurricane, and also the first category 4 hurricane, to make landfall on 
Haiti since Cleo of 1964. 
Matthew continued moving northward across the western end of Haiti’s Tiburon Peninsula 
and into the western Gulf of Gonâve by 1800 UTC (Figs. 7b,c). The mountainous terrain disrupted 
the hurricane’s low-level circulation, and Matthew’s sustained winds weakened to 115 kt by the 
time the category 4 hurricane moved through the Windward Passage and made landfall near 
Juaco, Cuba, around 0000 UTC 5 October (Fig. 7d). While an upper-level trough lifted out to the 
northeast, the ridge to the north of Matthew built westward, forcing the hurricane on a 

Hurricane Matthew     4 
 
northwestward track across the eastern end of Cuba and into the Atlantic Ocean between Cuba 
and the Bahamas early on 5 October. Additional disruption by the mountainous terrain of eastern 
Cuba caused the hurricane to weaken to category 3 status. 
Little change in intensity occurred during the next 18 h; by 1200 UTC 6 October, however, 
Matthew had completed a brief re-strengthening period, regaining category 4 status with an 
intensity of 125 kt when the hurricane was located about  25 n mi south-southwest of Nassau, 
Bahamas. Matthew then began a slow but steady weakening trend due to an ERC, increasing 
vertical wind shear, and decreasing mid-level moisture (Fig. 6) ahead of an approaching mid-
latitude trough. Matthew’s eyewall passed over the extreme western portion of New Providence 
Island, bringing hurricane-force winds and flooding rains to most of the central and northwestern 
Bahamas. Continuing on a northwestward track, the category 4 hurricane made landfall near West 
End, Grand Bahama Island, around 0000 UTC 7 October, bringing category-3 winds to that area. 
 
A broad, eastward-moving mid-latitude trough located over the central United States 
gradually eroded the ridge to the north and east of Matthew, allowing the major hurricane to turn 
toward the north-northwest on 7 October. Over the next 24 h, Matthew completed an ERC, 
causing the eye diameter to increase to 30-40 n mi. Remaining about 30 n mi offshore of the 
Florida east coast, the western edge of Matthew’s eyewall barely clipped NASA’s Cape Canaveral 
launch facility, likely producing sustained category 2 winds at the extreme northeastern portion of 
the launch complex. Matthew weakened to a category 3 hurricane around 0600 UTC 7 October 
about 35 n mi east of Vero Beach, Florida, and became a category 2 hurricane by 0000 UTC 8 
October about 50 n mi east-northeast of Jacksonville Beach, Florida.  
Hurricane Matthew moved northward around the western periphery of a subtropical ridge 
early on 8 October, remaining about 50 n mi offshore of the Georgia coast. As Matthew gained 
latitude, its wind field expanded, spreading hurricane-force wind gusts across the coastal regions 
of southeastern Georgia and southern South Carolina, especially on the barrier islands where 
category 2 wind gusts occurred. The approaching mid-latitude trough eroded the subtropical ridge 
further, causing the category 2 hurricane to make a sharp turn toward the northeast and weaken 
further. The now category 1 hurricane took a track nearly parallel to the coast of South Carolina, 
making landfall around 1500 UTC 8 October just south of McClellanville, South Carolina, in the 
Cape Romain Wildlife Sanctuary. Matthew was the first hurricane since Hurricane Hazel in 1954 
to make landfall in the United States north of Florida during the month of October. The center of 
the hurricane moved back offshore of the coast of South Carolina by 1800 UTC, and remained 
just offshore of the coast of North Carolina through 9 October. Baroclinic interaction associated 
with the mid-latitude trough caused Matthew’s cloud shield and rainfall pattern to steadily shift 
from the southeastern to the northwestern side of the circulation, resulting in deep moisture and 
heavy rainfall to spread well inland over the southeastern United States. 
The northwestern edge of Matthew’s large eyewall extended well inland and brought 
hurricane-force wind gusts and heavy rains to coastal regions of the Carolinas. While Matthew 
was moving east-northeastward to the south of eastern North Carolina early on 9 October, a 
combination of the cyclone undergoing extratropical transition and an increasing pressure 
gradient from an approaching cold front caused sustained hurricane-force winds over the Outer 
Banks and significant sound-side storm-surge flooding. Matthew maintained its east-
northeastward motion and lost its tropical characteristics by 1200 UTC 9 October, as 
southwesterly vertical wind shear in excess of 40 kt stripped away all of the deep convection near 

Hurricane Matthew     5 
 
Matthew’s center. The extratropical low merged with a frontal system by 0000 UTC 10 October 
about 200 n mi east of Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. Still possessing hurricane-force winds, the 
elongated cyclone turned northeastward within the deep tropospheric southwesterly flow ahead 
of a mid-latitude low located over the eastern United States and moved along the frontal boundary, 
brushing the coast of eastern Nova Scotia late on 10 October. The broad cyclone eventually 
merged with a larger extratropical low pressure system near Atlantic Canada on 11 October. 
 
METEOROLOGICAL STATISTICS 
 
  
Observations in Matthew (Figs. 2 and 3) include subjective satellite-based Dvorak 
technique intensity estimates from the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch (TAFB) and the 
Satellite Analysis Branch (SAB), and objective Advanced Dvorak Technique (ADT) estimates from 
the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies/University of Wisconsin-Madison.  
Observations also include flight-level, stepped frequency microwave radiometer (SFMR), and 
dropwindsonde observations from 19 flights made by the 53rd Weather Reconnaissance 
Squadron (53WRS) of the U. S. Air Force Reserve Command and from 8 flights conducted by 
NOAA/AOC “Hurricane Hunter” reconnaissance aircraft; those flights yielded a total of 120 center 
fixes (96 from the 53WRS and 24 from the NOAA/AOC). Additional dropwindsonde observations 
were obtained from flights conducted by the NASA AV-6 Global Hawk unmanned aircraft as part 
of the Hurricane and Severe Storms Sentinel (HS3) research program. Data from Doppler 
weather radars located at NOAA WFOs Miami, Melbourne, Jacksonville, Charleston, Wilmington, 
and Morehead City, along with data and imagery from NOAA polar-orbiting satellites including the 
Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit (AMSU), the NASA Global Precipitation Mission (GPM), the 
European Space Agency’s Advanced Scatterometer (ASCAT), and Defense Meteorological 
Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites, among others, were also useful in constructing the best track 
of Matthew. 
Ship reports of tropical-storm-force winds associated with Matthew are given in Table 2, 
and selected surface observations from land stations and data buoys are given in Table 3. 
Winds and Pressure 
 
Matthew’s estimated peak intensity of 145 kt at 0000 UTC 1 October is based on SFMR-
measured surface winds of 143 kt at 0010 UTC. Post-storm quality control checks made by the 
NOAA Hurricane Research Division (HRD) suggest that was a reliable report. These peak wind 
speeds were observed at the end of the rapid intensification cycle, during which time Matthew’s 
radius of maximum winds had contracted down from 30 n mi to approximately 5 n mi.  
Matthew’s estimated minimum central pressure of 934 mb, which was first observed at 
0000 UTC 4 October, is based on a dropwindsonde surface pressure measurement of 934 mb at 
2343 UTC 3 October, which was accompanied by a surface wind of 4 kt. The estimated central 
pressure of 942 mb at the time of Matthew’s 145-kt peak intensity is based on a dropwindsonde 
surface pressure measurement of 944 mb at 0125 UTC 1 October, which was accompanied by a 
surface wind of 18 kt. 

Hurricane Matthew     6 
 
The eastern portion of Matthew’s eye passed over NOAA Buoy 42058 in the central 
Caribbean Sea (Fig. 8) at approximately 0656 UTC 3 October, during which time a pressure of 
942.9 mb and a 5-meter wind speed of 10 kt were measured. About 2 h prior to the eye’s passage, 
a 1-minute sustained wind of 74 kt and a gust to 83 kt were measured (Table 3). However, the 
buoy stopped reporting 1-minute wind speed data from 0510-0650 UTC 3 October 2016, which 
means that the peak wind speed during Matthew’s traversal of the buoy likely was missed.  
In the Dominican Republic, the highest recorded wind gust was 43 kt at Las Américas 
International Airport (MDSD) in Santo Domingo on 3 October.  
In Haiti, there were no wind reports received from the area where the category 4 hurricane 
made landfall along the western end of the Tiburon Peninsula. The only official wind measurement 
was a sustained wind of 30 kt and a gust to 45 kt at Toussaint Louverture International Airport 
(MTPP) in Port-au-Prince, which is protected by a mountain range about 80 n mi east-northeast 
of where Matthew made landfall. 
Across eastern Cuba, the highest winds measured were a 1-minute sustained wind of 108 
kt at Punta de Maisí (MUMA), which was accompanied by a gust of 132 kt. However, the wind 
equipment failed at 0156 UTC 5 October, making it possible that stronger winds might have gone 
undetected. A sustained wind of 103 kt and a gust of 151 kt were observed along the northeast 
coast in Jamal. 
In the Bahamas, the highest recorded winds occurred at the Bahamas Department of 
Meteorology’s (BDM) upper-air site located at the Nassau airport, where a sustained wind of 100 
kt and a gust to 111 kt were measured. A sustained wind of 84 kt was measured at the BDM’s 
Weather Forecast Office, which is also located on the airport complex. However, a window in the 
forecast office was blown-out, forcing the staff to evacuate the premises. Hence, wind records at 
that location were not recorded beyond 0100 UTC 7 October. Farther north, a sustained 69-kt 
wind and a gust to 91 kt were reported at Settlement Point on Grand Bahama Island as the eastern 
edge of Matthew’s eyewall passed to the west of that location. Moreover, the BDM stated that 
their Doppler weather radar velocity data, along with surface wind observations, indicated that 
tropical-storm-force winds affected New Providence island, including the capital of Nassau, for 
approximately 19 h from 0700 UTC 6 October to 0200 UTC 7 October, and that hurricane-force 
winds lasted for about 8 h from 1130 UTC to 1930 UTC on 6 October. 
Across the southeastern United States, sustained tropical-storm-force winds spanned a 
large portion of coastal regions from Palm Beach County in southeastern Florida northward to the 
North Carolina Outer Banks. In addition, tropical-storm-force wind gusts reached inland at least 
80 n mi from the Atlantic coasts of Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina. 
Sustained gale-force winds occurred across portions of the Virginia Tidewater area, with 
hurricane-force wind gusts occurring well offshore. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Virginia 
Beach buoy (44014), located about 65 n mi east-southeast of the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay, 
measured a 10-minute average wind of 52 kt (equivalent to a 55-kt 1-minute wind) and a peak 
gust of 110 kt. However, that peak gust was almost double the sustained wind values that had 
been measured 1 h prior to and 3 h after the occurrence of the gust, during a period in which the 
pressure gradient was increasing between Matthew and a high pressure system located over the 
Great Lakes. Since a cold front had passed over and moved south of the buoy a few hours earlier, 
it is possible that the wind gust was due to local accelerations behind the frontal zone in a 

Hurricane Matthew     7 
 
convection-free area offshore of the Delmarva Peninsula, and was not directly associated with 
Matthew’s circulation. 
Sustained hurricane-force/category 1 winds were confined mainly to the immediate 
coastal areas and barrier islands of east-central and northeastern Florida, and the barrier islands 
of Georgia, South Carolina, and North Carolina, including the Outer Banks. The strongest winds 
measured along the U.S. southeast coast are as follows: sustained winds of 64-74 kt with gusts 
of 91-93 kt on the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) complex at Cape Canaveral, Florida; sustained 
wind of 65 kt and a gust to 83 kt on Tybee Island, Georgia; sustained 58-kt wind at Beaufort, 
South Carolina, and a gust of 90 kt at Winyah Bay, South Carolina; sustained wind of 67 kt and a 
gust of 84 kt at Nags Head, North Carolina. Furthermore, an NWS damage survey indicated that 
category-2 sustained winds likely occurred over mostly unpopulated coastal areas of northern 
Brevard County, Florida, from the northernmost portion of the KSC and extending northward 
across Mosquito Lagoon to the Brevard/Volusia County border. 
The aforementioned remarkable RI period, which has only been exceeded a few times in 
the Atlantic historical record, occurred during apparently unfavorable environmental conditions 
consisting of west-southwesterly 850−200-mb vertical wind shear of 18-22 kt. Such strong shear 
conditions generally result in only slow or no strengthening. However, post-storm shear 
recalculations of the SHIPS model by decreasing the default areal diameter of 1000 km down to 
400 km, and using observed positions instead of forecast positions, did yield significantly smaller 
vertical wind shear values of roughly 10-15 kt during the RI period. It is also interesting to note 
that Matthew was unusually electrically active with numerous lightning strikes having occurred in 
the eyewall, especially inside of the RMW, during most of the hurricane’s time over the Caribbean 
Sea. However, the role that this lightning played in the evolution of the hurricane, especially during 
the RI period, is unknown. 
Landfall Intensity Estimates 
Haiti: 130 kt near Les Anglais at 1100 UTC 4 October is based on a flight-level-to-surface 
wind conversion value of 126 kt, an SFMR surface wind of 128 kt, a Dvorak satellite intensity of 
T6.5/127 kt from both TAFB and SAB, and ADT satellite intensity estimates of 135-139 kt. 
Cuba: 115 kt near Juaco at 0000 UTC 5 October is based on an SFMR surface wind value 
of 117 kt just prior to landfall, and an ADT estimates of 117 kt. A 1-minute sustained surface wind 
of 108 kt was measured at Punta de Maisí, which was located east of the landfall location and 
near or just outside the RMW. In addition, a wind gust to 132 kt was observed at Punta de Maisí 
at 0156 UTC 5 October, just prior to the equipment failing. A sustained wind of 103 kt and a gust 
to 151 kt were recorded northwest of the landfall location at Jamal. The swath of calm winds 
observed during eye passage was about 8-10 n mi wide (Fig. 9). Wind measurements were 
acquired from Dines pressure-tube anemometers. 
Bahamas: 115 kt near West End, Grand Bahama Island, at 0000 UTC 7 October is based 
on an SFMR surface wind value of 118 kt, a Dvorak satellite intensity of T6.0/115 kt from both 
TAFB and SAB, and an ADT estimate of 125 kt. A sustained wind of 84 kt was observed in the 
capital of Nassau; a sustained wind of 69 kt and a gust of 91 kt were measured at Settlement 
Point as the eastern edge of Matthew’s eyewall passed just west of that location. 

Hurricane Matthew     8 
 
South Carolina: 75 kt just south of McClellanville is based on a flight-level-to-surface wind 
conversion value of 77 kt around the time of landfall, and Dvorak satellite intensity estimates of 
T4.5/77 kt from TAFB and T4.0/65 kt from SAB. 
Storm Surge3 
Dominican Republic − Specific storm surge values are not available, but media reports, 
along with information from the Dominican Republic government, indicate that considerable 
inundation occurred due to a combination of a significant storm surge and large waves along the 
southern coast from La Romana westward to the border with Haiti. Extremely rough surf 
conditions caused 8 Marines and 6 civilians to be stranded on Beata Island, which is located just 
south of the Barahona Peninsula.  
Haiti −  Although no specific storm surge values from the coasts of Haiti’s Tiburon 
Peninsula are available, official and media reports indicate that considerable wave action and 
coastal inundation was caused by Matthew’s storm surge. 
 
Cuba – Reports from the Meteorological Institute of Cuba indicate that a storm surge of 
10-13 ft was observed along the southern coast of Guantánamo Province, resulting in saltwater 
inundation that extended inland more than 300 ft, affecting the towns of Imías, San Antonio de 
Sur, and Maisí. The surge was also accompanied by large, battering waves of 20-26 ft all along 
the coast, with a maximum wave height of about 30 ft occurring at Maisí. Along the northern coast 
of the province, a storm surge exceeding 11 ft, accompanied by waves of 15-20 ft, resulted in 
inundation that penetrated 1000-1500 ft inland. Storm surge heights of 5-6 ft, along with waves 
up to 16 ft high, occurred along the north coast of Santiago de Cuba Province. Inundation 
extended more than 200 ft inland, which briefly cut off the road between the cities of Santiago de 
Cuba and Guantánamo.  In Holguin Province, the storm surge was estimated at 3-5 ft, resulting 
in coastal flooding that pushed inland about 300 ft in some areas. Large waves up to 20 ft occurred 
on top of the surge at Cabo Lucrecia, while wave heights of 16 ft were observed at Gibara. Along 
the north coast of Camagüey Province, a lesser storm surge of about 3 ft occurred, along with 
waves of 6-13 ft. This combination resulted in minor saltwater inundation that extended up to 200 
ft inland at Cayo Sabinal. 
 
Bahamas − Storm surge heights up to 8 feet inundated the south coast of New 
Providence and Grand Bahama Island. The east coast of Andros Island also experienced large 
and powerful surge and wave action, causing inundation that completely destroyed many coastal 
structures and infrastructure. 
                                                
3 Several terms are used to describe water levels due to a storm. Storm surge is defined as the abnormal 
rise of water generated by a storm, over and above the predicted astronomical tide, and is expressed in 
terms of height above normal tide levels. Because storm surge represents the deviation from normal water 
levels, it is not referenced to a vertical datum. Storm tide is defined as the water level due to the 
combination of storm surge and the astronomical tide, and is expressed in terms of height above a vertical 
datum, i.e. the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) or Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW). 
Inundation is the total water level that occurs on normally dry ground as a result of the storm tide, and is 
expressed in terms of height above ground level. At the coast, normally dry land is roughly defined as areas 
higher than the normal high tide line, or Mean Higher High Water (MHHW). 

Hurricane Matthew     9 
 
 
United States − 
The maximum storm surge measured by a tide gauge in the United States was 7.70 ft 
above normal tide levels at a NOS gauge at Fort Pulaski, Georgia. Matthew also produced storm 
surges of 6.96 ft at Fernandina Beach, Florida, 6.20 ft at Charleston, South Carolina, and 6.06 ft 
at Hatteras, North Carolina. Several NOS tide gauges from Mayport, Florida, to Hatteras, North 
Carolina, as well as along the St. Johns River, measured their highest water levels on record 
during Matthew. 
 
In Florida, the combined effect of the surge and tide produced maximum inundation levels 
of 5 to 7 ft above ground level along the coasts of Flagler, St. Johns, and Duval Counties (Fig. 
10). A United States Geological Survey (USGS) storm tide pressure sensor deployed on Fort 
Matanzas Beach just north of Matanzas Inlet recorded a wave-filtered storm tide water elevation 
of 8.39 ft above the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). This measurement 
converts to about 6.4 ft above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW), which suggests that maximum 
inundation of 6-7 ft above ground level occurred in the vicinity of Matanzas Inlet. A post-storm 
assessment conducted by the Weather Forecast Office (WFO) in Jacksonville also suggested 
that inundation could have been as high as 7 ft in several locations along the immediate coastline, 
particularly near Matanzas Inlet and Marineland. In Duval County, a record water level of 3.28 ft 
above MHHW was reported by the NOS gauge at Mayport (Bar Pilots Dock), exceeding the 2.48 
ft above MHHW recorded on 27 September 2004 during Hurricane Jeanne. Farther north, 
maximum inundation levels were 3 to 5 ft above ground level in Nassau County, where the NOS 
gauge at Fernandina Beach measured a storm tide of 4.17 ft above MHHW. Inundation levels 
decreased south of Flagler County, with 4 to 6 ft above ground level estimated in Volusia County 
and 3 to 4 ft above ground level estimated in Brevard County. Maximum inundation levels along 
the southeastern coast of Florida south of Cape Canaveral were 1 to 2 ft above ground level.   
Elsewhere in Florida, inundation occurred well inland from the coast along the banks of 
the St. Johns River due to locally induced surge in the river and freshwater input from rainfall.  
Data from NOS tide gauges along the river recorded 3 to 4 ft of storm surge, with a maximum 
surge of 4.6 ft above normal levels reported at Racy Point. Maximum inundation levels along the 
river bank were 2 to 4 ft above ground level, with the Racy Point gauge reporting a storm tide of 
4.6 ft above MHHW. Record water levels were reported by the NOS gauges at Red Bay Point 
(3.24 ft above MHHW) and Dames Point (2.77 ft above MHHW). 
Maximum inundations were 3 to 5 ft above ground level along the coast of Georgia.  The 
NOS gauge at Fort Pulaski, to the east of Savannah, recorded a peak water level of 5.05 ft above 
MHHW, which is a record for that site. The previous record at the gauge was 3.40 ft above MHHW, 
set on 15 October 1947 during the 1947 Cape Sable (Florida) Hurricane. An NHC survey team 
measured a high water mark of 4.9 ft above ground level on National Park Service grounds at 
Fort Pulaski, substantiating the report from the nearby tide gauge. 
In South Carolina, maximum inundation levels were also 3 to 5 ft above ground level. In 
addition to the 5.05 ft above MHHW reported at the Fort Pulaski, Georgia, NOS gauge, which lies 
very near the Georgia-South Carolina border, the NOS station at Oyster Landing (North Inlet 

Hurricane Matthew     10 
 
Estuary) near Georgetown recorded a peak water level of 4.69 ft above MHHW. Elsewhere, the 
tide gauge at Charleston measured a peak water level of 3.52 ft above MHHW. 
Maximum inundation levels along the coast of North Carolina varied significantly by 
location. For the Atlantic coast between the North Carolina-South Carolina border to Cape 
Hatteras, maximum inundation levels were 2 to 4 ft above ground level. The highest reported 
storm tide in that area was 3.53 ft above MHHW (8.21 ft above MLLW) from the NOS gauge in 
Wilmington along the Cape Fear River. This was a record flood level at the downtown Wilmington 
gauge, eclipsing the old record of 3.47 ft above MHHW (8.15 ft above MLLW) set in 1954 during 
Hurricane Hazel. The highest coastal water levels in the state occurred farther up the coast on 
the sound side of the Outer Banks, where maximum inundation levels were estimated to be 4 to 
6 ft above ground level. The NOS gauge at the United States Coast Guard station on Hatteras 
Island, which sits on Pamlico Sound, measured a peak water level of 5.76 ft above MHHW. This 
value was corroborated by several high water marks surveyed by the USGS, the highest of which 
was a mark of 5.1 ft above ground level in Hatteras. North of Cape Hatteras, maximum inundation 
levels were generally 1 to 3 feet above ground level. Along that section of the coast, the highest 
surveyed high water mark was 3.0 ft above ground level on the sound side of Nags Head, and 
the highest measured water level was 2.39 ft above MHHW by the tide station at Oregon Inlet 
Marina. 
Some coastal flooding also occurred along the coasts of Virginia, Maryland, and Delaware, 
but the highest inundations of 2 to 4 ft above ground level occurred primarily in the Hampton 
Roads area.  The NOS gauge at Money Point reported a peak water level of 3.43 ft above MHHW, 
and the gauge at Sewells Point measured a water level of 3.10 ft above MHHW. Matthew caused 
severe flooding in coastal parts of southeastern Virginia, with Virginia Beach officials reporting 
very significant flooding and that almost every road in the city had become impassable. 
Rainfall and Flooding  
 
Matthew produced locally heavy rainfall across portions of the Lesser Antilles, but 
especially on Martinique (Fig. 11). That island nation received the brunt of Matthew’s heavy 
rainfall with 8.19 inches occurring in the southern portion of the island at Rivière-Pilote Stade, 
while 7.94 inches of rainfall was measured in the northern portion at Fond-Denis-Cadet. Rainfall 
totals of 5-6 inches were common over the interior and western portions of Martinique due to the 
orographic lift created by the island’s mountains, which also resulted in a sharp rainfall gradient 
along and just inland of the east coast where rainfall amounts less than 2 inches occurred. 
 
 
Tremendous rainfall occurred across the central and western portions of the Tiburon 
Peninsula, and also over northwestern Haiti, with some locations receiving more than 20 inches. 
Along the north-central coast of the Tiburon Peninsula, immediately to the east of where 
Matthew’s eye made landfall, an official rainfall total of 23.80 inches was measured at Anse-à-
Veau, while 20.10 inches of rainfall was observed at Petit-Trou-de-Nippes. Elsewhere across the 
peninsula, rainfall totals in excess of 15 inches were common. The fury with which Matthew lashed 
the Sud and Grand'Anse Departments (regions) resulted in the collapse of the rainfall monitoring 
system in almost all areas along or near the path of Matthew’s eye. For this reason, no rainfall 

Hurricane Matthew     11 
 
data for these departments (regions) are available due to the instruments either having been 
damaged, washed away, or simply destroyed. 
 
In the adjacent Dominican Republic, rainfall amounts of 6-10 inches were common across 
the southern third of the country, with several areas receiving more than 12 inches. A peak rainfall 
total of 16.92 inches was measured at the María Montez International Airport in Barahona along 
the south-central coast of the Dominican Republic. Over the central third of the country, lesser 
rainfall amounts of 2-5 inches occurred. A distinct ‘rain shadow’ of an inch or less of rainfall 
occurred over the northern third of the Dominican Republic due to the east-west oriented 
mountain ranges blocking the northward transport of significant moisture and rain showers in the 
eastern portion of Matthew’s circulation.  
 
 
Jamaica, being located in the drier western portion of Mathew’s circulation, received very 
little rainfall. However, the eastern portions of Cuba felt the brunt of the hurricane’s heavy rains, 
even after Matthew had weakened due to traversing the mountainous terrain of southwestern 
Haiti. Rainfall amounts exceeding 10 inches were common across Guantanamo Province, with 
Punta de Maisí airport (MUMA) receiving 26.04 inches of rain. 
 
Across the Bahamas, a sharp west-to-east rainfall gradient was evident, with amounts 
near 20 inches measured from Inagua to Bimini in the western portion of the archipelago to less 
than 3 inches in the easternmost portion of the country from Long Island to eastern Grand Bahama 
Island. A maximum storm total amount of 19.70 inches was measured in Matthew Town, Inagua, 
and 16.82 inches was reported on South Bimini. 
 
 
In the United States, torrential rains occurred over much of east-central and northeastern 
Florida, extending northward across coastal sections of Georgia, much of eastern South Carolina, 
central and eastern North Carolina, and the Virginia Tidewater. Rainfall amounts exceeding 10 
inches were common in this region (Fig. 12). The heaviest rain in eastern North Carolina resulted 
from a contribution of Matthew’s tropical moisture, the ongoing extratropical transition that caused 
the cyclone’s rains to favor the northwestern quadrant, and a pre-existing frontal boundary over 
the far eastern portions of the state. The maximum reported storm-total rainfall was near 
Evergreen in Columbus County, North Carolina, where 18.95 inches was measured on 8-9 
October. Other notable rainfall amounts measured were 17.48 inches at Hunter Army Air Field in 
Savannah, Georgia, 17.05 inches at Hope Mills in southeastern North Carolina, 17.01 inches at 
Cape Canaveral Air Station in east-central Florida, 16.90 inches on Edisto Island in southern 
South Carolina, and 14.21 inches at Chesapeake in extreme southeastern Virginia.  
 
During Matthew’s extratropical stage, rainfall amounts were generally less than 3 inches 
from the northern Delmarva to Massachusetts due to the large cyclone moving away from the 
U.S. east coast. 
Tornadoes 
  
Because the right-front quadrant of the hurricane’s circulation remained mostly offshore, 
atmospheric conditions conducive for the generation of tornadoes did not extend very far inland 

Hurricane Matthew     12 
 
over of the southeastern United States. Only two weak tornadoes were reported −  an EF0 tornado 
occurred in Horry County, South Carolina, when a waterspout moved on shore in North Myrtle 
Beach and another EF0 tornado occurred in Wayne County, North Carolina, near Walnut Creek. 
 
CASUALTY AND DAMAGE STATISTICS 
 
Matthew was responsible for 585 direct deaths4: 546 in Haiti, 34 in the United States, 4 in 
the Dominican Republic, and 1 in St. Vincent and the Grenadines. An additional 18 indirect deaths 
occurred in the United States, and 128 persons are missing and 439 persons were injured in Haiti. 
More than 3 million residents in the United States were evacuated from coastal areas, at least 
380,000 people were evacuated in Cuba, 340,000 people evacuated in Haiti, and more than 8,500 
persons evacuated from the southern regions of the Dominican Republic. 
Lesser Antilles − No official damage estimates have been received. On St. Vincent, 
media reports indicate that a 16-year-old boy died in the town of Layou during a rain-induced 
mudslide as he was cleaning a drain behind his house. On St. Lucia, tropical-storm-force winds 
downed trees and power lines, leaving about 70% of the island’s residents without power. Floods 
and mudslides damaged many homes and roads, and the country’s banana crop suffered 
significant damage; at least 85% of the island’s farms incurred losses. Two homes were 
destroyed, one each in Bisée and Gros Islet; several other homes on the island were damaged. 
On the north end of St. Lucia, mudslides and other debris rendered many roads impassable from 
Castries and Gros-Islet. On Dominica, some minor damage was reported, which temporarily left 
many people without water and electricity. Heavy rains in Grenada disrupted the water supply on 
that island. On Martinique, strong wind gusts of more than 75 kt knocked down numerous trees 
and powerlines, resulting in more than 55,000 people temporarily losing power. Rain-induced 
flooding forced closure of the main road connecting Fort-de-France to the southern portion of the 
island and also caused 4,000 people to lose their water supply. 
Dominican Republic – No official damage estimates have been received. Tropical-storm-
force winds occurred over the southwestern and south-central portion of the country, causing 
trees and power lines to be blown down in several communities. In the capital city of Santo 
Domingo, severe flooding caused by the heavy rainfall caused the wall of a building to collapse 
and fall on four people, killing two adults and two children. At least 8,500 people were evacuated 
from southwestern portions of the country. 
Widespread flash floods, mudslides, and river floods were common across the southern 
third of the country, rendering many roads impassable for several days and even affecting some 
of the country’s prisons. Floodwaters adversely affected at least 50% of the aqueducts supplying 
water to Santo Domingo and also contaminated water wells in many outlying communities. Fast-
moving floodwaters destroyed 26 homes, and also damaged an additional 16 homes and 2 
                                                
4 Deaths occurring as a direct result of the forces of the tropical cyclone are referred to as “direct” deaths. 
These would include those persons who drowned in storm surge, rough seas, rip currents, and freshwater 
floods. Direct deaths also include casualties resulting from lightning and wind-related events (e.g., 
collapsing structures). Deaths occurring from such factors as heart attacks, house fires, electrocutions from 
downed power lines, vehicle accidents on wet roads, etc., are considered “indirect” deaths. 

Hurricane Matthew     13 
 
bridges. The southern slope of the central mountain range and the southwestern portion of the 
country experienced very heavy rains, which generated severe floods and mudslides, causing 
damage to many roads and making them impassable, collapsing bridges, and severely damaging 
agriculture. 
Haiti – Widespread damage to beachfront structures occurred from Tiburon eastward to 
Saint-Louis-du-Sud in Sud Department (region). Media reports indicate that numerous well-
constructed structures were knocked down by the pounding surf and then swept out to sea. 
However, in Les Cayes on the southern coast of the Tiburon Peninsula, the Haitian Government 
estimated that more than 10 h of hurricane-force winds and heavy rains blasted all the crops in 
the community's fields. At least 80% of crops were lost in some areas, according to the United 
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Grand'Anse Department (region), 
located in the northern portion of the peninsula, was hit particularly hard, with hundreds of poorly 
constructed homes having been completely destroyed by Matthew’s category 4 winds. In the city 
of Jérémie, nearly all of the corrugated-metal homes were destroyed, with only a few concrete 
buildings left standing. Thousands of large coconut, breadfruit, and plantain trees were blown 
down by the intense winds.  
Official reports from the Government of Haiti and the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID) indicated that heavy rainfall across most of the country 
resulted in widespread flash flooding, river floods, and mudslides. Travelling west of Les Cayes 
in the Sud Department, roads were impassable for several days after Matthew made landfall due 
to flooding and resultant severe damage to roads and bridges throughout the region. Some 
communities in Grand’Anse Department were completely cut off due to flood waters. Destruction 
of the La Digue Bridge in Petit Goave complicated transportation of relief supplies to the hardest-
hit areas. The flooding ravaged large swaths of farmland and also drowned livestock.  
Haitian officials indicated that at least 29,000 houses had been destroyed or heavily 
damaged in Grand’Anse and Sud Departments, and 17 schools were also damaged. The downing 
of power and telephone lines by the high winds was widespread throughout the aforementioned 
regions. The effects of Matthew’s intense winds and rainfall-induced flooding and mudslides 
resulted in the deaths of at least 546 persons. 
At least 210,000 homes were either destroyed or severely damaged, with about 90% of 
the houses along the southern coast of the Tiburon Peninsula having been destroyed. In the same 
general location, about 90% of coconut trees were knocked down by Matthew’s category-4 winds, 
and entire coffee and cocoa plantations were destroyed. More than 350,000 animals in the area 
were also killed. Matthew's intense winds knocked down power lines across most of the Tiburon 
Peninsula, leaving about 80% of residents without power. Cell phone towers were also knocked 
down by the high winds, which interrupted communications and inhibited rescue efforts in the 
days following the storm. According to the Haitian government, more than 85% of buildings 
suffered serious damage in this region, with some having been completely destroyed. More than 
80% of sheet metal roofs were damaged. More specifically, in rural areas, traditional buildings 
constructed of timber framing and roofing made of sheet metal or hemp were completely 
destroyed. In urban areas, numerous mixed houses (i.e., concrete, chipboard, and sheet metal 
roofing construction) were partially destroyed. 

Hurricane Matthew     14 
 
During the aftermath, an outbreak of cholera developed due to the significant damage that 
Haiti’s life support infrastructure incurred, resulting in nearly 10,000 cases according to the Pan 
American Health Organization (PAHO). The PAHO also reported that more than 2.4 million 
Haitians were directly affected by Hurricane Matthew. According to the Caribbean Disaster 
Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA), at least 120,000 families had their homes destroyed 
by Matthew.  
The World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank estimated total damage in 
Haiti to be about $1.9 billion USD. According to RMS, a catastrophe risk management company, 
those losses are equal to more than 10 percent of the country’s GDP. 
 
Cuba – No direct deaths were reported. The most significant damage occurred in the 
easternmost province of Guantánamo, which was primarily confined to buildings along the 
immediate coastal areas due to storm surge flooding. In the city of Baracoa, which was traversed 
by Matthew’s western eyewall, widespread structural damage to homes and other buildings 
resulted from the category 3 winds and storm surge. According to media reports, hundreds of 
homes were damaged across eastern Cuba, especially in Guantánamo Province, which received 
the brunt of Matthew’s winds. In Baracoa, 90% of the homes there were damaged or completely 
destroyed. Extensive damage to trees and utility poles occurred across much of Guantánamo 
Province, and the eastern portion of Holguin Province. Strong winds also knocked down a 
communication tower in Majayara, and a bridge spanning the Toa River was destroyed by flood 
waters, leaving several communities isolated.  
The combination of high storm surge and wave action destroyed a guard post building at 
the Boca de Jauco Bridge. Media reports from Baracoa also indicate that hundreds of homes 
were damaged or destroyed by the storm surge flooding, including more than 30 houses washed 
away, and that the coastal highway on the south side of the city was completely eroded and made 
impassable in large stretches. Some flooding of streets occurred in the town of Malecón due to 
saltwater inundation. Media reports quoting government officials indicate that damages in Cuba 
are estimated be around $2.58 billion USD, with the majority of the damage having occurred in 
Guantánamo Province. 
 
Bahamas − Tropical-storm-force winds affected all of the Bahamas, with hurricane-force 
winds occurring over the western portion of the country from the Exumas and Andros northward 
to western Grand Bahama Island. Category 3 winds barely missed New Providence and Andros 
islands, but damage surveys by the Government of the Bahamas suggested that at least category 
3 winds occurred on Berry Islands and western Grand Bahama Island. Numerous trees and power 
lines were knocked down, rendering many roads impassable. Storm surge-induced flooding 
occurring on the backside of the storm affected much of the western half of the island. Matthew’s 
long-duration winds down trees along with utility poles and lines throughout most of the country, 
and also caused severe structural damages to many homes and buildings. On New Providence, 
North and Central Andros, and Grand Bahama islands, the primary wind effects were to roofs, 
with damage ranging from pealed shingles to total destruction. Severe damage to vegetation 
occurred in the Northwest Bahamas. On western Grand Bahama Island, it is estimated that 95% 
of the homes in the townships of Eight Mile Rock and Holmes Rock sustained severe damage. 
By the time Matthew’s circulation had cleared the Bahamas on 8 October, some portion of the 
country had been affected by tropical-storm-force winds for three days. 

Hurricane Matthew     15 
 
The narrow swath of torrential rainfall across the westernmost Bahamas island chain 
caused severe flooding in many low-lying communities of Exuma, Andros, New Providence and 
western Grand Bahama Island. In Nassau, roads near and surrounding the airport were flooded 
to a depth of about 2 feet. 
Media reports quoting government officials indicate that damage in the Bahamas is 
estimated to be at least $600 million USD. 
United States – A breakdown of the 34 direct deaths by state is as follows: Florida – 2, 
Georgia – 2, South Carolina – 4, North Carolina – 25, and Virginia – 1. Although the southeastern 
U.S. was spared the full brunt of Matthew’s strongest winds as the core of the powerful hurricane 
remained just offshore, widespread wind damage to roofs, along with downed trees and utilities 
lines, still occurred from the Florida peninsula northward through the Carolinas. Matthew’s wind 
field caused some structural damage to homes and businesses, and widespread downing of 
trees, utility lines, and poles, which caused massive power outages. However, most of the 
structural damage caused by Matthew’s wind was described as minor, which is a stark contrast 
to the moderate to severe structural damage that was associated with the storm surge.  
The combination of storm surge inundation and inland freshwater flooding caused by 
excessive rainfall resulted in more than 1 million structures having been impaired or damaged by 
Hurricane Matthew, forcing businesses from Florida to North Carolina to close, and temporarily 
putting thousands out of work. More than 3.5 million customers from Florida to Virginia lost 
electrical power due to Hurricane Matthew’s effects. 
The NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) estimates that wind 
and water damage caused by Matthew totaled approximately $10.0 billion, with a 90% confidence 
interval of ±$2.0 billion. This makes Matthew the tenth-most-destructive hurricane to affect the 
United States. 
Loss of life and specific damage by state are as follows: 
Florida: Direct fatalities (2) – one woman was killed in Crescent City in Putnam County 
when a tree fell on the camper where she was residing, and a 63-year-old woman was killed in 
the city of DeLand in Volusia County when a tree fell on her while she was outside feeding her 
animals. There were also nine indirect deaths, which included two persons succumbing to carbon 
monoxide poisoning caused by operating gas-powered electrical generators in their homes and 
two deaths due to cessation of medical devices when electrical power was lost. More than 1.2 
million customers lost electrical power across the state. 
Much of Florida east of Interstate 75 and highway US27, and north of Lake Okeechobee 
and West Palm Beach experienced downed trees, trees falling onto homes, roof damage, and 
downed powerlines, along with stripped off awnings, siding, and other non-structural building 
features such as billboards and facades. The combination of high storm surge and wave action 
eroded beaches along coastal areas of east-central and northeastern Florida, and washed away 
boats and automobiles. Beach erosion was described as moderate from Palm Beach County 
northward to Indian River County, and was moderate to severe in many locations from Brevard 
County to the St. Mary’s River. Damage to beaches and dunes are estimated to be $29 million in 
Palm Beach County. 

Hurricane Matthew     16 
 
In Brevard County, which was the portion of Florida closest to Matthew’s center, 11 homes 
were destroyed, 140 sustained major damage, 549 experienced minor damage, and 939 
additional homes were adversely affected in some way. High water levels, wave run-up, and large 
breaking waves caused major beach erosion, extensive escarpment of sand dunes, and damage 
to numerous pedestrian crossovers along the coastline. Foundations of several beachfront 
properties between Satellite Beach and Melbourne Beach were compromised and weakened due 
to the damaged dunes and berms. Damage to the beaches is estimated to be $25 million. 
Saltwater intrusion also affected NASA’s rocket launch facility at the Kennedy Space Center, 
Cape Canaveral, causing several million dollars-worth of damage. The roof of NASA’s Operations 
Support Building II (OSB-II) broke and rainwater damaged the interior of the structure. Air 
conditioning was lost throughout Launch Complex 39 as well. NASA had to deploy its Damage 
Assessment and Recovery Team (DART) to KSC to quickly effect repairs to the roof in order to 
prevent further damage to the OSB-II. Portable chillers mounted on trailers had to be brought in 
to provide cooling and ventilation to buildings that had lost air conditioning, including the Launch 
Control Center. Many other facilities also had roof damage, broken windows or lost power. Almost 
every stoplight on the KSC had been blown over or broken, and water intrusion also was a 
common occurrence. Ironically, the damage that Matthew inflicted on the facility delayed the 
scheduled launch of NOAA’s GOES-R advanced geostationary weather satellite that will be used 
to monitor future tropical cyclones.  
Significant damage occurred in Volusia County where 69 homes were destroyed, 467 
homes sustained major damage, 1,494 incurred minor damage, and additional 10,041 
experienced some sort of adverse effects. Structural damage to homes and businesses due to 
wind were mainly confined to the barrier islands, as well as those properties exposed to larger 
bodies of water. High water levels, wave run-up, and large breaking waves caused major beach 
erosion, extensive escarpment of sand dunes, and damage to numerous pedestrian crossovers 
along the entire coastline. In Ormond-By-The-Sea, surging waters eroded much of the protective 
barrier along highway A1A, resulting in the collapse of several sections of the highway. 
Farther north along the northeast Florida coast, major to extreme beach erosion occurred 
from Flagler Beach to Micklers Landing in St. Johns County. In many areas, the dune lines were 
cut back 30-40 ft, leaving vertical cliffs that were 12-16 ft high. Large rocks that were uncovered 
on the beach were forced backward 150 ft to highway A1A, and the highway was washed out in 
numerous locations up and down the Flagler County coastline. The rough surf conditions also 
knocked down the end of the Flagler Beach pier and produced significant sand overwash on roads 
in Marinaland, Summerhaven, Vilano, and Ponte Vedra. Severe storm surge flooding produced 
inundation of 6-7 ft above ground level, causing a new inlet to be cut in the barrier island between 
Marineland and Matanzas Inlet. Severe damage was reported in Summerhaven and Matanzas 
Inlet, with many houses and businesses inundated by saltwater that was at least 3 ft high. Storm 
surge flooding was reported at the sea walls in St. Augustine Beach and at the Castillo de San 
Marcos National Monument. Water heights up to 4 ft above ground level occurred in the city of 
St. Augustine, especially near the bayfront and the San Sebastian River. More than 2 ft of 
saltwater intrusion occurred on Anastasia Island. In Ponte Vedra Beach, storm surge inundation 
moved the sand dune line back 30-40 ft, carved out 12-16 ft cliffs, and undermined numerous 
structures along the beachfront. 

Hurricane Matthew     17 
 
In Duval County, several communities in the east side of the Jacksonville metropolitan 
area incurred extensive damage due to water and numerous massive oak trees having been 
knocked down. Major to locally extreme beach erosion occurred in Jacksonville Beach, resulting 
in some sand dunes being completely swept away. Battering waves knocked down and washed 
away part of the Jacksonville Beach Pier. The combination of storm surge and freshwater flooding 
of the St. Johns River destroyed many properties and knocked out electrical power for nearly 
250,000 customers in the Jacksonville metropolitan area. 
Moderate beach erosion occurred in Nassau County, resulting in several washouts along 
Ocean Boulevard. Hurricane-force wind gusts caused widespread tree and powerline damage, 
along with some structural damage, mainly across the eastern portion of the county. 
Georgia: Direct fatalities (2) – two males, ages 68 and 41 were killed in Statesboro and 
Savannah, respectively, after trees fell on their homes and crashed through the roofs. One indirect 
death resulted when a man in Statesboro drove his car into a tree that had fallen across Burkhalter 
Road.  
More than 12 inches of rainfall in many locations across southeastern portions of the state 
left roads, homes, and businesses inundated by freshwater flooding more than 4 ft deep at times. 
Downed trees and powerlines were common throughout the coastal areas of the state. On Sapelo 
Island in McIntosh County, several thousand trees were reported knocked down by category 1 
wind gusts. At least 300,000 customers in the state were left without electrical power. 
Chatham County received the brunt of Matthew’s storm surge effects in the state. On 
Tybee Island, where record storm surge was recorded at the Ft. Pulaski National Monument, a 
dune escarpment 7-10 ft high was noted on 19th Street. Storm surge inundation also penetrated 
as far inland as Lovell Avenue and points south, with minor erosion occurring from near the Tybee 
Island Pier to Center Street. Debris lines also indicated that highway US80 on the north side of 
the island had been inundated by saltwater in a few locations, resulting in 3 ft of water in a few 
homes located several blocks inland from the shoreline. In Savannah, storm surge inundation 
flooded the parking lot of the Hyatt Regency Hotel and also flooded a ballroom with up to 18 
inches of saltwater. Floodwaters from the Savannah River inundated a restaurant on the east end 
of River Street and there were eyewitness reports of the hulls of boats tied up at the River Street 
Bridge rising to the level of the railings along the river. Storm surge pushed into river inlets and 
low-lying areas near Savannah, causing saltwater damage to many estuaries and bird refuges in 
and around the Savannah National Wildlife Refuge. Wind gusts in Savannah, especially in 
residential neighborhoods, knocked down large majestic oak trees, most dating back more than 
a century. 
In Liberty County, storm surge caused some property damage on St. Catherine Island, 
including the destruction of three docks. Sand overwash was evident in several locations on the 
island and dunes were breached or completely destroyed in many spots. Saltwater inundation 
was noted along St. Catherines Sound Margin and some creeks were partially flooded by 
transported sand. At least 10% of the sea turtle nesting habitat was destroyed due to the beach 
erosion. In the southeastern part of the county, freshwater flooding forced Interstate 95 to be 
closed between exits 58-67. 

Hurricane Matthew     18 
 
Although Glynn County escaped major storm surge damage, significant flooding of all 
roads around Brunswick still occurred, rendering them impassable to St. Simons Island. 
Hurricane-force wind gusts along the coastal areas and tropical-storm-force wind gusts extending 
at least 60 n mi inland knocked down trees and powerlines, and caused damage to the roofs of 
homes and businesses.  
South Carolina: Direct fatalities (4) – In Florence County, 2 females were drowned when 
their car was swept away by rain-induced floodwaters. In Marion County, a 40-year old male was 
drowned in his flooded home; in Richland County, a 66-year old male was found pinned face-
down in floodwaters outside his home. One indirect death occurred in Dillon County when a 70-
year old man was struck by a cable while cleaning up tree debris. The combination of strong wind 
gusts and freshwater floods downed trees and powerlines more than 50 n mi inland from the 
coast, forcing the closure of many roads. In the town of Nichols in Marion County, more than 100 
people spent the night on the third floor of the town hall due to rising floodwaters. However, the 
bulk of the damage associated with Matthew occurred in the counties of Beaufort, Berkeley, 
Charleston, Dorchester, Georgetown, and Horry. At least 800,000 homes and businesses lost 
power across the state. 
In Beaufort County, significant storm surge caused inundation at several locations along 
highway US21 and eight boats were driven aground along the north side of the highway. An 
additional four boats were driven aground onto the Beaufort County Airport runway. An NWS site 
survey indicated extensive tree damage had occurred on Dataw Island, including trees knocked 
down onto several homes, which was consistent with wind gusts of at least 85 kt. Storm surge 
inundation on the island destroyed several boats and washed out the northbound lane of the 
Harbor Island Bridge. The survey further confirmed that some of the structural damage on Harbor 
Island was consistent with wind gusts of 85-95 kt. The combination of the strong winds and high 
surge badly damaged several waterfront homes along North Harbor Drive, and Hunting Island 
State Park was rendered inaccessible due to large number of trees that were knocked down. 
Sand overwash occurred in many locations on Hunting Island, and a pier was damaged on the 
south end of the island. Saltwater inundation was also evident on Fripp Island, including the 
deposition of boulders and large amounts of sand across roads located on the northeastern side 
of the island. Two waterfront homes on the eastern end of the island near Fripp Inlet incurred 
major structural damage. Damage to roofs of homes elsewhere on the island was consistent with 
wind gusts of at least 85 kt. On Hilton Head Island, an NWS site survey indicated that storm surge 
inundation reached the Harbour Town Golf Course, which is located more than 500 ft inland from 
the small harbor and more than 1000 ft from the coast. Several marinas on the island were also 
damaged by the combination of storm surge and wave action. 
The downing of trees and powerlines by category 1 wind gusts was widespread throughout 
much of Charleston County. Storm surge inundation occurred along the entire coast, including 
much of downtown Charleston where many roads were closed during the storm due to high water. 
Several communities and many businesses near the Cooper River also experienced saltwater 
inundation more than 10 n mi inland from the coast. The combination of the high surge and wave 
action sunk one boat and drove another one aground on Ashley River just north of the I-
526/Westmoreland Bridge.  Another large boat was driven aground along a tree line just west of 
the Intracoastal Waterway near Isle of Palms. Significant escarpment of more than 6 ft was noted 
along the sand dune line north of the Isle of Palms Pier.  

Hurricane Matthew     19 
 
Farther south in Colleton County, numerous trees and powerlines were knocked down 
throughout the area. Flooding occurred along the Edisto River well inland, with a height of 14.90 
ft measured near Givhans Ferry, which was the 12th-highest flood stage ever recorded. Edisto 
Island was hit particularly hard by Hurricane Matthew. A majestic oak tree 90 ft tall and 3 ft in 
diameter was uprooted and one home was completely destroyed. For a while, there was no 
electricity or water on the island, and all roads were impassable; Main Road was flooded and 
closed at the intersection with highway US17. An NWS survey team reported that the combination 
of surge and wave action damaged at least 70 beachfront homes along a 1.5-mile stretch of 
Palmetto Boulevard on Edisto Beach. The most significant damage occurred along the northern 
end of the beach, with most concrete home foundations and driveways severely undercut by as 
much as 6 ft or completely destroyed by the rushing waters. Complete destruction of wooden 
decks up to 15 ft tall was common. Up to 5 ft of saltwater inundation occurred on parts of the 
island, and sand up to 5-ft deep was pushed onshore and covered more than a 1-n-mi stretch of 
Palmetto Boulevard near the beach. Widespread debris was mixed with the sand, including gas 
tanks, refrigerators, and HVAC units. It is estimated that the beachfront of Edisto Beach moved 
inland as much as two city blocks. 
Up the coast in Georgetown County, moderate flooding occurred on the Black River and 
Pee Dee River, which spread into parts of the city of Georgetown. Two boats were run aground 
in the city, and several other boats were washed out to sea. Numerous roads were closed across 
Georgetown due to floodwaters and downed trees and powerlines. Inland freshwater flooding 
resulted in numerous evacuations throughout the county.  
In Horry County, the combination of storm surge and large waves caused significant beach 
erosion in beachfront communities along most of the coastal areas, including Myrtle Beach. Heavy 
rainfall, combined with storm surge moving upstream, caused major flooding of the Waccamaw 
and Little Pee Dee Rivers. The Waccamaw River reached a record crest of 17.90 ft in Conway, 
toppling the old record set in 1928 that was caused by Hurricane Okeechobee, which is listed as 
one of the state’s “storms of the century” by the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources. 
Most of Socastee was inundated by knee-deep water caused by the convergence of floodwaters 
where the Intracoastal Waterway meets the Waccamaw River just west of the city. Small rivers 
and creeks surrounding the Conway-Horry County Airport overflowed their banks, flooding 
portions of the runway complex. High water rendered roads, bridges, and railways impassible, 
and more than 1,000 people had to seek shelter to escape the floodwaters. More than 170 roads 
were closed in the county due to freshwater flooding, including highway US501, a main line of 
communication leading out of Myrtle Beach. The combination of storm surge and wave action tore 
away 900 ft of the 1,000-ft Springmaid Pier in Myrtle Beach, according to city officials, leaving 
splintered, weather-beaten boards scattered across the beach where the pier once stood. In 
addition, the pier in Surfside Beach suffered substantial damage due to significant storm surge, 
and city officials shut down all roads from Dogwood Drive to the ocean due to the flooding. An 
EF0 tornado in North Myrtle Beach damaged a couple of businesses and also caused minor 
damage to a few homes. 
In upland portions of the state, widespread freshwater flooding of streets, highways, 
streams, and rivers occurred across the counties of Darlington, Dillon, Florence, Marion, and 
Marlboro. Fast-moving floodwaters completely destroyed a bridge in Scranton and numerous 
water rescues were required across Florence County. In Marlboro County, floodwaters caused a 

Hurricane Matthew     20 
 
CSX Railroad train derailment in Wallace. One locomotive and four cars came off the track in a 
washed-out area just north of the large overpass on Highway 9. The South Carolina Department 
of Health and Environmental Control responded and found no evidence of any hazardous 
materials cargo or any fuel leakage that might have posed a threat to surrounding areas. 
In Dillon County, major flooding resulted in the closure of Interstate 95 between mile-
markers 181 and 193. Moderate flooding of the Lumber and Pee Dee Rivers in the southern part 
of the county forced closure of Highway 9 from Dillon to Lakeview. Both the Squires Lake Dam 
and Little Pee Dee State Park Dam failed due to flooding. An unregulated dam in Lexington 
County also failed. 
North Carolina: Direct fatalities (25) – Of the direct deaths reported, 24 of them were flood 
related. Unfortunately, 19 of those drowning deaths occurred when people drove their vehicles or 
walked into hazardous floodwaters and were swept away by the swift currents. Some of the 
victims encountered flood waters after driving around posted barricades. None of the flood-related 
deaths were associated with storm surge. 
Two males, ages 44 and 22, drowned when their vehicle plunged into floodwaters covering 
a washed-out road in Bladen County. A 70-year-old male was found drowned about 50 yards from 
his abandoned vehicle. In Cumberland County, a male (age 54) was found drowned near his 
abandoned vehicle, and a female driver was drowned when her car plunged into rushing flood 
waters across highway US301. In Gates County, a 75-year old male was found in his car after 
floodwaters had receded. A 74-year old man was drowned after he drove his car around barriers 
and into a rain-swollen creek in Harnett County. Four deaths occurred in Johnston County; a 
driver’s car was swept away after attempting to cross a flood-covered bridge, a female driver’s 
car was swept away in floodwaters near I-95 mile-marker 85, a 51-year-old male was swept away 
while walking through floodwaters, and another driver was found submerged car in a car in 
Cleveland. Three people were killed in Lenoir County when a 71-year-old male was drowned 
while attempting to rescue a horse, a female drowned after driving her car around barricades and 
into floodwaters near LaGrange, and a 55-year-old man was found drowned in a shed in Kinston. 
A female driver drowned in Pitt County when her car was swept away by rushing floodwaters. 
Four flood-related deaths occurred in Robeson County when a man’s car was washed away by 
floodwaters near highway NC130, a man relying on oxygen drowned while attempting to escape 
floodwaters in his home in Fairmont, a 76-year-old man in Lumberton fell into water in his flooded 
home and drowned, and a female passenger drowned after her husband drove their car into 
floodwaters. Two people were killed in Wayne County when a male (age 54) had his car swept 
away by rushing floodwaters, and a 47-year-old female was found in her car after floodwaters had 
receded. In Wilson County, two people drowned after their cars were swept away submerged by 
freshwater floods. In Robeson County, a man fell into a large hole caused by an uprooted tree 
and was unable to climb out of the hole as it filled with floodwaters, resulting in an apparent 
drowning death. 
One additional direct death that was not flood related occurred when a man in Wake 
County was killed after a tree fell on the truck that he was driving. 
There were also six indirect deaths in North Carolina associated with Matthew. A 63-year-
old male collapsed from apparent heart failure after getting out of his vehicle in Cumberland 
County, a person died from apparent heart failure in Lenoir County while walking around after the 

Hurricane Matthew     21 
 
hurricane had passed, a female was killed in a fire in Rowan County, a 30-year-old male was 
killed when his car hydroplaned and crashed on a wet road in Sampson County, two evacuees 
died in shelters due to health-related issues. 
Wind damage was limited primarily to the immediate coastal areas, but flood-producing 
rainfall exceeding 10 inches was widespread, occurring along and well inland from the coast. 
Freshwater flooding of major rivers, low-lying areas, roads, and several municipalities was 
common. Flooding forced closure of Interstate 95 at exit 73 (US421) through exit 58 (NC295) and 
at exit 31 (NC20) through exit 13 (I-74).  In addition, Interstate 40 was closed westbound from exit 
341 (NC55) to exit 334 (NC96) between Newton Grove and Benson. 
In New Hanover County, at least 4 ft of storm surge produced a record flood level at the 
downtown Wilmington gauge along the Lower Cape Fear River. The storm surge flooding not only 
pushed northward up the Cape Fear River, but also spread eastward, producing saltwater 
inundation in Carolina Beach and low-lying dune areas elsewhere along the immediate coast. 
Flooding of the Black River Basin in the western part of Pender County resulted in 
evacuation and rescues of several neighborhoods in the days following Matthew. 
In Brunswick County, major flooding occurred near the confluence of the Black River and 
the Cape Fear River in the days following Matthew’s passage. This caused water to back up into 
the Lockwood Folly River in Shallotte, forcing several water rescues by local emergency 
responders. 
Major freshwater flooding occurred in the western part of Columbus County along the 
Lumber River, especially in the town of Fair Bluff where 85% of the town was submerged under 
water, resulting in massive evacuations. Highways 701 and 74, as well as highway NC130, 
experienced lengthy closures due to freshwater inundation. 
Several of the highest rainfall amounts occurred in Bladen County, resulting in major 
freshwater flooding along the Cape Fear River at Lock #1 near the town of Kelly. Major flooding 
was reported in Clarkton, Elizabethtown, White Oak, and Tar Heel, forcing evacuations and water 
rescues in the latter two municipalities. Floodwaters inundated much of downtown Bladenboro 
and caused the closure of numerous roads, including major state highways NC210, NC242, 
NC41, NC53, and NC87. Gauges on the Cape Fear River at the William O. Huske Dam and Lock 
#1 near East Arcadia recorded their highest flood stages since 1945. 
In Robeson County, major and record-breaking flood levels were observed along the 
Lumber River at Lumberton. Devastating floods occurred in and around Lumberton and 
Pembroke, causing significant monetary damage and loss of property, and forcing the closure of 
many roads. Offices in the Robesonian Newspaper in Lumberton were also flooded. A levee was 
believed to have broken in Lumberton, forcing the emergency evacuation of nearly 1,500 people 
stranded by the rising waters. On 10 October, two days after Matthew had passed, those people 
were still stranded and awaiting rescue. Most of them were in knee-deep water, but some fled to 
rooftops to escape the floodwaters. Numerous water rescues were required at many locations 
along the Lumber River. This was one of the hardest hit counties in the state due to the historic 
flooding that occurred. 

Hurricane Matthew     22 
 
Heavy rainfall and resultant freshwater flooding extended well inland from the state capital 
of Raleigh eastward to the Outer Banks, resulting in numerous evacuations and water rescues. 
One notable evacuation included the removal of nearly 800 inmates at the minimum-security 
Neuse Correctional Institute in Goldsboro in order to escape rising water from the Neuse and 
Little rivers. More than 700 swiftwater rescues were required in Cumberland County alone. 
Extensive flooding along the Tar, Cape Fear, Neuse and Lumber rivers produced dangerous 
conditions beyond drowning – the waters were toxic from sewage, chemicals, and dead animals 
that were caught up in the floods. 
Although Matthew remained well offshore of the Outer Banks, winds coming out of a high 
pressure system located over the Great Lakes were accelerated into Matthew’s circulation, 
resulting in widespread tree and powerline damage in Currituck, Dare, Hyde, and Tyrrell Counties. 
These winds also drove water onshore on the sound side of the barrier islands that combined with 
storm surge coming in from the Atlantic, producing significant saltwater inundation across much 
of the Outer Banks. Portions of Highway NC12 were closed or impassable. The section of highway 
NC12 from Kitty Hawk Road to Lillian Street was once again hit hard by overwash, causing new 
damage to the dunes and pavement. That area was closed and repaired in 2015 after Hurricane 
Arthur caused damage to the road in 2014. According to the North Carolina Department of 
Transportation, the barrier island highway was also closed from Old Oregon Inlet Road in Nags 
Head southward to Hatteras Village due to “very high standing water throughout the area, 
especially in Hatteras and Avon, with deep standing water covering much of NC12 for the entire 
length of Hatteras Island.” 
Elsewhere on the Outer Banks, a large volume of tree debris in Southern Shores had to 
be removed from the town’s streets to allow for emergency vehicles to reach residents. However, 
overall damage to structures was limited. The town of Kitty Hawk experienced freshwater flooding 
from the heavy rains between highways US158 and NC12, and pumps had to be invoked in an 
effort to relieve the standing water. Beach Road (NC12) received damage in front of the Sea 
Dunes condominiums and had to be closed, while the eastern portion of highway was eroded 
away by the ocean. Although some homes were damaged from flooding and high winds, property 
damage overall was described as minor by city officials. The town of Duck’s damage estimate 
indicated that a total of 543 properties were affected. City officials reported that, although many 
properties were damaged, the damage was relatively minor in nearly all cases. The most common 
types of damage identified were missing or damaged roof shingles and damaged siding, fascia, 
and soffits. Storm-surge flooding damaged dozens of additional residences throughout Duck. 
However, most of the flooded areas were enclosed storage areas, not finished rooms. Several 
beach structures, such as stairways and decks, were damaged by wave action caused by 
Matthew. Nags Head officials indicated the town experienced significant flooding on Beach Road 
(NC12) and between the highways on the north end of Nags Head. Significant flooding also 
occurred in some of the west side neighborhoods such as Nags Head Pond and Nags Head 
Acres. 
An EF0 tornado touched down near Walnut Creek in Wayne County, uprooting numerous 
trees, causing minor roof damage to several buildings, and destroying at least one billboard. In 
addition, a camper was uplifted and rotated around an adjacent building, and subsequently 
sustained damage. Several privacy fences were also knocked down and blown away. No injuries 
or deaths resulted from the tornado. 

Hurricane Matthew     23 
 
Across the southeastern and eastern portions of the state, Matthew caused at least $1.5 
billion in property damage to 100,000 buildings, left 900,000 people without electrical power, and 
caused environmental problems. 
Virginia: Direct fatalities (1) – A 53-year-old man was swept out to sea and drowned; his 
body was later found near Constant’s Wharf Park & Marina in Suffolk. One indirect death occurred 
when a 38-year-old male rear-ended a semi-tractor trailer that had stopped at a downed tree 
across the road.  
Strong northerly winds accelerating down the Chesapeake Bay caused widespread power 
outages across much of the Virginia Tidewater area, especially in the cities of Chesapeake, 
Hampton Roads, Virginia Beach, and Norfolk. Numerous traffic lights were knocked out, causing 
confusion and frustration on area roadways. Many streets were rendered impassable either due 
to floodwaters, downed trees, or downed power lines. In Virginia Beach, flooding and power 
outages stressed the sewer system so much that city officials asked residents to cut back on 
unnecessary water use due to the system’s inability to handle excessive wastewater flows. 
Furthermore, city officials indicated that saltwater inundation from storm surge flooding likely got 
into a 30-inch pressurized line, adding stress to it and exposing a weak spot, which caused a 
break in a major sewer line along Laskin Road. This resulted in about 2 million gallons of raw 
sewage spilling into a tributary of Linkhorn Bay. In Suffolk, Matthew’s winds and rains damaged 
some City Hall offices, forcing them to be moved elsewhere within the building.  
Many roads were flooded and rendered impassable, especially in Chesapeake, Elmwood 
Landing, Mill Creek, and Culpepper Landing neighborhoods, and pumps had to be installed to 
help increase the drainage. More than 100 road closures were reported throughout southeastern 
Virginia due to freshwater flooding. 
Although Matthew’s center passed more than 100 n mi southeast of Virginia, the 
hurricane’s effects still caused nearly 350,000 households to lose electrical power. The Virginia 
Department of Transportation estimated that damage from Hurricane Matthew to state-
maintained roads and bridges, along with debris cleanup, was at least $2 million. 
Mid-Atlantic and Northeast: Matthew lost its tropical characteristics early on 9 October as 
it moved eastward and then northeastward away from the United Sates. However, the large 
circulation of the extratropical low pressure system still managed to produce some flooding rains 
across the Delmarva Peninsula, along with minor beach erosion from Delaware to Long Island. 
In Snow Hill, Maryland, located in the east-central portion of the Delmarva, freshwater flooding 
led to a water rescue, but no injuries were reported. 
 
FORECAST AND WARNING CRITIQUE 
 
The genesis of Matthew was forecast extremely well. Table 4 provides the number of 
hours in advance of formation associated with the first NHC Tropical Weather Outlook (TWO) 
forecast in each likelihood category. The precursor disturbance was introduced in the TWO and 
given a low (<40%) chance of genesis during the next five days 138 hours before Matthew formed. 

Hurricane Matthew     24 
 
It was given a medium (40-60%) chance 96 h before genesis occurred, followed 12 h later by a 
high chance (>60%) of formation.  For the shorter term 48-h forecasts, the disturbance was given 
low, medium, and high chance of genesis 96 h, 54 h, and 42 h, respectively, before formation 
occurred. 
A verification of NHC official track forecasts (OFCL) for Matthew is given in Table 5a. 
Official forecast track errors were significantly lower than the mean official errors for the previous 
5-yr period at all forecast times, especially at 12 h and 24 h where OFCL forecasts were about 
40% better than average. At 72-120 h, the climatology and persistence model (OCD5) errors were 
larger than their 5-yr averages, which suggests that Matthew was a more difficult hurricane to 
forecast at those longer time periods. Figure 13 shows OFCL forecasts plotted against the best 
track for Matthew for 0-72 h and 0-120 h.  The NHC 72-h forecasts verified exceptionally well with 
very little bias. The OFCL 120-h forecasts verified quite well over the Caribbean Sea and the 
Bahamas. However, once Matthew emerged over the southwestern Atlantic north of the Greater 
Antilles, there was a sharp right-of-track bias due to expectations that Matthew would turn 
southward around a ridge that was expected to build over the southeastern United States instead 
of recurving into the mid-latitude westerlies. 
A homogeneous comparison of the official track errors with selected guidance models 
during Matthew’s tropical and post-tropical phases is given in Table 5b. Overall, the European 
Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasting model (EMXI) and the United Kingdom Met Office 
model (EGRI) had the lowest errors, which were mostly lower than the NHC official forecast errors. 
Many of the model consensus aids also had lower errors than the official forecasts, especially 
between 12 h and 96 h, including the new NOAA HFIP Corrected Consensus Approach (HCCA) 
model. 
A verification of NHC official intensity forecasts (OFCL) for Matthew is given in Table 6a.  
OFCL intensity errors were greater than the mean official errors for the previous 5-yr period at all 
forecast times and contained a pronounced low bias. The early OFCL forecasts missed Matthew’s 
24-h period of significant strengthening that occurred from 30 September to 1 October, resulting 
in the low bias. However, after Matthew completed that RI period, OFCL intensity forecast were 
quite good. A homogeneous comparison of the official intensity errors with selected guidance 
models is given in Table 6b. Overall, the NOAA Hurricane Weather Research and Forecasting 
model (HWFI) had the best statistics, but only narrowly outperforming the NHC official intensity 
forecasts at 36-96 h. However, none of the available intensity models, including the consensus 
model IVCN and its individual members – HWFI, GHMI, CTCI, DSHP, and LGEM – predicted 
Matthew’s RI period either before or during the episode (Fig. 14). 
In addition to Hermine earlier in the season, Matthew provided another opportunity for the 
National Weather Service to issue the Prototype Storm Surge Watch/Warning Graphic (Fig. 17), 
a depiction of areas that would qualify for inclusion under a storm surge watch or warning under 
development by the agency. Once operational, the storm surge watch and warning will be issued 
to delineate areas in which there is a possibility and danger, respectively, of life-threatening 
inundation of normally dry areas near the coast due the combination of storm surge and the tides.  
Prototype Storm Surge Watch/Warning Graphics were issued for Matthew beginning at 2100 UTC 
4 October, with a possibility of life-threatening inundation within the next 48 hours indicated for 
the east coast of Florida from North Palm Beach to the Volusia/Brevard County line.  A danger of 
life-threatening inundation within the next 36 h was first conveyed at 0300 UTC 5 October from 

Hurricane Matthew     25 
 
North Palm Beach to Sebastian Inlet, Florida. The Prototype Storm Surge Warning was then 
extended northward on successive advisories. 
Storm surge observations and analyses indicate that at least 3 ft of inundation (the current 
threshold for the prototype watch/warning) occurred from the east-central coast of Florida 
northward to North Carolina and the Hampton Roads area of Virginia within most of the Prototype 
Storm Surge Warning areas (Figs. 10 and 15). In general, locations within the southern portion of 
the warning area (south of Cape Canaveral) did not experience at least 3 ft of inundation, but only 
a slight westward shift in Matthew’s track would have caused worse storm surge flooding in that 
area. Conversely, a Prototype Storm Surge Warning was not depicted north of Duck, North 
Carolina, yet some locations in the Hampton Roads area of Virginia may have experienced 3 ft of 
inundation. NHC’s highest explicit storm surge inundation forecasts indicated that 7 to 11 ft above 
ground level was expected somewhere between Sebastian Inlet, Florida, and Edisto Beach, 
South Carolina. Inundation heights that were observed along the coasts of Flagler, St. Johns, and 
Duval Counties in Florida appear to have been very close to the 7-ft threshold. 
Coastal watches and warnings associated with Matthew are given in Table 7. A hurricane 
watch was first issued for the southeastern and east-central coasts of Florida from Deerfield 
Beach to the Volusia/Brevard County line at 1500 UTC 4 October. Since sustained tropical-storm-
force winds first reached the southeast Florida coast within the hurricane watch area in Palm 
Beach County around 1800 UTC 6 October, a lead time of 51 h was provided. A hurricane warning 
was issued for the southeastern and east-central Florida coastal areas from Golden Beach to 
Sebastian Inlet at 0300 UTC 5 October, and was subsequently extended northward to the 
Flagler/Volusia County line at 1500 UTC 5 October.  Sustained hurricane-force winds first reached 
the northern portion of the hurricane warning area at Cape Canaveral, Florida, around 0900 UTC 
7 October, resulting in a lead time of 42 h. However, the southern portion of the hurricane warning 
south of Sebastian, Florida, did not verify. Tropical storm and hurricane watches and warnings 
were subsequently issued at various times for the remainder of the southeastern coast of the 
United States from the Volusia/Brevard County border northward to Duck, North Carolina. 
However, the segment of the North Carolina Outer Banks from Surf City to Duck was only covered 
by a tropical storm warning and a hurricane watch. Surface observations indicate that sustained 
hurricane-force winds occurred near Nags Head, North Carolina, on the morning of 9 October, an 
area that was not covered by a hurricane warning. 
NHC does not issue warnings for inland flooding, but coordinates with the Weather 
Prediction Center (WPC) on hazard statements for inclusion in NHC public products.  The risk of 
flooding and flash flooding from central Florida to eastern North Carolina was first mentioned in 
the NHC Public Advisory at 5 AM Friday 7 October, when Matthew’s center was east of Cape 
Canaveral. The threat of inland flooding was included as a “Key Message” in NHC’s Tropical 
Cyclone Discussion beginning at 11 AM that day, and Public Advisories began describing the 
anticipated flooding as “life-threatening” beginning at 5 PM. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Hurricane Matthew     26 
 
 
Data in Table 3 were compiled from Post-Tropical Cyclone Reports issued by the NWS 
Forecast Offices (WFOs) in Miami, Melbourne, Tampa Bay/Ruskin, Jacksonville, Charleston, 
Wilmington, and Newport/Morehead City. Data from the Weather Prediction Center, National Data 
Buoy Center, NOS Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services, United States 
Geological Survey, the Cuban Meteorological Service (INSMET), the Bahamas Department of 
Meteorology, the Dominican Republic National Meteorological Office, and Meteo-France were 
also used in this report. Situation Reports (SITREP) from the Government of Haiti and USAID, 
along with reports from the St. Vincent and the Grenadines National Emergency Management 
Office were used to compile casualty and damage information for their respective countries. Mark 
Sudduth of HurricaneTrack.com contributed detailed wind and pressure observations, along with 
eyewitness accounts of conditions in New Smyrna Beach, Florida, during Matthew’s passage. 
Special thanks to Hurricane Specialist Robbie Berg and the NHC Storm Surge Unit for providing 
valuable analysis and figures concerning U.S. coastal flooding caused by Matthew’s storm surge. 
Brad Klotz of the NOAA/AOML Hurricane Research Division (HRD) provided the post-storm 
quality control checks of SFMR surface wind speed data.  
 

Hurricane Matthew     27 
 
Table 1. 
Best track for Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 9 October 2016. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
28 / 1200 
13.4 
59.8 
1009 
50 
tropical storm 
28 / 1800 
13.6 
61.2 
1008 
50 
" 
29 / 0000 
13.9 
62.6 
1004 
55 
" 
29 / 0600 
14.0 
64.0 
1002 
55 
" 
29 / 1200 
14.1 
65.5 
995 
60 
" 
29 / 1800 
14.2 
66.9 
993 
65 
hurricane 
30 / 0000 
14.2 
68.1 
987 
70 
" 
30 / 0600 
14.0 
69.3 
979 
85 
" 
30 / 1200 
13.8 
70.4 
968 
100 
" 
30 / 1800 
13.5 
71.2 
955 
120 
" 
01 / 0000 
13.4 
71.9 
942 
145 
" 
01 / 0600 
13.4 
72.5 
942 
140 
" 
01 / 1200 
13.4 
73.1 
944 
135 
" 
01 / 1800 
13.4 
73.3 
942 
130 
" 
02 / 0000 
13.5 
73.5 
940 
130 
" 
02 / 0600 
13.7 
73.9 
941 
125 
" 
02 / 1200 
14.0 
74.3 
947 
130 
" 
02 / 1800 
14.2 
74.7 
945 
135 
" 
03 / 0000 
14.5 
75.0 
944 
130 
" 
03 / 0600 
14.9 
75.0 
942 
125 
" 
03 / 1200 
15.4 
75.0 
941 
125 
" 
03 / 1800 
15.9 
74.9 
938 
125 
" 
04 / 0000 
16.6 
74.6 
934 
130 
" 
04 / 0600 
17.5 
74.4 
934 
130 
" 
04 / 1100 
18.3 
74.3 
935 
130 
" 
04 / 1200 
18.4 
74.3 
937 
125 
" 

Hurricane Matthew     28 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
04 / 1800 
19.3 
74.3 
947 
120 
" 
05 / 0000 
20.1 
74.3 
949 
115 
" 
05 / 0600 
20.7 
74.4 
960 
110 
" 
05 / 1200 
21.4 
74.8 
962 
105 
" 
05 / 1800 
22.2 
75.4 
963 
105 
" 
06 / 0000 
23.0 
76.0 
960 
105 
" 
06 / 0600 
23.8 
76.7 
952 
110 
" 
06 / 1200 
24.7 
77.5 
937 
120 
" 
06 / 1800 
25.7 
78.3 
937 
120 
" 
07 / 0000 
26.7 
79.0 
937 
115 
" 
07 / 0600 
27.7 
79.7 
939 
110 
" 
07 / 1200 
28.9 
80.3 
944 
105 
" 
07 / 1800 
29.7 
80.7 
946 
100 
" 
08 / 0000 
30.7 
80.6 
949 
95 
" 
08 / 0600 
31.6 
80.6 
953 
85 
" 
08 / 0900 
32.1 
80.5 
957 
85 
" 
08 / 1200 
32.5 
79.9 
963 
80 
" 
08 / 1500 
33.0 
79.5 
967 
75 
" 
08 / 1800 
33.5 
79.0 
973 
70 
" 
09 / 0000 
33.9 
77.3 
981 
70 
" 
09 / 0600 
34.7 
76.0 
983 
70 
" 
09 / 1200 
35.0 
74.5 
984 
65 
extratropical 
09 / 1800 
35.2 
72.8 
987 
60 
" 
10 / 0000 
35.3 
71.1 
990 
55 
" 
01 / 0000 
13.4 
71.9 
942 
145 
maximum winds 
04 / 0000 
16.6 
74.6 
934 
130 
minimum pressure 

Hurricane Matthew     29 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
Wind 
Speed (kt) 
Stage 
04 / 1100 
18.3 
74.3 
934 
130 
landfall near Les 
Anglais, Haiti 
05 / 0000 
20.1 
74.3 
949 
115 
landfall near Juaco, 
Cuba 
07 / 0000 
26.7 
79.0 
937 
115 
landfall near West 
End, Grand Bahama 
Island 
08 / 1500 
33.0 
79.5 
963 
75 
landfall 5 n mi south 
of McClellanville, 
South Carolina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     30 
 
Table 2. 
Selected ship reports with winds of at least 34 kt for Hurricane Matthew, 28 
September – 10 October 2016, while it was a tropical and extratropical cyclone. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Ship call 
sign 
Latitude 
(°N) 
Longitude 
(°W) 
Wind 
dir/speed (kt) 
Pressure 
(mb) 
29 / 0100 
3ETA8  
 19.2 
  67.1 
070 /  35 
1014.0 
05 / 0000 
J8PE4  
 20.1 
  71.2 
170 /  40 
1006.0 
07 / 1000 
WMKA   
 31.6 
  77.8 
080 /  40 
1007.0 
07 / 1800 
DFDG2  
 29.8 
  76.0 
130 /  36 
1007.2 
08 / 1100 
3FFL8  
 25.8 
  79.5 
230 /  38 
1009.9 
08 / 1354 
WTER   
 32.8 
  79.9 
330 /  40 
 980.2 
09 / 0000 
WAIU   
 37.0 
  70.9 
140 /  37 
1007.0 
09 / 0700 
H3GR   
 30.3 
  80.3 
020 /  35 
1012.0 
09 / 1600 
C6VV8  
 40.4 
  69.3 
050 /  52 
1011.0 
09 / 1800 
D5FR8  
 37.6 
  73.1 
350 /  60 
 999.0 
09 / 1800 
BUZM3  
 41.4 
  71.0 
020 /  35 
1011.9 
09 / 2100 
WCE506 
 41.0 
  70.9 
030 /  45 
1010.3 
10 / 0000 
3EFD9  
 40.5 
  71.5 
020 /  45 
1011.9 
10 / 0000 
BUZM3  
 41.4 
  71.0 
010 /  37 
1011.4 
10 / 0100 
BATFR2 
 41.3 
  69.3 
020 /  55 
1005.4 
10 / 0600 
A8XY2  
 39.7 
  69.5 
360 /  56 
1009.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     31 
 
Table 3. 
Selected surface observations for Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 9 October 
2016. 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Antigua 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
V. C. Bird  IAP (TAPA) 
(17.14N 61.79W) 
28/2300 
1013.0 
28/1800 
22 
(10 min) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Bahamas 
ICAO Sites 
Lynden Pindling 
(Nassau)  IAP (MYNN) 
(25.04N 77.47W) 
06/1300 
  975.7 
06/1300 
50 H 
(10 min) 
84 
 
 
 
 
Rock Sound IAP 
(MYER)  
(24.89N 76.18W) 
06/1200 
1000.0 
06/1200 
31 
(10 min) 
 
 
 
 
 
San Salvador Airport 
(MYSM)  
(24.06N 74.52W) 
06/0000 
1004.3 
06/0000 
28 
(10 min) 
 
 
 
 
 
South Bimini Airport 
(MYBS) 
(25.70N 79.26W) 
06/1800 
987.5 
06/1800 
38 
(10 min) 
 
 
 
 
16.82 
West End IAP 
(MYGW) 
(26.69N 78.98W) 
07/0100 
943.1 
07/0100 
63 
(11 m/1 min) 
 
 
 
 
3.88 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Settlement Point, GBI 
(SPGI7)  
(26.70N 78.99W) 
06/2300 
  972.3 
06/2230 
68 
(10 m/10 min) 
91 
 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coco Cay/Berry 
Islands (ITHBAHAS) 
(25.82N 77.94W) 
06/1927 
  970.6 
06/1959 
78 
88 
 
 
 
 
George Town 1.0 ESE 
(BHS-EX-1) 
(23.51N 75.77W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.36 
Matthew Town, Inagua 
(20.94N 73.67W) 
05/0000 
996.5 
05/0000 
21 
(10 min) 
 
 
 
 
19.70 
Moss Town, Exuma 
(23.56N 75.87W) 
06/0000 
993.0 
06/0600 
35 
(10 min) 
 
 
 
 
6.30 
Nassau 4.4 SW 
(BHS-NP-6) 
(25.04N 77.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.94 

Hurricane Matthew     32 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Nassau Upper-Air 
Station (MYNN) 
(25.05N 77.46W) 
 
 
06/1400 
100 
111 
 
 
 
 
Paradise Island 
(25.08N 77.30W) 
 
 
06/1139 
57 
(10 min) 
 
 
 
 
 
Ragged Island 
(22.18N 75.73W) 
05/0000 
989.0 
05/1800 
40 
(10 min) 
 
 
 
 
 
Stella Maris, Long 
Island 
(23.58N 75.27W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.82 
West End 1.1 ESE 
(BHS-WG-1) 
(26.68N 78.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.01 
Barbados 
ICAO Sites 
Grantley-Adams IAP 
(TBPB) (13.07N 59.49W) 
28/0800 
1007.8 
28/2200 
37 
(10 min) 
53 
 
 
 
2.69 
Cuba 
ICAO Sites 
Frank País/Holguin 
Arpt  (MUHG/78372) 
(20.79N 76.32W) 
05/1800 
1002.2 
05/1700 
17 
(1 min/10 m) 
27 
 
 
 
2.51 
Hermanos Ameijeiras/ 
Las Tunas Arpt  
(MUVT/78357) 
(20.99N 76.94W) 
05/2100 
1003.1 
04/1740 
24 
(1 min/10 m) 
30 
 
 
 
2.51 
Mariana Grajales/ 
Guantánamo Arpt 
(MUGT/78368) 
(20.09N 75.16W) 
04/2010 
991.6 
04/1950 
9 
(1 min/10 m) 
--- 
 
 
 
4.67 
Punta de Maisí  Arpt 
(MUMA/78369) 
(20.24N 71.50W) 
05/0150 
968.8 
05/0120 
108 
(1 min/10 m) 
132 
 
 
 
26.04 
Sierra Maestra/ 
Manazillo Arpt 
(MUMZ/78359) 
(20.29N 77.09) 
05/0800 
1004.3 
05/2215 
22 
(1 min/10 m) 
29 
 
 
 
1.00 
U.S. Naval Station, 
Guantánamo Bay 
(MUGM) 
(19.90N 75.21W) 
04/2156 
996.9 
04/1356 
24 
(1 min/10 m) 
34 F 
 
 
 
3.16 

Hurricane Matthew     33 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cabo Cruz (78360) 
(19.85N 77.23W) 
04/2100 
1004.0 
04/1745 
24 
(1 min/10 m) 
31 
 
 
 
0.32 
Caujeri (78319) 
(20.22N 74.81W) 
04/2200 
989.7 
05/2010 
75 
(1 min/10 m) 
--- 
 
 
 
15.75 
Guaro (78370) 
(20.67N 75.78W) 
05/0800 
994.0 
04/1500 
19 
(1 min/10 m) 
32 
 
 
 
3.61 
Jaucarito (78361) 
(20.67N 76.90W) 
05/2100 
1004.6 
05/2200 
10 
(1 min/10 m) 
40 
 
 
 
0.60 
Jamal (78356) 
(20.28N 74.43W) 
05/0230 
958.6 
04/2200 
103 
(1 min/10 m) 
151 
 
 
 
7.55 
Jiquima (78362) 
(22.03N 79.74W) 
05/0700 
1002.1 
04/1930 
15 
(1 min/10 m) 
--- 
 
 
 
3.87 
Palenque de Yatera 
(78334) 
(20.35N 74.92W) 
05/0500 
992.0 
05/0250 
76 
(1 min/10 m) 
--- 
 
 
 
14.87 
Pinares de Mayari 
(78371/elev. 646 m) 
(20.48N 75.80W) 
05/0700 
933.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.61 
Punta Lucrecia 
(78365) 
(21.07N 75.62W) 
05/0940 
997.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.94 
Puerto Padre (78358) 
(21.20N 76.60W) 
05/2140 
1002.3 
04/1830 
24 
(1 min/10 m) 
35 
 
 
 
2.89 
Velazco (78378) 
(21.92N 78.32W) 
05/2045 
1001.0 
04/1930 
31 
(1 min/10 m) 
33 
 
 
 
2.31 
Veguitas (78377) 
(20.32N 76.88W) 
05/0807 
1004.8 f 
04/1930 
4 
(1 min/10 m) 
18 
 
 
 
0.47 
Dominica 
ICAO Sites 
Canefield  IAP (TDCF) 
(15.34N 61.39W) 
28/2100 
1008.0 
29/0000 
15 F 
(10 min) 
37 
 
 
 
 
Douglas–Charles  IAP 
(TDPD) 
(15.55N 61.30W) 
28/2100 
1011.0 f 
28/1500 
29 F 
(10 min) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Dominican Republic 
ICAO Sites 
Arroyo Barril Airport/ 
Samaná (MDAB) 
(19.20N 69.43W) 
03/2100 
1008.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.48 

Hurricane Matthew     34 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
La Isabela IAP/ 
Higuero (MDJB) 
(18.58N 69.98W) 
03/2000 
1008.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.31 
La Romana IAP 
(MDLR) 
(18.45N 68.91W) 
03/2000 
1008.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.72 
Las Américas IAP/ 
Santo Domingo 
(MDSD) 
(18.43N 69.67W) 
03/2100 
1008.0 
04/0800 
12 
(10 min) 
43 
 
 
 
7.15 
María Montez IAP/ 
Barahona (MDBH) 
(18.25N 71.12W) 
04/0900 
1006.2 
04/0800 
30 
(10 min) 
40 
 
 
 
16.92 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bayaguana (78473) 
(18.75N 69.34W) 
03/2100 
1007.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.94 
Jimani (78480) 
(18.49N 71.85) 
04/1400 
1005.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.02 
Sabana de la Mar 
(78467) 
(19.07N 69.39W) 
03/2100 
1008.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.79 
Santo Domingo - 
Central (78486) 
(18.49N 69.98W) 
03/0900 
1008.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.17 
Guadeloupe 
ICAO Sites 
Pointe-à-Pitre IAP 
(TFFR)  
(16.26N 61.52W) 
28/1900 
1010.0 
28/1700 
23 
(10 min) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Haiti 
ICAO Sites 
Toussaint Louverture 
IAP (MTPP) 
(18.58N 72.95W) 
04/0800 
1001.7 
04/0500 
30 
(10 min) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anse-à-Veau/ 
Nippes Department 
(18.52N 73.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.80 
Belle-Anse/ 
Sud-Est Department 
(18.23N 72.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.73 

Hurricane Matthew     35 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Bombardopolis/ 
Nord-Ouest Dep’t 
(19.70N 73.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.74 
Carrefour/ 
Ouest Department 
(18.53N 72.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.30 
Fonds-Parisien/ 
Ouest Department 
(18.52N 71.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.13 
Gros-Morne/ 
Artibonite Department 
(19.67N 72.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.94 
Jean-Rabel/ 
Nord-Ouest Dep’t 
(19.85N 73.20W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.72 
La Vallée-de-Jacmel/ 
Sud-Est Department 
(18.27N 72.67W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.83 
Mombin-Crochu/ 
Nord-Est Department 
(19.37N 71.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.20 
Petit-Trou-de-Nippes/ 
Nippes Department 
(18.45N 73.35W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.10 
Plaisance/  
Nord Department 
(19.60N 72.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.74 
Verrettes/ 
Artibonite Department 
(19.05N 72.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.93 
Martinique 
ICAO Sites 
Martinique Aimé 
Césaire  IAP (TFFF) 
(14.59N 60.99W) 
28/1900 
1007.9 F 
28/2107 
38 
(10 min) 
61 
 
 
 
 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daimant 
(elev. 366 m) 
(14.48N 61.00W) 
 
 
28/2107 
44 
(10 min) 
66 
 
 
 
 
Fond-Denis-Cadet 
(elev. 493 m) 
(14.73N 61.14W) 
 
 
28/1856 
39 
(10 min) 
87 
 
 
 
7.94 

Hurricane Matthew     36 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Fort De Frances 
Desaix (elev. 143 m) 
(14.63N 60.07W) 
 
 
28/2023 
35 
(10 min) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Lorrain Vallon 
(elev. 83 m) 
(14.81N 61.07W) 
 
 
28/2213 
32 
(10 min) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Rivière-Pilote Stade 
(elev. 80 m) 
 (14.48N 60.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.19 
Sainte-Anne 
(elev. 22 m) 
(14.44N 60.87W) 
 
 
28/1927 
32 
(10 min) 
61 
 
 
 
5.65 
Sainte-Luce 
(elev. 44 m) 
(14.59N 60.99W) 
 
 
28/1935 
32 
(10 min) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Sainte-Pierre 
(elev. 27 m) 
(14.74N 61.18W) 
 
 
28/1917 
31 
(10 min) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Trinite Caravel 
(elev. 26 m) 
(14.71N 60.97W) 
 
 
28/2201 
52 
(10 min) 
75 
 
 
 
 
Vauclin 
(elev. 12 m) 
(14.54N 60.84W) 
 
 
28/2113 
51 
(10 min) 
68 
 
 
 
4.96 
Montserrat 
ICAO Sites 
John A. Osborne  IAP 
(TRPG) 
(16.79N 62.19W) 
28/2100 
1012.0 F 
28/1807 
31 F 
(10 min) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Puerto Rico 
ICAO Sites 
Luis Muñoz Marín 
(San Juan) IAP (TJSJ) 
(18.44N 66.00W) 
29/0756 
1013.5 
29/1109 
25 
(2 min/10 m) 
36 F 
 
 
 
 
St. Croix 
ICAO Sites 
Henry E. Rohlsen  IAP 
(TISX) 
(17.70N 64.80W) 
28/1935 
1013.5 
28/2153 
27 F 
(10 min) 
43 
 
 
 
 
St. Lucia 

Hurricane Matthew     37 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
ICAO Sites 
George F. L. Charles 
IAP (TLPC) 
(14.02N 60.99W) 
28/1900 
1006.0 
29/0000 
19 
(10 min) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Hewanorra IAP  
(TLPL) 
(13.73N 60.95W) 
28/2100 
1007.0 
29/0000 
31 F 
(10 min) 
41 
 
 
 
 
St. Maarten & St. Martin 
ICAO Sites 
Princess Juliana  IAP 
(TNCM) 
(18.04N 63.11W) 
28/1942 
1012.8 F 
28/2200 
21 
(10 min) 
33 
 
 
 
 
United States 
Florida 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Sites 
Brooksville-Tampa 
Bay Reg. Arprt (KFHB)  
(28.47N 82.45W) 
07/1053 
1001.8 
07/1853 
22 
(2 min, 10 m) 
34 
 
 
 
 
Cape Canaveral Air 
Force Station (KXMR)  
(28.50N 80.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.01 
Daytona Beach IAP 
(KDAB)  
(29.18N 81.05W) 
07/1537 
974.3 
07/1045 
45 
(2 min, 10 m) 
62 
 
 
 
5.06 
Deland Municipal 
Airport  (KDED)  
(29.06N 81.28W) 
07/1655 
984.7 
07/1415 
36 
(2 min, 10 m) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Fernandina Beach 
Muni. Airport (KFHB)  
(30.61N 81.46W) 
07/2235 
984.6 
08/0155 
38 
(2 min, 10 m) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Ft. Lauderdale Exec. 
Arpt (KFXE)  
(26.20N 80.17W) 
07/0053 
996.9 
07/0126 
26 
(2 min, 10 m) 
38 
 
 
 
1.61 
Ft. Lauderdale-
Hollywood IAP (KFLL)  
(26.07N 80.15W) 
06/2305 
996.7 
07/0453 
21 
(2 min, 10 m) 
29 
 
 
 
1.19 
Ft. Myers-Page Field 
Airport (KFMY)  
(26.58N 81.97W) 
07/0753 
1001.9 
06/1907 
21 
(2 min, 10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     38 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Gainesville Regional 
Airport (KGNV)  
(29.69N 82.27W) 
07/1953 
996.5 
07/1917 
29 
(2 min, 10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
1.49 
Jacksonville-Cecil 
Field Airport (KVQQ)  
(30.22N 81.88W) 
 
 
07/2215 
32 
(2 min, 10 m) 
48 
 
 
 
8.91 
Jacksonville 
Exec./Craig (KCRG)  
(30.34N 81.51W) 
07/2053 
986.1 
07/2006 
41 
(2 min, 10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
8.91 
Jacksonville IAP 
(KJAX)  
(30.48N 81.70W) 
07/2156 
989.8 
07/1920 
39 
(2 min, 10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
8.32 
Jacksonville Naval Air 
Station (KNIP)  
(30.22N 81.67W) 
07/2053 
988.5 
07/1909 
42 
(2 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
6.71 
Keystone Heights 
Airpark (K42J)  
(29.85N 82.05W) 
07/1535 
999.3 
07/1535 
24 
(2 min, 10 m) 
36 
 
 
 
 
Lake City Gateway 
Airport (KLCQ)  
(30.18N 82.58W) 
07/2135 
999.3 
07/2015 
24 
(2 min, 10 m) 
36 
 
 
 
 
Leesburg IAP 
(KLEE)  
(28.82N 81.81W) 
07/1550 
995.9 
07/1825 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
42 
 
 
 
1.69 
Mayport Naval Station/ 
Jacksonville  (KNRB)  
(30.40N 81.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.47 
Northeast Florida Reg. 
Airport/St. Augustine 
(KSGJ) (28.78N 81.24W) 
07/1858 
982.1 
07/1721 
44 
(2 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
8.81 
North Perry-Hollywood 
Airport (KHWO)  
(26.00N 82.24W) 
06/2253 
998.0 
07/0353 
23 
(2 min, 10 m) 
36 
 
 
 
 
Ocala IAP  
(KOCF)  
(29.18N 82.22W) 
07/1850 
997.6 
07/1650 
20 
(2 min, 10 m) 
34 
 
 
 
3.00 
Okeechobee County 
Airport  (KOBE)  
(27.27N 80.85W) 
07/0615 
994.2 
07/1115 
27 
(2 min, 10 m) 
34 
 
 
 
 
Opa Locka-Miami 
Exec. Aprt  (KOPF)  
(25.91N 80.28W) 
06/2300 
998.5 
07/0045 
24 
(2 min, 10 m) 
35 
 
 
 
 
Orlando-Melbourne 
IAP  (KMLB)  
(28.10N 80.65W) 
07/0937 
980.0 
07/0646 
46 
(2 min, 10 m) 
61 
 
 
 
6.17 

Hurricane Matthew     39 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Orlando IAP 
(KMCO)  
(28.42N 81.33W) 
07/1058 
991.5 
07/1444 
40 
(2 min, 10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
2.48 
Orlando Exec. Airport 
(KORL)  
(28.55N 81.33W) 
07/1229 
991.5 
07/1521 
36 
(2 min, 10 m) 
50 
 
 
 
3.01 
Orlando-Sanford IAP 
(KSFB)  
(28.78N 81.24W) 
07/1508 
987.1 
07/1512 
41 
(2 min, 10 m) 
55 
 
 
 
8.22 
Palm Beach IAP  
(KPBI)  
(26.68N 80.09W) 
07/0353 
992.8 
06/2253 
29 
(2 min/10 m) 
44 
 
 
 
 
Pompano Beach 
Airpark  (KPMP)  
(26.25N 80.12W) 
07/0200 
996.0 
07/0322 
33 
(2 min/10 m) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Sarasota-Bradenton 
IAP (KSRQ)  
(27.40N 82.55W) 
07/0853 
1002.8 
07/1153 
24 
(2 min/10 m) 
34 
 
 
 
 
St. Pete.-Clearwater 
IAP (KPIE)  
(27.91N 82.69W) 
07/0853 
1002.2 
07/0953 
21 
(2 min/10 m) 
35 
 
 
 
 
The Villages Airport 
(KVVG)  
(28.96N 81.97W) 
07/1815 
993.0 
07/1815 
26 
35 
 
 
 
 
Treasure Coast IAP/ 
Ft. Pierce (KFPR)  
(27.49N 80.37W) 
07/0711 
982.7 
07/0715 
29 
 (2 min, 10 m) 
59 
 
 
 
4.18 
Vero Beach Regional 
Airport  (KVRB)  
(27.65N 80.42W) 
07/0725 
980.7 
07/0650 
48 
(2 min/10 m) 
64 
 
 
 
3.55 
Williston Municipal 
Airport (KX60)  
(27.35N 82.47W) 
07/1835 
999.0 
07/1935 
28 
39 
 
 
 
 
Witham Field Airport/ 
Stuart  (KSUA)  
(27.18N 80.22W) 
07/0615 
985.1 
07/0615 
36 
(2 min/10 m) 
53 
 
 
 
2.45 
United States Geological Survey (USGS) Storm Tide Pressure Sensors 
Fort Matanzas Beach 
(FLSTJ03126)  
(29.72N 81.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.39 
6.4 
 
Everglades National Park Water Quality Stations 
Blackwater Sound Key 
(BWSF1)  
(25.18N 80.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.03 
(MLLW) 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     40 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Butternut Key 
(BNKF1)  
(25.09N 80.52W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.06 
(MLLW) 
 
 
Duck Key (DKKF1)  
(25.18N 80.49W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.19 
(MLLW) 
 
 
Little Blackwater 
Sound (LSBF1)  
(25.21N 80.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.16 
(MLLW) 
 
 
Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) Sites 
Blount Island 
Command (BLIF1) 
(30.39N 81.52W) 
07/2124 
986.4 
07/2000 
36 
(10 min, 17 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Cedar Key (CDRF1) 
(29.14N 83.03W) 
07/1854 
1002.4 
06/1624 
29 
(10 min, 10 m) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Fowey Rocks 
(FWYF1)  
(25.59N 80.10W) 
06/2200 
999.0 
06/2250 
38 
(6 min,4 4 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Molasses Reef 
(MLRF1)  
(25.01N 80.38W) 
 
 
06/1109 
 
37 
(16 m) 
 
 
 
 
St. Augustine (SAUF1) 
(29.86N 81.27W) 
07/1900 
978.9 
07/1730 
57 
(10 min, 17 m) 
75 
 
 
 
 
National Ocean Service (NOS) Sites 
Clearwater Beach 
(8726724)  
(27.98N 82.83W) 
07/0918 
1003.2 
07/1154 
33 
(6 min, 7 m) 
39 
 
 
 
 
Dames Point (8720219)  
(30.39N 81.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
3.68 
4.18I 
2.8 
 
Fernandina Beach 
(8720030)  
(30.67N 81.47W) 
08/0012 
987.4F 
08/0318 
34 
(6 min, 7 m) 
51 
6.91 
6.96 
4.2 
 
Lake Worth Pier 
(8722670)  
(26.61N 80.03W) 
 
 
06/2130 
40 
(6 min, 6 m) 
52 
1.69 
1.97 
1.4 
 
Mayport-Bar Pilots 
Dock (8720218)  
(30.40N 81.43W) 
07/2112 
985.3 
07/2006 
46 
(6 m) 
65 
4.69 
5.22I 
3.3 
 
I-295 Bridge, St. 
Johns River (8720357)  
(30.19N 81.69W) 
07/2036 
988.3 
07/1800 
28 
(10 m) 
42 
3.08 
3.44 
3.1 
 
Racy Point, St. Johns 
River (8720625)  
(29.80N 81.55W) 
 
 
 
 
 
4.58 
5.19 
4.6 
 
Red Bay Point, St.J 
Johns River (8720503)  
(29.98N 81.64W) 
07/2012 
986.9 
07/1824 
44 
(10 m) 
60 
3.38 
3.66i 
3.2 
 

Hurricane Matthew     41 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
South Bank Riverwalk, 
St. Johns River 
(8720226)  
(30.32N 81.66W) 
 
 
 
 
 
3.37 
2.76 
2.1 
 
Trident Pier (8721604)  
(28.42N 80.59W) 
07/1100 
973.5 
07/0948 
45 
(6 min, 7 m) 
64 
4.09 
2.82 
1.8 
 
Vaca Key (8723970)  
(24.71N 81.10W) 
06/1930 
1003.5 
06/2230 
26 
(7 m) 
30 
0.98 
0.60 
1.0 
 
Virginia Key (8723214)  
(25.73N 80.16W) 
06/2206 
998.4 
07/0506 
26 
(10 m) 
33 
1.01 
1.30 
1.1 
 
Weatherflow Sites 
Altamonte Springs-
Spring Lake (XSPR) 
(28.66N 81.41W) 
 
 
07/1221 
33 
41 
 
 
 
 
Anna Maria Island 
6 NNW  (XEGM) 
(27.61N 82.76W) 
 
 
07/1116 
32 
38 
 
 
 
 
Boca Grande  2 S 
(XBCG) 
(26.72N 82.26W) 
 
 
06/2010 
23 
36 
 
 
 
 
Buck Island -
Jacksonville (XJAK)  
(30.39N 81.48W) 
07/2048 
979.4 
07/1943 
51 
(2 min, 10 m) 
71 
 
 
 
 
Carysfort Reef Light- 
Key Largo (KCFL)  
(25.23N 80.21W) 
06/1955 
997.3 
06/2230 
33 
42 
 
 
 
 
Cocoa Beach Club 
(XCOA) 
(28.31N 80.63W) 
 
 
07/1245 
43 
56 
 
 
 
 
Cocoa Beach Pier 
(XCCO) 
(28.37N 80.60W) 
 
 
07/0845 
52 
67 
 
 
 
 
Crescent Beach - 
Summerhouse (XHSE)  
(29.71N 81.23W) 
07/1815 
977.6 
07/1725 
49 
(2 min, 5 m) 
67 
 
 
 
 
Hobe Sound  
(XHOB) 
(27.05N 80.17W) 
 
 
07/0529 
37 
50 
 
 
 
 
Horizon West-Reedy 
Lake  (XRDY) 
(28.44N 81.63W) 
 
 
07/1326 
31 
39 
 
 
 
 
Huguenot Park - 
Jacksonville (XHUP)  
(30.42N 81.41W) 
07/2048 
979.4 
07/1943 
51 
(2 min, 10 m) 
71 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     42 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Jacksonville Beach 
Pier (XJAX)  
(30.29N 81.39W) 
07/2105 
983.6 
07/1735 
53 
(2 min, 12 m) 
66 
 
 
 
 
Jensen Beach 
(XJEN) 
(27.22N 80.20W) 
 
 
07/0400 
45 
63 
 
 
 
 
Jensen Beach-St. 
Lucie Pwr Plnt (XSTL) 
(27.35N 80.24W) 
 
 
07/0207 
50 
58 
 
 
 
 
Jupiter (XJUP)  
(26.89N 80.06W) 
 
 
06/2315 
49 
(6 m, 5 min) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Lewis - St. Johns 
(XLWS)  
(29.91N 81.33W) 
07/1929 
976.9 
07/1659 
39 
(2 min, 15 m) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Malabar-Rocky Point 
(XRPT) 
(27.98N 80.55W) 
 
 
07/0648 
52 
63 
 
 
 
 
Melbourne-Dairy Road 
(XDAI) 
(28.04N 80.64W) 
 
 
07/0747 
38 
62 
 
 
 
 
Melbourne Beach-
Aquarina R&D Lab 
(XDAI) (27.94N 80.49W) 
 
 
07/0749 
35 
53 
 
 
 
 
Merritt Island-Banana 
River at SR520 (XCCB) 
(28.36N 80.65W) 
 
 
07/0919 
55 
70 
 
 
 
 
Merritt Island-Banana 
River at SR528 (XMER) 
(28.40N 80.66W) 
 
 
07/1130 
37 
60 
 
 
 
 
New Smyrna Beach 
(XNSB) 
(29.04N 80.90W) 
 
 
07/1202 
61 
72 
 
 
 
 
Palmetto  7 NW 
(XSKY) 
(27.60N 82.65W) 
 
 
07/1532 
30 
36 
 
 
 
 
Sarasota  1 WNW 
(XSRB) 
(27.34N 82.56W) 
 
 
06/2002 
28 
36 
 
 
 
 
Tamarac  
(XCVN) 
(26.19N 80.30W) 
 
 
07/0038 
 
37 
(10 m) 
 
 
 
 
Titusville-Parrish Park 
North  (XPAR) 
(28.63N 80.81W) 
 
 
07/1110 
50 
65 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     43 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Vero Beach - City Hall 
(XVER) 
(27.63 80.39W) 
 
 
07/0459 
35 
57 
 
 
 
 
Weeki Wachee 1 NNE 
(XWKI) 
(28.52N 82.57W) 
 
 
07/1715 
 
37 
 
 
 
 
Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Sites 
Aberdeen 4.2 NNW 
(FL-PB-12) 
(26.61N 80.17W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.43 
Apopka 2.9E 
(FL-OR-16) 
(28.69N 81.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.14 
Astatula 1.0 E 
(FL-LK-25) 
(28.71N 81.72W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.84 
Boynton Beach 6.2 
WNW (FL-PB-72) 
(26.55N 80.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.38 
Chuluota 0.9 N 
(FL-SM-8) 
(28.65N 81.12W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.78 
Daytona Beach 
Shores 1.8 SSE 
(FL-VL-42) 
(29.15N 80.97W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.35 
DeLand 5.7 NW 
(FL-VL-9) 
(29.10N 81.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.75 
DeLeon Springs  
1.3 NNW (FL-VL-24) 
(29.13N 81.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.10 
East Palatka 3.5 NNW 
(FL-PT-8) 
(29.70N 81.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.96 
Fernandina Beach  
6.3 SW (FL-NS-14) 
(30.60N 81.53W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.51 
Fleming Island 1.7 SE 
(FL-CY-1) 
(30.08N 81.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.45 
Fleming Island 2.2 S 
(FL-CY-37) 
(30.06N 81.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.55 

Hurricane Matthew     44 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Florahome 4.1 NNE 
(FL-PT-12) 
(29.78N 81.85W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.30 
Fruit Cove 4.0 NE 
(FL-DV-67) 
(30.14N 81.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.37 
Groveland 1.7 E  
(FL-LK-3)  
(28.57N 81.82W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.10 
Haines City 6.0 ESE 
(FL-PK-46)  
(28.06N 81.55W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.11 
Interlachen 10.4 NNE  
(FL-PT-1)  
(29.76N 81.84W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.64 
Jacksonville 10.0 
WSW (FL-DV-33)  
(30.30N 81.82W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.61 
Jacksonville 10.3 SW  
(FL-DV-42)  
(30.24N 81.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.16 
Jacksonville 11.4 ESE  
(FL-DV-32)  
(30.31N 81.47W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.60 
Jacksonville 11.9 N  
(FL-DV-37)  
(30.50N 81.62W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.60 
Jacksonville 12.0 SSE  
(FL-DV-51)  
(30.18N 81.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.41 
Jacksonville 11.4 ESE 
(FL-DV-28)  
(30.32N 81.60W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.02 
Jacksonville 9.6 SE  
(FL-DV-79)  
(30.23N 81.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.64 
Keystone Heights  
9.1 NE  (FL-CY-14)  
(29.87N 81.92W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.91 
Lakeside 2.9 S 
(FL-CY-4)  
(30.09N 81.76W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.97 
Lakewood Park  
0.5 SW  (FL-SL-4)  
(27.53N 81.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.92 

Hurricane Matthew     45 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Merritt Island 9.1 N  
(FL-BV-36)  
(28.48N 80.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.86 
Middleburg 3.8 NW 
(FL-CY-40)  
(30.09N 80.95W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.84 
Mount Plymouth  
0.2 WSW  (FL-LK-5) 
(28.80N 81.54W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.27 
Oak Hill 2.8 WSW 
(FL-VL-38) 
(28.86N 80.87W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.98 
Orange 11.2 NE 
(FL-OR-23) 
(28.59N 81.11W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.82 
Orange Park 0.7 NNE 
(FL-CY-10) 
(30.18N 81.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.94 
Orange Park  
3.0 WNW   (FL-CY-8) 
(30.18N 81.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.17 
Orange Park  
4.1 WSW   (FL-CY-25) 
(30.15N 81.77W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.44 
Orlando 7.4 WNW   
(FL-OR-25)  
(28.57N 81.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.67 
Ormond Beach  
3.5 SE   (FL-VL-5)  
(29.27N 81.05W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.84 
Oveido 4.0 W    
(FL-SM-12)  
(28.67N 81.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.08 
Palm Bay 2.6 SSE   
(FL-BV-1)  
(27.95N 80.64W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.85 
Palm Coast 5.9 S 
(FL-FL-25)  
(29.49N 81.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.32 
Picolata 2 WSW 
(FL-CY-19)  
(29.90N 81.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.30 
Sanford 1 WNW 
(FL-SM-18)  
(28.80N 81.31W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.07 

Hurricane Matthew     46 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Satsuma 4.0 NE 
(FL-PT-7)  
(29.59N 81.61W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.11 
St. Augustine  
12.2 WNW  (FL-SJ-16)  
(29.94N 81.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.60 
St. Augustine South 
2.1 SSW  (FL-SJ-4)  
(29.81N 81.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.30 
Stuart 3.7 SW   
(FL-MT-7)  
(27.13N 80.21W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.87 
Winter Garden 6.1 SW   
(FL-OR-20)  
(28.50N 81.65W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.65 
Hydrometeorological Automated Data System (HADS) Sites (NWS) 
Nerrs Meteorological 
Site at Mantanzas/St. 
Augustine (GTXF1)  
(29.66N 81.22W) 
07/1845 
979.0 
07/1630 
41 
(2 m) 
 
 
 
 
 
NWS Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Sites 
Bellair  3 W 
(D8274) 
(30.18N 81.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.34 
Geneva  5 ESE 
(GNEF1) 
(28.72N 81.04W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.21 
Lake Mary  5 WNW  
(LSPF1)  
(28.80N 81.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.26 
Leesburg  7 NE  
(LSBF1)  
(28.87N 81.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.51 
Melbourne  
(MLBF1)  
(28.11N 80.65W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.72 
Melbourne Beach 
(TSUF1)  
(28.05N 80.55W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.66 
Sanford  1 SSW 
(SFNF1)  
(28.80N 81.27W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.99 
Titusville 
(TITF1)  
(28.63N 80.83W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.50 

Hurricane Matthew     47 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Vero Beach  4 W 
(VRGF1)  
(27.69N 80.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.53 
Other Sites 
AP837 - 3 SW Eagle 
Lake (27.95N 81.79W) 
 
 
07/0748 
24 
38 
 
 
 
 
AR664 - 2 WNW 
Frostproof  
(27.76N 81.57W) 
 
 
07/1929 
 
36 
 
 
 
 
AR666 - 1 ESE 
Dundee  
(28.01N 81.60W) 
 
 
07/0734 
22 
37 
 
 
 
 
Broad Key 
(Weatherstem) 
(25.35N 80.25W) 
 
 
06/1043 
 
36 
 
 
 
 
D1496 - 1 N Beverly 
Hills  
(28.93N 82.46W) 
 
 
07/202 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
D9045 - 1 NW Port 
Charlotte  
(26.99N 82.11W) 
 
 
06/1935 
 
37 
 
 
 
 
E6508 – Belleair 
(27.95N 82.81W) 
 
 
07/0935 
30 
43 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC0021) –  
USAF Tower 2 
(28.44N 80.56W) 
 
 
07/1020 
59 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
88 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC0003) –  
USAF Tower 3 
(28.46N 80.53W) 
 
 
07/1026 
74 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
93 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC1102) –  
USAF Tower 110 
(28.57N 80.59W) 
 
 
07/1121 
65 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
91 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC3132) –  
USAF Tower 313 
(28.62N 80.66W) 
 
 
07/1130 
60 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
86 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC0020) –  
USAF Tower 108 
(28.44N 80.56W) 
 
 
07/1020 
58 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
85 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     48 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC0108) –  
USAF Tower 2 
(28.54N 80.57W) 
 
 
07/1046 
64 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
83 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC0061) –  
USAF Tower 6 
(28.51N 80.56W) 
 
 
07/1127 
53 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
81 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC0303) –  
USAF Tower 303 
(28.46N 80.57W) 
 
 
07/1037 
60 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
80 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC1101) –  
USAF Tower 1101 
(28.57N 80.59W) 
 
 
07/1230 
70 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
80 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC3131) –  
USAF Tower 3131 
(28.63N 80.66W) 
 
 
07/1130 
58 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
80 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC0403) –  
USAF Tower 403 
(28.46N 80.59W) 
 
 
07/1050 
60 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
80 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC0001) –  
USAF Tower 1 
(28.43N 80.57W) 
 
 
07/1129 
59 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
77 
 
 
 
 
Kennedy Space 
Center (KSC0415) –  
USAF Tower 415 
(28.66N 80.70W) 
 
 
07/1104 
56 
(1 min, 16.5 m) 
73 
 
 
 
 
KFLDAYTONA014- 
Daytona Beach 
(Embry Riddle) 
Weatherstem 
(29.19N 81.05W) 
 
 
07/1527 
62 
73 
 
 
 
 
New Smyrna Beach  
Hurricanetrack.com 
(29.02N 80.91W) 
07/1457 
969.9 
07/1440 
56 
(26 m, 1 min) 
82 
 
 
 
 
Ortega 1 SSE 
(C0639) 
(30.26N 81.70W) 
 
 
07/1948 
 
34 
 
 
 
6.87 

Hurricane Matthew     49 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Palm Coast 
(E0808) 
(29.57N 81.21W) 
 
 
07/1456 
 
43 
 
 
 
6.52 
Peterson Key-
Everglades NPWQS 
(24.92N 80.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.59 
Satellite Beach C1819 
(28.43N 80.57W) 
 
 
07/1050 
60 
80 
 
 
 
 
Silver Springs Shores  
2 WNW  (E8915) 
(29.12N 81.05W) 
 
 
07/1437 
 
49 
 
 
 
 
Stuart-South Fork HS 
(Weatherstem)  
(28.67N 80.43W) 
 
 
07/0802 
40 
47 
 
 
 
 
Tarpon Springs 3 W 
(FHPF1-COMPS) 
(28.15N 82.80W) 
 
 
07/1048 
31 
(10 m, 6 min) 
38 
 
 
 
 
Vero Beach-
Dodgertown Elem. 
(Weatherstem)  
(28.67N 80.43W) 
 
 
07/0802 
40 
47 
 
 
 
 
Welaka  3 SE 
(E1959)  
(29.44N 81.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.89 
Georgia 
ICAO Sites 
Augusta Regional 
Airport (KAGS)  
(33.37N 81.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.17 
Brunswick Golden 
Isles Airport (KBQK)  
(31.15N 81.47W) 
08/0535 
986.0 
07/2015 
28 
(10 m, 2 min) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Bacon County/Alma 
Airport (KAMG)  
(31.54N 82.50W) 
08/0653 
998.8 
08/0210 
24 
(10 m, 2 min) 
36 
 
 
 
2.88 
Claxton-Evans Co. 
Airport (KCWV)  
(32.20N 81.88W) 
 
 
08/0355 
28 
(10 m, 2 min) 
49 
 
 
 
 
Jesup-Wayne County 
Airport (KJES)  
(31.55N 81.88W) 
08/0450 
993.0 
08/0335 
29 
(10 m, 2 min) 
50 
 
 
 
 
McKinnon-St. Simons 
Island Airport (KSSI)  
(31.15N 81.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.08 

Hurricane Matthew     50 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Plantation Airpark/ 
Sylvania (KJYL)  
(32.64N 81.60W) 
 
 
08/0830 
30 
(10 m, 2 min) 
45 
 
 
 
 
Savannah-Hilton Head 
IAP (KSAV)  
(32.13N 81.20W) 
08/0750 
983.1 
08/0834 
43 
(10 m, 2 min) 
62 
 
 
 
11.51 
Savannah-Hunter 
Army Air Field (KSVN)  
(32.01N 81.13W) 
 
 
08/0958 
46 
(10 m, 2 min) 
59 
 
 
 
17.49 
Statesboro-Bulloch 
Co. Airport (KTBR)  
(32.49N 81.74W) 
 
 
08/0315 
30 
(10 m, 2 min) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Waycross-Ware 
County Airport (KAYS)  
(31.25N 82.40W) 
08/0555 
998.1 
08/0455 
27 
(2 min/10 m) 
39 
 
 
 
 
Wright Army Airfield/ 
Fort Stewart (KLHW)  
(31.89N 81.56W) 
 
 
07/2358 
26 
(10 m, 2 min) 
40 
 
 
 
5.42 
NOS Sites 
Fort Pulaski (8670870) 
(32.03N 80.90W) 
08/0812 
973.3 
08/0806 
51 
(7 m) 
68 
7.70 
8.46I 
5.1 
 
Weatherflow Sites 
Jekyl Island (XJEK) 
(31.05N 81.41W) 
07/0311 
983.7 
07/2216 
36 
(10 m, 2 min) 
56 
 
 
 
6.52 
Tybee Island North 
(XTYB) (32.02N 80.84W) 
08/0819 
964.0 
08/0819 
62 
(10 m) 
82 
 
 
 
 
Tybee Island South 
(XTYE) (31.99N 80.85W) 
08/0818 
964.0 
08/0848 
65 
(9 m) 
83 
 
 
 
 
CoCoRaHS Sites 
Belleview 2.8 N 
(GA-EV-1)  
(31.19N 81.97W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.97 
Country Club Estates 
2.8 SSW (GA-BR-?)  
(31.18N 81.48W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.29 
Darien  4.2 NNE 
(GA-MI-3)  
(31.43N 81.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.42 
Garden City  1.2 NNE 
(GA-CT-28)  
(32.12N 81.15W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.86 

Hurricane Matthew     51 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Garfield  2.7 N  
(GA-EM-3)  
(32.69N 82.10W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.69 
Jesup 7.1 N  
(GA-WY-2)  
(31.70N 81.90W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.14 
Marlow  0.0 S  
(GA-EM-3)  
(32.27N 81.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.14 
Metter  7.0 N  
(GA-CD-2)  
(32.50N 82.05W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.52 
Midway  3.3 ENE  
(GA-LB-4)  
(31.82N 81.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.47 
Midway  3.8 NE  
(GA-LB-6)  
(31.84N 81.38W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.00 
Nahunta  6 S  
(GA-BY-1)  
(31.12N 81.93W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.29 
Newington  0.5 SSE  
(GA-SV-5)  
(32.58N 81.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.74 
Pooler  0.4 ENE  
(GA-CT-70)  
(32.11N 81.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.05 
Pooler  1.2 NNE  
(GA-CT-1)  
(32.12N 81.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.03 
Richmond Hill 
0.5 NE  (GA-BR-2)  
(31.95N 81.30W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.09 
Rincon  1.5 SSE  
(GA-EF-1)  
(32.27N 81.23W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.09 
Savannah  1.7 W  
(GA-CT-55) 
(32.03N 81.16W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.75 
Savannah  2.7 ENE  
(GA-CT-25) 
(32.04N 81.09W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.10 
Skidaway Island   
1.3 ENE (GA-CT-17)  
(31.94N 81.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.97 

Hurricane Matthew     52 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Statesboro  2.2 N  
(GA-BU-7)  
(32.47N 81.78W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.13 
Townsend  5.5 SE  
(GA-MI-5)  
(31.57N 81.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.15 
Waynesboro  3.3 SW  
(GA-BK-1)  
(33.06N 82.06W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.38 
HADS Sites 
Millhaven 9 ENE 
(BFYG1)  
(32.93N 81.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Metter (MTFG1)  
(32.39N 82.04W) 
 
 
08/0703 
22 
(6 m) 
49 
 
 
 
 
NWS COOP Sites 
Augusta 8 SSE 
(NSLG1)  
(33.37N 81.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.31 
Baxley 5 SW  
(NSLG1)  
(31.71N 82.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.66 
Eden  2 NW  
(EDEG1)  
(32.19N 81.41W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.31 
Ellabell   7 SE  
(ELLG1)  
(32.08N 81.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.07 
Fargo  15 NW  
(JONG1)  
(30.83N 82.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.76 
Fort Stewart  8 NNE  
(FSBG1)  
(31.96N 81.46W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.51 
Hilltonia  4 N  
(BRIG1)  
(32.93N 81.65W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.19 
Hutchinson Island  
(SVDG1)  
(32.08N 81.08W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.81 
McIntosh  
(MTHG1)  
(31.82N 81.54W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.41 

Hurricane Matthew     53 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Millhaven  9 ENE  
(BFYG1)  
(32.93N 81.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.28 
Oliver  1 SW  
(OLVG1)  
(32.49N 81.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.49 
Port Wentworth  
(PWNG1)  
(32.17N 81.15W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.02 
Port Wentworth  6 N 
(PTWG1)  
(32.24N 81.15W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.18 
Rincon  5 SE  
(ACRG1)  
(32.25N 81.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.81 
Rincon  6 NE  
(HBNG1)  
(32.34N 81.15W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.17 
Rincon  6 SE  
(ACMG1)  
(32.24N 81.15W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.26 
Sapelo Island  
(SPIG1)  
(31.40N 81.28W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.96 
Sapelo Island Reserve 
(SAXG1)  
(31.42N 81.30W) 
08/0430 
982.6 
08/0530 
50 
(10 m) 
65 
 
 
 
10.94 
Springfield  2 W  
(SRFG1)  
(32.35N 81.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.23 
Sterling  3 SW  
(STRG1)  
(31.21N 81.61W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.65 
Tybee Island  4 NW  
(FTBG1)  
(32.03N 80.90W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.24 
South Carolina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICAO Sites 
Allendale County 
Airport (KAQX)  
(32.99N 81.27W) 
 
 
08/0915 
31 
(10 m, 2 min) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Beaufort County 
Airport (KARW)  
(32.41N 80.63W) 
 
 
08/0835 
45 
(10 m, 2 min) 
60 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     54 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Beaufort MCAS 
(KNBC)  
(32.49N 80.70W) 
08/0456 
980.6 
08/0845 
40 
(10 m, 2 min) 
62 
 
 
 
13.97 
Charleston Downtown 
Airport (KCXM)  
(32.70N 80.01W) 
 
 
08/0335 
32 
(10 m, 2 min) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Charleston Executive 
Airport (KJZI)  
(32.78N 79.93W) 
08/1300 
974.6 
08/1300 
36 
(10 m, 2 min) 
46 
 
 
 
 
Charleston IAP 
(KCHS)  
(32.90N 80.04W) 
08/1316 
981.7 
08/1655 
42 
(10 m, 2 min) 
60 
 
 
 
10.48 
Columbia Metropolitan 
Airport (KCAE)  
(33.95N 81.12W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.45 
Curtis L. Brown Field/ 
Elizabethtown (KEYF)  
(34.60N 78.58W) 
08/1920 
993.9 
08/2105 
18 
(10 m, 2 min) 
37 
 
 
 
 
Florence Regional 
Airport (KFLO)  
(34.19N 79.72W) 
08/1153 
1011.5 
08/1029 
29 
(10 m, 2 min) 
38 
 
 
 
6.75 
Georgetown County 
Airport (KGGE)  
(33.31N 79.32W) 
08/1335 
990.5 
08/0515 
27 
(10 m, 2 min) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Hartsville Regional 
Airport (KHVS)  
(34.40N 80.12W) 
08/1155 
1002.0 
08/1135 
25 
(10 m, 2 min) 
35 
 
 
 
 
Hilton Head Island 
Airport (KHXD)  
(32.23N 80.69W) 
 
 
08/0855 
53 
(10 m, 2 min) 
76 
 
 
 
 
Marlboro County 
Jetport (KBBP)  
(34.62N 79.73W) 
08/1155 
1002.4 
08/1155 
24 
(10 m, 2 min) 
37 
 
 
 
 
McEntire JNG Base/ 
Columbia (KMMT)  
(33.92N 80.78W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.83 
Mount Pleasant Reg. 
Airport (KLRO)  
(32.90N 79.78W) 
 
 
08/1435 
37 
(10 m, 2 min) 
48 
 
 
 
 
Berkeley Co. Arpt/ 
Moncks Crnr (KMKS)  
(33.19N 80.04W) 
 
 
08/0555 
23 
(10 m, 2 min) 
38 
 
 
 
11.69 
Grand Strand/N Myrtle 
Beach Airport (KCRE)  
(33.81N 78.72W) 
08/1900 
980.7 
08/2114 
33 
(10 m, 2 min) 
61 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     55 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Low Country Reg. Arpt 
/Walterboro (KRBW)  
(32.93N 80.64W) 
 
 
08/1135 
29 
(10 m, 2 min) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Myrtle Beach IAP 
(KMYR)  
(33.69N 78.93W) 
08/1815 
998.0 
08/2115 
42 
(10 m, 2 min) 
64 
 
 
 
3.34 
Williamsburg Regional 
Arpt/Kingstree (KCKI)  
(33.71N 79.86W) 
08/1435 
992.9 
08/1435 
18 
(10 m, 2 min) 
31 
 
 
 
 
C-MAN Sites 
Folly Island (FBIS1)  
(32.69N 79.89W) 
08/1300 
971.3 
08/1120 
45 
(7 m, 10 min) 
59 
 
 
 
 
NOS Sites 
Cooper River 
Entrance, Charleston 
(8665530)  
(32.78N 79.93W) 
08/1248 
975.6 
08/0018 
37 
(9 m, 6 min) 
51 
6.20 
6.15 
3.5 
 
Oyster Landing (North 
Inlet Estuary) 
(8662245)  
(33.35N 79.19W) 
 
 
 
 
 
5.51 
7.11I 
4.7 
 
Springmaid Pier J 
(8661070)  
(33.66N 78.92W) 
08/1618 
985.0 
08/0700 
41 
(7 m, 6 min) 
53 
4.43 
5.20 
2.8 
 
National Estuarine Research Reserve System (NERRS)Sites 
Winyah Bay-S. Jetty 
(TEC2929)  
(33.18N 79.20W) 
 
 
08/1950 
56 
(7 m, 6 min) 
90 
 
 
 
 
Coastal Ocean Research and Monitoring Program (CORMP) Sites 
Fripp Nearshore – 
FRP2 (41033)  
(32.28N 80.41W) 
 
 
08/1108 
48 
(3 m) 
73 
 
 
 
 
Capers Nearshore – 
CAP2 (41029)  
(32.81N 79.63W) 
08/1308 
962.8 
08/1308 
41 
(3 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Weatherflow Sites 
Charleston-Battery 
Point (XCHA)  
(32.76N 79.95W) 
08/1316 
972.0 
08/1401 
46 
(9 m) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Beaufort (XBUF)  
(32.34N 80.59W) 
08/0841 
966.0 
08/0841 
58 
(10 m) 
72 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     56 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Folly Beach Pier 
(XFOL) 
(32.65N 79.94W) 
08/1241 
968.0 
08/1216 
51 
(13 m) 
65 
 
 
 
 
Isle of Palms (XIOP)  
(32.78N 79.79W) 
08/1315 
971.0 
08/1245 
46 
(9 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Sullivans Island 
(XSUL) 
(32.10N 81.08W) 
08/1306 
969.0 
08/1221 
43 
(13 m) 
57 
 
 
 
 
Sumter/Charleston 
Harbor (XSUM)  
(32.75N 79.87W) 
08/1256 
971.0 
08/1356 
53 
(12 m) 
70 
 
 
 
 
CoCoRaHS Sites 
Beaufort 3.6 NNE  
(SC-BF-35)  
(32.48N 81.84W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.03 
Branchville 2.5 SE  
(SC-OR-24)  
(33.23N 80.78W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.15 
Canadys 0.4 NW  
(SC-CL-6)  
(33.06N 80.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.31 
Charleston 5.0 WNW  
(SC-CR-97)  
(32.81N 80.08W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.92 
Charleston 5.7 NW  
(SC-CR-45)  
(32.84N 80.07W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.00 
Conway 4.4 SE  
(SC-HR-80)  
(33.79N 79.01W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.17 
Cottageville 5.8 WSW  
(SC-CL-16)  
(32.90N 80.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.89 
Darlington 7.3 SSW  
(SC-DR-4)  
(34.20N 79.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.71 
Daufuskie Island  
1.7 SW  (SC-BF-23)  
(32.10N 80.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.10 
Dillon 3.8 NW  
(SC-DL-4)  
(34.46N 79.41W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.88 
Georgetown 4.9 NNE  
(SC-GT-13)  
(34.43N 79.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.83 

Hurricane Matthew     57 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Green Pond 1.3 S 
(SC-CL-14)  
(32.71N 80.61W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.68 
Hilton Head Island 
2.7 E  (SC-BF-52)  
(32.19N 80.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.66 
Hilton Head Island 
4.0 N  (SC-BF-2)  
(32.25N 80.74W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.58 
Kingstree 7.9 NW  
(SC-WL-2)  
(33.74N 79.93W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.70 
Loris 2.9 WSW  
(SC-HR-33)  
(34.04N 78.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.88 
Myrtle Beach 
8.4 WNW (SC-HR-27)  
(33.72N 79.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.69 
North Charleston 
3.1 ESE (SC-CR-78)  
(33.89N 79.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.02 
NOAA-NWS 
Charleston (SC-CR-49)  
(32.90N 80.03W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.40 
Parris Island 1.7 N 
(SC-BF-53)  
(32.35N 80.69W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.00 
Reevesville 1.0 SSE 
(SC-DC-18)  
(33.19N 80.64W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.05 
Ridgeland 6.0 ESE 
(SC-JS-3)  
(32.44N 80.89W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.46 
Santee  6.9 WSW 
(SC-OR-22) 
(33.43N 80.59W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.84 
Summerton  8.4 SE 
(SC-CD-1) 
(33.53N 80.24W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.72 
Summerville  1.9 N 
(SC-CD-41) 
(33.03N 80.17W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.04 
Yemassee  7.6 NE 
(SC-CL-1) 
(32.78N 80.77W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.70 

Hurricane Matthew     58 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
HADS Sites 
Bennett’s Point, Ace 
Basin Res. (ACXS1) 
(34.04N 78.94W) 
08/1045 
979.5 
08/1300 
19 
(10 m) 
36 
 
 
 
11.36 
Elba Island (ELBS1)  
(32.12N 81.05W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.45 
Galivant’s Ferry 
(GALS1) 
(34.06N 79.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.88 
Pinopolis-Lake 
Moultrie (PNOS1) 
(33.25N 80.03W) 
08/1330 
985.4 
08/1700 
43 
(10 m) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Remote Automated Weather Stations (RAWS) 
Adams Run/Ace Basin 
(ABRS1)  
(32.66N 80.40W) 
 
 
08/1255 
27 
(6 m) 
63 
 
 
 
10.58 
Huger 3 NNE (HUGS1)  
(33.13N 79.78W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.50 
Jamestown 2 NE-
Santee River  (JAMS1)  
(33.30N 79.67W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.00 
Limehouse 4 SW-Little 
Black River  (FWDS1)  
(32.17N 81.12W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.70 
Mullins (MULS1) 
(34.19N 79.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.57 
Savannah/Hardeeville 
NWR (SVNS1) 
(32.10N 81.08W) 
 
 
08/0923 
34 
(6 m) 
54 
 
 
 
12.78 
Walterboro (WTBS1) 
(32.92N 80.63W) 
 
 
08/1407 
15 
(6 m) 
37 
 
 
 
9.62 
Others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chadbourne 1.1 WNW  
(34.51N 79.42W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.90 
Edisto Island 
Middleton (EDSS1)  
(32.60N 80.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.90 
Florence  5 E 
(34.19N 79.67W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.95 
Georgetown 1 ENE 
(33.37N 79.29W) 
 
 
08/2000 
39 
65 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     59 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Marion 
(34.17N 79.40W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.52 
Marion  4 E 
(34.18N 79.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.02 
Quinby  5 N 
(34.30N 79.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.69 
Wedgefield Plantation  
5 SE (33.37N 79.18W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.36 
North Carolina 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICAO Sites 
Albert J. Ellis-
Jacksonville Airport 
(KOAJ)  
(34.83N 77.62W) 
08/2156 
994.5 
09/0156 
26 
(10 m, 2 min) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Billy Mitchell-Hatteras 
Airport (KHSE)  
(35.22N 75.62W) 
09/0258 
989.0 
09/0019 
41 
(10 m, 2 min) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Bouge Field MCAF-
Bouge Sound (KNJM)  
(34.69N 77.03W) 
08/2357 
992.8 
06/1632 
29 
(10 m, 2 min) 
50 
 
 
 
 
Burlington-Alamance 
Regional Arpt (KBUY)  
(35.05N 79.48W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.96 
Cape Fear Regional 
Airport (KSUT)  
(33.93N 78.07W) 
08/2105 
984.0 
09/0025 
35 
(10 m, 2 min) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Charlotte Douglas IAP 
(KCLT)  
(35.21N 80.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.78 
Cherry Point MCAS 
(KNKT)  
(34.90N 76.90W) 
09/0054 
993.4 
09/0454 
41 
(10 m, 2 min) 
54 
 
 
 
 
Coastal Carolina Reg. 
Arpt/New Bern (KEWN)  
(35.07N 77.04W) 
08/2354 
995.2 
09/0513 
33 
(10 m, 2 min) 
49 
 
 
 
5.30 
Columbus County 
Municipal Arpt (KCPC)  
(35.27N 78.72W) 
08/1945 
998.1 
08/2045 
20 
(10 m, 2 min) 
33 
 
 
 
 
Dare County Gunnery 
Range Airport (K2DP)  
(35.67N 75.90W) 
09/0521 
995.6 
09/0051 
28 
(10 m, 2 min) 
48 
 
 
 
 
Dare County Reg. 
Airport-Manteo (KMQI)  
(35.90N 75.70W) 
09/0710 
995.9 
09/0910 
43 
(10 m, 2 min) 
61 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     60 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Duplin County Airport-
Kenansville (KDPL)  
(34.99N 77.98W) 
08/2205 
996.6 
08/2220 
28 
(10 m, 2 min) 
43 
 
 
 
 
Elizabeth City 
Regional Arpt (KECG)  
(36.26N 76.17W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.99 
Fayetteville Regional 
Airport (KFAY)  
(34.99N 78.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.99 
First Flight Airport-Kill 
Devil Hills (KFFA)  
(36.02N 75.67W) 
09/0725 
996.3 
09/0945 
31 
(10 m, 2 min) 
52 
 
 
 
 
Kingston Regional 
Jetport (KISO)  
(35.33N 77.62W) 
08/2156 
995.9 
08/2256 
32 
(10 m, 2 min) 
44 
 
 
 
 
Lumberton Municipal 
Airport (KLBT)  
(34.61N 79.06W) 
08/1901 
995.9 
08/1929 
35 
(10 m, 2 min) 
58 
 
 
 
10.47 
Michael J. Smith-
Beaufort Aprt (KMBH)  
(34.72N 76.65W) 
09/0258 
992.1 
09/0629 
40 
(10 m, 2 min) 
61 
 
 
 
 
New River MCAS/ 
Jacksonville (KNCA)  
(34.72N 77.43W) 
08/2256 
992.7 
09/0256 
42 
(10 m, 2 min) 
63 
 
 
 
5.35 
Pitt-Greenville Airport 
(KPGV)  
(35.64N 77.38W) 
08/2345 
100.7 
08/2345 
39 
(10 m, 2 min) 
51 
 
 
 
 
Raleigh-Durham IAP 
(KRDU)  
(35.88N 78.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.96 
Rocky Mount-Wilson 
Regional Arpt (KRWI)  
(35.85N 77.89W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.79 
Washington-Warren 
Airport (KOCW)  
(35.57N 77.05W) 
09/0015 
998.3 
09/0015 
33 
(10 m, 2 min) 
39 
 
 
 
 
Wilmington IAP  
(KILM)  
(34.28N 77.92W) 
08/2353 
991.2 
09/0017 
39 
(10 m, 2 min) 
61 
 
 
 
6.59 
C-MAN Sites 
Cape Lookout (CLKN7)  
(34.62N 76.53W) 
09/0400 
989.8 
09/0900 
49 
(10 m, 10 min) 
66 
 
 
 
 
NOS Sites 

Hurricane Matthew     61 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
 
Duck Pier (8651370)  
(36.18N 75.75W) 
09/0836 
994.7 
09/0830 
60 
(9 m, 6 min) 
74 
3.27 
3.40 
1.9 
 
Beaufort (8656483)  
(34.72N 76.67W) 
09/0312 
991.3 
09/0600 
39 
(8 m, 6 min) 
57 
2.98 
3.57 
2.1 
 
Johnny Mercer Pier, 
Wrightsville Beach 
(8658163)  
(34.21N 77.79W) 
08/2136 
987.1 
08/1054 
45 
(8 m, 6 min) 
67 
3.08 
4.40 
2.6 
 
2 
 
Oregon Inlet Marina 
(8652587)  
(35.80N 75.55W) 
09/0824 
993.2 
09/1006 
46 
(8 m, 6 min) 
60 
2.59 
2.87 
2.4 
 
USCG Station 
Hatteras (8654667)  
(35.21N 75.70W) 
09/0706 
988.8 
09/0948 
57 
(8 m, 6 min) 
73 
6.06 
4.15i 
5.8 
 
Wilmington (8658120)  
(34.23N 77.95W) 
08/2112 
988.2 
 
 
 
4.08 
 
3.5 
 
Weatherflow Sites 
Alligator River Bridge 
(XALI) (35.90N 76.01W) 
09/0749 
993.1 
09/0849 
57 
(12 m, 1 min) 
73 
 
 
 
 
Avon Sound (XAVN) 
(35.37N 75.51W) 
09/0902 
988.1 
09/1017 
41 
(12 m, 1 min) 
56 
 
 
 
 
Jennettes Pier-Nags 
Head (XJNP)  
(35.91N 75.59W) 
09/0755 
993.9 
09/0900 
67 
(18 m, 1min) 
84 
 
 
 
 
Jockey’s Ridge (XJNP) 
(35.95N 75.63W) 
09/0828 
996.0 
09/0844 
35K 
(5 m, 1 min) 
47 
 
 
 
 
North River (XNRV) 
(34.77N 76.62W) 
09/0334 
991.7 
09/0609 
40 
(6 m, 1 min) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Ocracoke Sound 
(XOCR)  
(35.14N 76.01W) 
09/0615 
990.0 
09/0820 
55 
(8 m, 1 min) 
73 
 
 
 
 
Palmico Sound (XPM2) 
(35.43N 75.83W) 
09/0814 
983.4 
09/0959 
61 
13 m, 1 min) 
76 
 
 
 
 
Real Slick-Waves 
(XSLK) (35.90N 76.01W) 
09/0905 
990.8 
09/1010 
58 
6 m, 1 min) 
70 
 
 
 
 
CoCoRaHS Sites 
Apex  2.2 N  
(NC-WK-77)  
(35.76N 78.84W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.69 
Apex  3.4 ESE  
(NC-WK-4)  
(35.71N 78.79W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.68 

Hurricane Matthew     62 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Aurora  1.6 SE  
(NC-BF-24)  
(35.29N 76.77W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.70 
Ayden  3.7 S  
(NC-PT-37)  
(35.42N 77.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.85 
Bath  6.6 ESE  
(NC-BF-16)  
(35.43N 76.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.45 
Battleboro  7.2 W  
(NC-NS-20)  
(36.04N 77.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.86 
Belvidere  5.4 N  
(NC-PR-2)  
(36.35N 76.55W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.13 
Bladenboro  2.0 WNW  
(NC-BD-1)  
(34.57N 78.81W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.36 
Bunn  1.2 N  
(NC-FK-7)  
(35.98N 78.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.03 
Burgaw  0.3 NE  
(NC-PD-22)  
(34.55N 77.92W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.66 
Calypso  1  N  
(NC-DP-3)  
(35.17N 78.10W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.19 
Chadbourn  1.1 NNW  
(NC-CL-3)  
(34.34N 78.84W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.05 
Clayton  2.9  W  
(NC-JH-5)  
(36.65N 78.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.21 
Clayton  6.8 ESE 
(NC-JH-46)  
(35.62N 78.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.97 
Clinton  0.8 NE  
(NC-SM-17)  
(35.01N 78.32W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.47 
Coats  0.2 ESE  
(NC-HR-34)  
(35.41N 78.67W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.72 
Corapeake  1.3 NE  
(NC-GT-5)  
(36.55N 76.56W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.00 
Duck  1.1 SSE  
(NC-DR-24)  
(36.15N 75.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.31 

Hurricane Matthew     63 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Dunn  7.1 SSE  
(NC-SM-2)  
(35.22N 78.57W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.93 
Edenton  2.0 W  
(NC-CW-22)  
(36.06N 76.64W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.25 
Elizabeth City  2.6 W  
(NC-PS-1)  
(36.30N 76.27W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.87 
Elizabethtown  6.2 NW  
(NC-BD-2)  
(34.69N 78.69W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.85 
Elizabethtown  6.6 NW  
(NC-BD-15)  
(34.69N 78.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.00 
Elm City  7.1 ESE 
(NC-WN-15)  
(35.76N 77.76W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.54 
Evergreen  3.3 NE  
(NC-CL-21)  
(34.44N 78.86W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.95 
Farmville  3.1 NW  
(NC-PT-47)  
(35.63N 77.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.43 
Fayetteville  1.4 SW  
(NC-CM-68)  
(35.05N 78.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.87 
Fayetteville  2.4 S  
(NC-CM-1)  
(35.04N 78.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.62 
Fountain  0.1 NE  
(NC-PT-10)  
(36.68N 77.64W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.21 
Four Oaks  5.7 NW  
(NC-JH-65)  
(35.51N 78.49W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.72 
Garland  11.2 W  
(NC-BD-4)  
(34.81N 78.59W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.52 
Godwin  2.1 SW  
(NC-CM-39)  
(35.20N 78.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.32 
Goldsboro  4.4 E  
(NC-WY-1)  
(35.37N 77.90W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.31 
Goldsboro  8.4 WNW  
(NC-WY-22)  
(35.42N 78.11W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.48 

Hurricane Matthew     64 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Hertford  5.2 SSE  
(NC-PR-5)  
(36.12N 76.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.84 
Hope Mills  4.8 SE  
(NC-CM-13)  
(34.93N 78.89W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.05 
Hope Mills  8.0 SSE  
(NC-CM-34)  
(34.87N 78.88W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.89 
Kill Devil Hills   
0.9 WNW (NC-DR-10)  
(36.02N 75.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.31 
Kinston 1.3 NNW  
(NC-LR-26)  
(35.29N 77.60W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.50 
Lindon 4.2 S 
(NC-CM-56)  
(35.19N 78.74W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.18 
Lumberton 2.3 NE 
(NC-RB-9)  
(34.66N 78.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.09 
Mount Olive 2.4 SW 
(NC-DP-3)  
(35.18N 78.10W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.19 
New Bern 7.0 E 
(NC-CN-64)  
(35.12N 76.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.66 
Pikeville 6.2 WSW 
(NC-WY-2)  
(35.47N 78.09W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.12 
Point Harbor 0.2 WSW 
(NC-CC-10)  
(36.08N 75.80W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.81 
Raeford  9.6 E 
(NC-HK-3)  
(34.96N 79.06W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.91 
Raleigh  3.8 SSW 
(NC-WK-90)  
(35.77N 78.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.40 
Rocky Mount  9.2 SW 
(NC-NS-21)  
(35.85N 77.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.91 
Roper  0.6 WSW 
(NC-WS-5)  
(35.88N 78.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.22 
Salemburg  2.5 N 
(NC-SM-16)  
(35.05N 78.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.60 

Hurricane Matthew     65 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Snow Hill  3.1 NNE 
(NC-GN-7)  
(35.50N 77.66W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.00 
Steadman 0.4 WSW 
(NC-CM-75)  
(35.00N 78.70W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.34 
Steadman 0.4 WSW 
(NC-ED-11)  
(35.02N 78.71W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.34 
Tarboro 5.9 SE 
(NC-CM-19)  
(35.84N 77.50W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.40 
Wake Forest 1.9 NNE 
(NC-WK-18)  
(36.00N 78.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.84 
Washington 7.6 SE 
(NC-BF-2)  
(35.48N 76.95W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.93 
Williamston 0.9 SSW 
(NC-MT-6)  
(35.84N 77.06W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.27 
Wilson 3.3 NNW 
(NC-WN-17)  
(35.78N 77.94W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.30 
Zebulon 9.1 S 
(NC-JH-62)  
(35.69N 78.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.10 
NWS COOP Sites 
Apex  2 ENE  
(APXN7)  
(35.74N 78.84W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.04 
Aurora  6 N  
(AURN7)  
(35.39N 78.78W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.42 
Elizabethtown  4 NNE  
(TURN7)  
(34.68N 78.58W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.97 
Rocky Mount   
(RMBN7)  
(35.93N 77.83W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.17 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Back Island 
(34.53N 77.72W) 
 
 
08/2330 
44 
54 
 
 
 
 
Belville  2 WSW 
(34.22N 78.02W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.85 

Hurricane Matthew     66 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Duart  3 N 
(34.83N 78.82W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.87 
Fort Fisher 
(33.97N 77.92W) 
 
 
08/2350 
48 
71 
 
 
 
 
Long Beach 
(33.91N 78.12W) 
 
 
08/2330 
44 
54 
 
 
 
 
Pembroke  
(34.68N 79.19W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.09 
Plymouth  5 SE  
(35.80N 76.69W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.66 
St. James Plantation 
(33.95N 77.98W) 
 
 
08/2250 
41 
75 
 
 
 
 
Whiteville 1 W  
(34.33N 78.73W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.86 
Florida Coastal Monitoring Program Sites 
Buxton – Hatteras 
High (WF73823)  
(35.26N 75.59W) 
09/0816 
987.9 
09/1001 
41 
(10 m) 
65 
 
 
 
 
Other 
Avon Sound  
(35.34N 75.50W) 
09/0854 
988.1 
09/1014 
52 
(10 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Fort Macon  
(34.70N 76.71W) 
09/0338 
988.8 
09/0608 
41 
(10 m) 
60 
 
 
 
 
Hatteras High 
(35.26N 75.55W) 
09/0905 
984.4 
09/0905 
55 
(10 m) 
75 
 
 
 
 
Jockeys Ridge 
(35.95N 75.63W) 
09/0828 
995.7 
09/0844 
35 
(10 m) 
47 
 
 
 
 
Kitty Hawk Kites 
Resort-Salvo NC  
(35.58N 75.47W) 
09/0855 
989.7 
09/1050 
49 
(16 m) 
70 
 
 
 
 
Oregon Inlet-Coast 
Guard 
(35.80N 75.54W) 
09/0832 
991.9 
09/1103 
63 
(10 m) 
78 
 
 
 
 
Waves 
(35.57N 75.49W) 
09/0838 
991.0 
09/1005 
50 
(11 m) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Virginia 
ICAO Sites 
Newport News/ 
Williamsburg IAP 
(KPHF) (37.13N 76.49W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.47 
Norfolk IAP (KORF)  
(36.90N 76.19W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.28 

Hurricane Matthew     67 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Naval Station -Norfolk 
(KNGU)  
(36.83N 76.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.11 
Richmond IAP (KRIC)  
(37.51N 77.32W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.14 
Roanoke-Blacksburg 
Reg. Airport (KRIC)  
(37.33N 79.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.30 
Wakefield Municipal 
Airport (KAKQ)  
(36.98N 77.01W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.39 
Wallops Flight Facility 
Airport (KWAL)  
(37.93N 75.48W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.28 
NOS Sites 
Chesapeake Bay 
Bridge Tunnel 
(8638863)  
(36.97N 76.11W) 
09/0506 
1002.7 
09/0442 
50 
(6 m, 6 min) 
58 
3.40 
 
2.8 
 
Kiptopeke (8632200)  
(37.17N 75.99W) 
 
 
09/1542 
38 
(7 m, 6 min) 
50 
2.82 
3.25 
2.2 
 
Lewisetta (8635750)  
(38.00N 76.47W) 
09/0624 
1009.4 
09/1300 
26 
(6 m, 6 min) 
39 
1.77 
2.08 
1.4 
 
Money Point (8639348)  
(36.78N 76.30W) 
09/0454 
1003.2 
09/1000 
27 
(6 m, 6 min) 
46 
4.16 
 
3.4 
 
Sewells Point 
(8638610)  
(36.94N 76.33W) 
09/0448 
1004.6 
 
 
 
3.61 
4.25 
3.1 
 
Yorktown USCG 
Training Center 
(8637689)  
(37.23N 76.48W) 
09/0518 
1005.4 
09/0524 
32 
(10 m, 6 min) 
48 
2.75 
 
2.3 
 
Wachapreague 
(8631044)  
(37.61N 75.69W) 
09/0706 
1005.5 
09/0136 
31 
(7 m, 6 min) 
39 
2.77 
3.60 
1.7 
 
Weatherflow Sites 
Virginia Beach - 
Chesapeake Light 
Tower (XCLT)  
(36.90N 75.71W) 
09/0519 
994.0 
09/0529 
63 
(41 m, 1 min) 
76 
 
 
 
 
Wachapreague 
(XWAC)  
(37.60N 75.69W) 
09/0719 
1002.0 
09/0709 
23 
(10 m, 1 min) 
37 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     68 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
CoCoRaHS Sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Boones Mill 3.4 N   
(VA-RN-8)  
(37.17N 79.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.43 
Bracey 6.0 ESE   
(VA-BR-2)  
(36.57N 78.04W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.20 
Cape Charles  
5.8 NNE  (VA-NH-1)  
(37.35N 75.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.22 
Chesapeake 3.9 NE 
(VA-CSC-5)  
(36.72N 76.26W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.21 
Chesapeake 9.8 NW 
(VA-CSC-4)  
(36.79N 76.41W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.31 
Chincoteague  
1.3 SSW  (VA-AC-10)  
(37.93N 75.37W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.17 
Danville 5.5 N  
(VA-PT-3)  
(36.66N 76.42W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.48 
Franklin 2.6 WNW 
(VA-ST-16)  
(36.70N 76.98W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.73 
Hampton 7.2 W 
(VA-HMC-4)  
(37.05N 76.43W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.86 
Ivor  1.0 SW 
(VA-ST-5)  
(36.89N 76.91W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.33 
Metompkin  0.9 SE 
(VA-AC-16)  
(36.76N 75.59W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.99 
Newport News  3.3 E 
(VA-NNC-4)  
(37.08N 76.45W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.59 
Norfolk  3.0 S 
(VA-NRC-5)  
(36.88N 76.25W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.83 
Portsmouth  4.1 SSE 
(VA-PRC-2)  
(36.80N 76.33W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.28 
Roanoke  7.3 SSW 
(VA-RN-6)  
(37.18N 80.02W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.13 

Hurricane Matthew     69 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Sedley  3.7 N 
(VA-ST-2)  
(36.83N 76.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.06 
Smithfield  3.6 SSE 
(VA-IW-10)  
(36.93N 76.60W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.67 
Suffolk  13.9 NNE 
(VA-SFC-7)  
(36.89N 76.53W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.39 
Virginia Beach  
11.2 NNW (VA-VBC-2)  
(36.89N 76.11W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.26 
Virginia Beach  2.4 N 
(VA-VBC-13)  
(36.78N 76.04W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.55 
Virginia Beach  
3.1 ENE (VA-VBC-21)  
(36.75N 76.99W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.90 
Whitestone 8.0 SSW 
(VA-MX-1)  
(35.54N 76.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.70 
Williamsburg 1.4 ENE 
(VA-WLC-2)  
(37.29N 76.68W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.63 
Yorktown 0.5 SSE 
(VA-YR-8)  
(37.23N 76.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.87 
Yorktown 6.9 SE  
(VA-YR-16)  
(37.17N 76.42W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.17 
Zuni 1.5 NW  
(VA-ST-12)  
(36.88N 76.85W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.25 
HADS Sites 
Chesapeake 7 SSW 
(DPCV2)  
(36.75N 76.34W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.75 
Chesapeake 19 SSW 
(LKDV2)  
(36.60N 76.44W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.14 
RAWS Sites 
Great Dismal Swamp 
NWR-Suffolk 8 S 
(GDSV2)  
(36.61N 76.55W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.39 

Hurricane Matthew     70 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
NWS COOP Sites 
Camp Pickett (CAPV2)  
(37.04N 77.96W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maryland 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICAO Sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ocean City Municipal 
Airport (KOXB)  
(38.31N 75.12W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.85 
Salisbury–Ocean 
City–Wicomico Reg. 
Airport (KSBY)  
(38.34N 75.51W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.34 
NOS Sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baltimore (8574680)  
(39.27N 76.58W) 
09/0612 
1013.5 
09/1524 
24 
(7 m, 6 min) 
34 
 
 
 
 
Bishops Head 
(8571421)  
(38.22N 76.04W) 
09/0730 
1009.6 
09/1336 
26 
(7 m, 6 min) 
37 
 
 
 
 
Cambridge (8571892)  
(38.57N 76.07W) 
09/0800 
1009.4 
09/1342 
29 
(6 m, 6 min) 
37 
 
 
 
 
Ocean City Inlet 
(8570283)  
(38.33N 75.09W) 
09/0836 
1007.8 
09/1730 
33 
(9 m, 6 min) 
41 
2.03 
2.30 
1.5 
 
Tolchester Beach 
(8573364)  
(39.21N 76.25W) 
09/0600 
1013.6 
09/1730 
30 
(7 m, 6 min) 
35 
 
 
 
 
CoCoRaHS Sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Berlin 5.9 NNE  
(MD-WR-22)  
(38.40N 75.16W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.61 
Bishopville 3.1 E  
(MD-WR-4)  
(38.45N 75.13W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.18 
Deal Island 0.5 SSW  
(MD-SS-12)  
(38.15N 75.95W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.20 
Leonardtown 0.6 NE  
(MD-SM-3)  
(38.40N 75.16W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.15 
Ocean Pines 1.2 SSW 
(MD-WR-10)  
(38.37N 75.16W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.39 

Hurricane Matthew     71 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Princess Anne 
4.4 WSW (MD-SS-4)  
(38.18N 75.77W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.09 
Salisbury 2.5 WSW 
(MD-WC-2)  
(38.36N 75.63W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.73 
Snow Hill  0.4 S 
(MD-WR-14)  
(38.17N 75.39W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.72 
Westover  2.6 WNW 
(MD-SS-6)  
(38.14N 75.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.62 
NWS COOP Sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assateague Island 
(ASTM2) 
(38.24N 75.75W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.91 
Weatherflow Sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ocean City (XOCN)  
(38.33N 75.08W) 
09/0828 
1005.0 
09/0527 
37 
(10 m, 1 min) 
42 
 
 
 
 
Point Lookout (XPTL)  
(38.04N 76.32W) 
09/0631 
1007.0 
09/0541 
26 
(11 m, 1 min) 
40 
 
 
 
 
Delaware 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICAO Sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delaware Coastal 
Airport/Georgetown 
(KGED) 
(38.69N 75.36W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.90 
Wilmington-New 
Castle Airport (KILG) 
(39.68N 75.61W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.26 
NOS Sites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lewes (8557380) 
(38.78N 75.12W) 
09/0836 
1009.5 
09/1700 
40 
(10 m, 6 min) 
48 
2.30 
3.21 
1.2 
 
Offshore 
NOAA Buoys 
E. Caribbean (42059)  
(15.25N 67.21W) 
29/1850   1004.8 
29/1850 
53 
(5 m, 10 min) 
 
 
 
 
 
C. Caribbean (42058)  
(14.92N 74.92W) 
03/0656     942.9 
03/0503 
74 g 
(5 m, 10 min) 
86 
 
 
 
 
Canaveral (42058)  
(28.52N 80.19W) 
07/0820     975.4 
08/0820 
56 
(5 m, 10 min) 
68 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     72 
 
Location 
Minimum Sea Level 
Pressure 
Maximum Surface 
Wind Speed 
Storm 
surge 
(ft)C 
Storm 
tide 
(ft)D 
Estimated 
Inundation 
(ft)E 
Total 
rain 
(in) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC) 
Press. 
(mb) 
Date/ 
time 
(UTC)A 
Sustained 
(kt)B 
Gust 
(kt) 
Diamond Shoals 
(41025) 
(35.01N 75.40W) 
09/0750 
984.9 
09/0750 
53 
(54m, 10 min) 
66 
 
 
 
 
Frying Pan Shoals, 
NC (41013)  
(33.43N 77.74W) 
08/2220  
  982.4 
09/0110 
45 
(4 m, 10 min) 
63 
 
 
 
 
Onslow Bay Outer, NC 
(41064)  
(34.21N 76.95W) 
09/0200 
982.8 
09/0400 
45 
(3 m, 60 min) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Sunset Nearshore, NC 
(41024)  
(33.83N 78.48W) 
08/2008     977.8 
09/2008 
41 
(3 m, 60 min) 
58 
 
 
 
 
Wrightsville Beach 
Offshore, NC (41037)  
(33.99N 77.36W) 
08/2308  
984.4 
09/0308 
43 
(53m, 60 min) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Wrightsville Beach 
Nearshore, NC (41038)  
(34.14N 77.72W) 
08/2208     985.3 
09/0308 
43 
(53m, 60 min) 
62 
 
 
 
 
Virginia Beach (44014)  
(36.61N 74.84W) 
09/1050 
   995.8 
09/1210 
52 
(5 m, 10 min) 
110 
 
 
 
 
South Hatteras (41002)  
(31.76N 74.84W) 
08/2050 
1004.8 
09/0440 
31 
(5 m, 10 min) 
41 
 
 
 
 
Edisto (41004)  
(32.50N 79.10W) 
08/1350 
981.7 
08/1320 
50 
(5 m, 10 min) 
64 
 
 
 
 
Grays Reef (41008) 
(31.40N 80.87W) 
08/0350 
957.6 
08/0250 
54 
(5 m, 10 min) 
68 
 
 
 
 
Canaveral 20 E 
(41009)  
(28.52N 80.19W) 
07/0820 
975.4 
07/0820 
56 
(5 m, 10 min) 
68 
 
 
 
 
 
A  Date/time is for sustained wind when both sustained and gust are listed. 
B  Except as noted, sustained wind averaging periods for C-MAN and land-based reports are 2 min; buoy averaging 
periods are 8 min. 
C  Storm surge is water height above normal astronomical tide level. 
D  For most locations, storm tide is water height above the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). 
E  Estimated inundation is the maximum height of water above ground.  For NOS tide gauges, the height of the water 
above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW) is used as a proxy for inundation. 
F   Last of several occurrences.     
G   Wind speed data missing 0510-0650 UTC 3 October 2016.   
H   All wind data missing 0800-1000 UTC 6 October 2016. 
I   Record water level. 
J   Sensor damaged or destroyed and likely did not record maximum water level. 
K   All wind data missing 1300 UTC 9 October – 0200 10 October 2016. 
 

Hurricane Matthew     73 
 
Table 4. 
Number of hours in advance of formation associated with the first NHC Tropical 
Weather Outlook forecast in the indicated likelihood category.  Note that the 
timings for the “Low” category do not include forecasts of a 0% chance of genesis. 
 
Hours Before Genesis 
48-Hour Outlook 
120-Hour Outlook 
Low (<40%) 
96 
138 
Medium (40%-60%) 
54 
96 
High (>60%) 
42 
84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 5a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) track 
forecast errors (n mi) for forecasts issued on Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 
9 October 2016.  Mean errors for the previous 5-yr period are shown for 
comparison.  Official errors that are smaller than the 5-yr means are shown in 
boldface type. 
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
17.6 
27.6 
42.4 
58.8 
87.2 
135.1 
170.8 
OCD5 
34.6 
82.1 
141.3 
202.8 
343.7 
451.5 
486.4 
Forecasts 
42 
40 
38 
36 
32 
28 
24 
OFCL (2011-15) 
28.4 
45.0 
60.4 
77.1 
113.1 
157.8 
210.0 
OCD5 (2011-15) 
48.3 
101.5 
161.5 
222.6 
329.8 
412.6 
483.9 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     74 
 
Table 5b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected track forecast guidance models (in n mi) 
for forecasts issued on Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 9 October 2016.  
Errors smaller than the NHC official forecast are shown in boldface type. The 
number of official forecasts shown here will generally be smaller than that shown 
in Table 5a due to the homogeneity requirement. 
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
17.8 
29.1 
44.2 
63.8 
92.7 
137.3 
165.9 
OCD5 
34.7 
82.1 
139.8 
199.6 
351.4 
459.7 
472.6 
GFSI 
18.1 
33.0 
48.5 
66.2 
105.3 
145.0 
201.2 
EMXI 
17.4 
29.2 
37.9 
48.5 
76.3 
111.0 
128.2 
EGRI 
19.2 
31.3 
36.2 
47.3 
67.4 
100.8 
120.8 
NVGI 
25.6 
44.7 
70.1 
110.9 
187.3 
262.4 
348.2 
CMCI 
29.1 
53.4 
77.4 
109.5 
196.0 
326.9 
523.0 
GHMI 
21.2 
40.6 
63.6 
88.9 
148.4 
226.3 
334.5 
HWFI 
20.3 
36.5 
58.6 
90.4 
162.8 
263.2 
381.9 
CTCI 
18.8 
36.6 
59.8 
89.5 
144.6 
200.9 
237.1 
GFNI 
21.7 
45.4 
75.4 
110.4 
180.2 
284.1 
448.2 
TCON 
16.7 
29.5 
44.9 
66.0 
106.0 
158.7 
232.9 
TVCA 
16.4 
29.0 
44.7 
63.9 
100.2 
149.0 
203.9 
TVCX 
16.1 
28.9 
42.9 
60.5 
93.7 
139.2 
186.6 
GFEX 
16.9 
29.4 
40.8 
51.9 
78.7 
113.7 
140.4 
HCCA 
15.3 
26.8 
34.9 
47.4 
78.2 
119.0 
193.2 
AEMI 
18.7 
32.9 
49.6 
69.0 
113.6 
159.5 
228.4 
BAMS 
63.7 
113.1 
150.3 
171.5 
154.0 
121.9 
167.7 
BAMM 
35.9 
68.3 
102.2 
127.3 
146.9 
120.5 
158.3 
BAMD 
32.5 
61.6 
87.8 
114.4 
170.3 
204.2 
226.0 
Forecasts 
35 
33 
31 
29 
25 
22 
19 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     75 
 
Table 6a. 
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) intensity 
forecast errors (kt) for forecasts issued on Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 9 
October 2016.  Mean errors for the previous 5-yr period are shown for comparison.  
Official errors that are smaller than the 5-yr means are shown in boldface type.   
 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
7.7 
12.5 
16.8 
19.6 
21.1 
22.5 
22.1 
OCD5 
11.6 
15.8 
16.6 
18.4 
22.0 
27.9 
55.5 
Forecasts 
42 
40 
38 
36 
32 
28 
24 
OFCL (2011-15) 
6.2 
9.4 
11.5 
13.3 
14.6 
14.6 
15.8 
OCD5 (2011-15) 
7.3 
10.8 
13.3 
15.3 
17.7 
17.8 
17.6 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     76 
 
Table 6b. 
Homogeneous comparison of selected intensity forecast guidance models (in kt) 
for forecasts issued on Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 9 October 2016.  
Errors smaller than the NHC official forecast are shown in boldface type. The 
number of official forecasts shown here will generally be smaller than that shown 
in Table 6a due to the homogeneity requirement. 
Model ID 
Forecast Period (h) 
12 
24 
36 
48 
72 
96 
120 
OFCL 
8.0 
12.7 
14.2 
14.0 
15.0 
18.2 
17.1 
OCD5 
12.6 
16.4 
13.7 
13.5 
18.5 
24.5 
55.7 
DSHP 
12.6 
17.2 
17.9 
18.5 
22.6 
27.3 
24.3 
LGEM 
13.0 
17.5 
19.9 
19.2 
17.6 
19.0 
14.6 
GHMI 
14.9 
22.5 
25.0 
19.3 
18.6 
20.4 
19.8 
HWFI 
11.7 
13.8 
14.0 
13.1 
15.1 
18.9 
12.1 
CTCI 
12.6 
19.5 
21.7 
20.1 
23.8 
25.4 
20.2 
GFNI 
14.0 
21.8 
24.3 
21.4 
16.0 
15.1 
13.7 
ICON 
12.3 
16.7 
16.9 
15.3 
16.4 
16.2 
14.5 
IVCN 
12.2 
16.7 
17.1 
15.4 
17.3 
17.1 
15.0 
HCCA 
12.4 
17.4 
18.7 
15.8 
18.2 
19.3 
16.7 
GFSI 
12.2 
17.4 
17.6 
17.8 
20.0 
27.7 
29.6 
EMXI 
9.8 
15.6 
17.1 
18.0 
19.5 
25.5 
30.2 
Forecasts 
35 
33 
31 
29 
25 
22 
19 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     77 
 
Table 7. 
Watch and warning summary for Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 9 October 
2016. 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Guadeloupe and Martinique 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
St. Lucia 
28 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Barbados, Dominica, St. Vincent, and 
Grenadine Islands 
28 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Aruba, Bonaire, and Curacao 
29 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Barbados, Dominica, St. Vincent, and 
Grenadine Islands 
29 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Dominica, St. Vincent, and Grenadine 
Islands 
29 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Guadeloupe and Martinique 
29 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
St. Lucia 
29 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Dominica, St. Vincent, and Grenadine 
Islands 
29 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
St. Vincent and Grenadine Islands 
29 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
All 
29 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Colombia/Venezuela border to Riohacha 
30 / 0600 
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued 
Aruba, Bonaire, and Curacao 
30 / 0600 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Aruba and Curacao 
30 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued 
Aruba and Curacao 
30 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Aruba 
30 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Colombia/Venezuela border to Riohacha 
30 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued 
All 
30 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Southern border Haiti/Dominican Republic to 
Port-au-Prince 
30 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Jamaica 
 1 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued 
All 
 1 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
All 
 1 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Southern border Haiti/Dominican Republic to 
Le Môle-St. Nicholas 
 1 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch changed to Hurricane 
Warning 
Jamaica 
 1 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch changed to Hurricane 
Warning 
Southern border Haiti/Dominican Republic to 
Le Môle-St. Nicholas 

Hurricane Matthew     78 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
 1 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Le Môle-St. Nicholas to northern border 
Haiti/Dominican Republic 
 1 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Camagüey to Guantánamo 
 2 / 0600 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Puerto Plata to northern border 
Haiti/Dominican Republic 
 2 / 0600 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
southern border Haiti/Dominican Republic to 
Barahona 
 2 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Le Môle-St. Nicholas to northern border 
Haiti/Dominican Republic 
 2 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Turks & Caicos and Southeastern Bahamas 
 2 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
southern border Haiti/Dominican Republic to 
Le Môle-St. Nicholas 
 2 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Haiti 
 2 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Las Tunas to Guantánamo 
 3 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch changed to Hurricane 
Warning 
Southeastern Bahamas 
 3 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Turks & Caicos and Central Bahamas 
 3 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning changed to Tropical 
Storm Warning 
Jamaica 
 3 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Turks & Caicos and Central Bahamas 
 3 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Turks & Caicos 
 3 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Northwestern Bahamas 
 4 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch changed to Tropical 
Storm Warning 
Turks & Caicos 
 4 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch changed to Hurricane 
Warning 
Southeastern Bahamas to Northwestern 
Bahamas 
 4 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Southeastern Bahamas to Northwestern 
Bahamas 
 4 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Seven Mile Bridge to Deerfield Beach 
 4 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Jamaica 
 4 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Deerfield Beach to Volusia/Brevard County 
Line 
 4 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Seven Mile Bridge to Golden Beach 
 4 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Golden Beach to Volusia/Brevard County 
Line 
 5 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Watch changed to 
Tropical Storm Warning 
Seven Mile Bridge to Golden Beach 
 5 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Chokoloskee to Ocean Reef 

Hurricane Matthew     79 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
 5 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Golden Beach to Volusia/Brevard County 
Line 
 5 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Sebastian Inlet to Flagler/Volusia County 
Line 
 5 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Golden Beach to Sebastian Inlet 
 5 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Sebastian Inlet to Fernandina Beach 
 5 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning changed to Tropical 
Storm Warning 
Haiti 
 5 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued 
All 
 5 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
southern border Haiti/Dominican Republic to 
Barahona 
 5 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Flager/Volusia County Line to Fernandina 
Beach 
 5 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Golden Beach to Flager/Volusia County Line 
 5 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Turks & Caicos 
 5 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Watch issued 
Chokoloskee to Suwannee River 
 5 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Haiti 
 5 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Cuba 
 5 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Cuba 
 5 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Flager/Volusia County Line to Savannah 
River 
 6 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Flager/Volusia County Line to Savannah 
River 
 6 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Fernandina Beach to Edisto Beach 
 6 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Golden Beach to Fernandina Beach 
 6 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
Fernandina Beach to Edisto Beach 
 6 / 0900 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Altamaha Sound to South Santee River 
 6 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Golden Beach to Altamaha Sound 
 6 / 1200 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Central Bahamas to Northwestern Bahamas 
 6 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Chokoloskee to Anclote River 
 6 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Anclote River to Suwanee River 
 6 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Edisto Beach to South Santee River 
 6 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Golden Beach to Edisto Beach 
 6 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
South Santee River to Surf City 
 6 / 2100 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
All 
 6 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Golden Beach to South Santee River 

Hurricane Matthew     80 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
 7 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Englewood to Anclote River 
 7 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Chokoloskee to Ocean Reef 
 7 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Seven Mile Bridge to Boca Raton 
 7 / 0000 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Boca Raton to South Santee River 
 7 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Ocean Reef to Boca Raton 
 7 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Watch modified to 
Anna Maria Island to Anclote River 
 7 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Boca Raton to Jupiter Inlet 
 7 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Jupiter Inlet to South Santee River 
 7 / 1200 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Jupiter Inlet to Sebastian Inlet 
 7 / 1200 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Northwestern Bahamas 
 7 / 1200 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Sebastian Inlet to South Santee River 
 7 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued 
All 
 7 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Surf City to Duck 
 7 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Sebastian Inlet to Cocoa Beach 
 7 / 1500 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Anna Maria Island to Anclote River 
 7 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch issued 
Surf City to Cape Lookout 
 7 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
Sebastian Inlet to South Santee River 
 7 / 1500 
Hurricane Warning issued 
Cocoa Beach to Surf City 
 7 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Sebastian Inlet to Cocoa Beach 
 7 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Volusia/Brevard County Line to 
Flagler/Volusia County Line 
 7 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Flagler/Volusia County Line to Surf City 
 8 / 0000 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Volusia/Brevard County Line to 
Flagler/Volusia County Line 
 8 / 0300 
Tropical Storm Warning issued 
Flagler/Volusia County Line to Fernandina 
Beach 
 8 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Fernandina Beach to Surf City 
 8 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
Flagler/Volusia County Line to Fernandina 
Beach 
 8 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Altamaha Sound to Surf City 
 8 / 1800 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Edisto Beach to Surf City 
 8 / 2100 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
South Santee River to Surf City 
 9 / 0300 
Hurricane Watch modified to 
Surf City to Duck 
 9 / 0300 
Hurricane Warning modified to 
Little River Inlet to Surf City 
 9 / 0900 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Cape Fear to Duck 

Hurricane Matthew     81 
 
Date/Time 
(UTC) 
Action 
Location 
 9 / 0900 
Hurricane Warning discontinued 
All 
 9 / 1500 
Hurricane Watch discontinued 
All 
 9 / 1800 
Tropical Storm Warning modified to 
Surf City to Duck 
 9 / 2100 
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued 
All 
 
 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     82 
 
 
Figure 1. 
Best track positions for Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 9 October 2016. 

Hurricane Matthew     83 
 
 
Figure 2. 
Selected wind observations and best track maximum sustained surface wind speed curve for Hurricane Matthew, 28 September 
– 9 October 2016.  Aircraft observations have been adjusted for elevation using 90%, 80%, and 80% adjustment factors for 
observations from 700 mb, 850 mb, and 1500 ft, respectively.  Dropwindsonde observations include actual 10 m winds (sfc), 
as well as surface estimates derived from the mean wind over the lowest 150 m of the wind sounding (LLM).  Advanced Dvorak 
Technique estimates represent the Current Intensity at the nominal observation time. AMSU intensity estimates are from the 
Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies technique.  Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC, and solid 
vertical lines correspond to landfalls. 
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
9/24
9/26
9/28
9/30
10/2
10/4
10/6
10/8
10/10
BEST TRACK
Sat (TAFB)
Sat (SAB)
ADT
AC (sfc)
AC (flt->sfc)
AC (DVK P->W)
Scatterometer
Surface
Drop (sfc)
Drop (LLM xtrp)
AMSU
Wind Speed (kt)
Date (Month/Day)
Hurricane  Matthew
28  September -  9 October 2016

Hurricane Matthew     84 
 
 
Figure 3. 
Selected pressure observations and best track minimum central pressure curve for Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 9 
October 2016.  Advanced Dvorak Technique estimates represent the Current Intensity at the nominal observation time.  AMSU 
intensity estimates are from the Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies technique.  KZC P-W refers to pressure 
estimates derived using the Knaff-Zehr-Courtney pressure-wind relationship.  Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC, 
and solid vertical lines correspond to landfalls. 
900
910
920
930
940
950
960
970
980
990
1000
1010
9/24
9/26
9/28
9/30
10/2
10/4
10/6
10/8
10/10
BEST TRACK
KZC P-W
Sat (TAFB)
Sat (SAB)
ADT
AMSU
AC (sfc)
Surface
Analysis
Sat (JTWC)
Pressure (mb)
Date (Month/Day)
Hurricane  Matthew
28 September  -  9 October 2016

Hurricane Matthew     85 
 
 
Figure 4. 
Plot of Hurricane Matthew’s intensity versus SFMR-based surface (RMW-SFC) and 700-mb flight-level (RMW-FLTLVL) radius 
of maximum winds (RMW). Time period covered is from 0000 UTC 29 September to 0000 UTC 3 October 2016, which includes 
Matthew’s rapid intensification period (red shading). 

Hurricane Matthew     86 
 
 
Figure 5. 
Satellite-derived sea-surface temperature analysis valid 1200 UTC 4 October showing cold wake (yellow shading) created by 
Hurricane Matthew. Buoy 42058 location is indicated by black circle (left panel). Time series plot of SST data (red line) recorded 
by NOAA Buoy 42058 during the period 1 - 8 October 2016 (right panel). The time of Hurricane Matthew’s eye passage over 
the buoy is indicated by the black vertical dashed line. Upwelling began more than 12 h before eye passage and continued for 
almost 24 h after passage.  Satellite-derived SST image courtesy Remote Sensing Systems (RSS), Santa Rosa, CA. 
 
 

Hurricane Matthew     87 
 
 
Figure 6. 
Plot of Hurricane Matthew’s intensity versus GFS-based SHIPS model analyzed environmental parameters: 850−200-mb 
vertical wind shear (SHEAR), sea-surface temperature (SST), upper-ocean heat content (UOHC), and 700−500-mb average 
relative humidity (MDLVLRH). Time period covered is from 1200 UTC 28 September to 0600 UTC 9 October 2016, which 
includes the rapid intensification (RI/red shading) cycle. 

Hurricane Matthew     88 
 
 
Figure 7. 
U.S. Federal Aviation Administration ARSR-4 radar reflectivity data (dBZ) from Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, on 4 October 2016 
when Matthew’s eye was (a) approaching Les Anglais, Haiti, at 1017 UTC, (b) over the western Tiburon peninsula at 1324 UTC, 
(c) over the western Gulf of Gonâve at 1729 UTC, and (d) approaching Juaco, Cuba, at 2235 UTC. Range rings are 30 n mi. 

Hurricane Matthew     89 
 
 
Figure 8. 
Times series plot of surface pressure (in Hg), 10-minute average wind speed (kt), and wind gusts (kt) associated with Hurricane 
Matthew’s passage over NOAA Buoy 42058, located over the central Caribbean Sea about 220 n mi southeast of Kingston, 
Jamaica. Time plot is in Coordinated Universal Time/UTC (GMT) and Eastern Standard Time (EST). The minimum pressure of 
27.84 inches measured during eye passage equals 942.9 mb. 
 

Hurricane Matthew     90 
 
 
Figure 9. 
Matthew’s track and wind fields during the hurricane’s passage over eastern Cuba on 5 October 2016. Graphic is courtesy of 
the Instituto de Meteorología de Cuba/INSMET (Meteorological Institute of Cuba). 

Hurricane Matthew     91 
 
 
Figure 10. 
Estimated maximum storm surge inundation levels (ft above ground level) along the 
southeastern and mid-Atlantic coasts of the United States due to Hurricane Matthew. 
Estimates are based on USGS and NWS high water mark observations, NOS tide station 
observations above MHHW, and USGS storm tide pressure sensors. Image courtesy of 
the NHC Storm Surge Unit. 

Hurricane Matthew     92 
 
 
Figure 11. 
Total rainfall amounts in inches (in) and millimeters (mm) for Matthew during its 
passage over Martinique as a tropical storm during the period 28-29 October 2016. 
Graphic courtesy of Météo-France.

Hurricane Matthew     93 
 
 
Figure 12. 
U.S. rainfall amounts (inches) for Hurricane Matthew during its tropical and post-tropical 
phases, which has been compiled from 4,303 sites during the period 4–10 October 2016. 
Graphic courtesy of David Roth at the NOAA/NWS Weather Prediction Center. 

Hurricane Matthew     94 
 
 
 
Figure 13. 
Selected official track forecasts with 0, 12, 24, 36, 48, and 72 h positions indicated (dashed 
blue lines, top panel) and 0, 12, 24, 36, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h positions indicated (dashed 
blue lines, bottom panel) for Hurricane Matthew, 28 September – 9 October 2016. The 
best track is given by the thick solid red line with positions given at 6 h intervals. 

Hurricane Matthew     95 
 
 
Figure 14. 
Hurricane Matthew 120-h intensity forecasts during the period 1200 UTC 28 September – 0000 UTC 8 October 2016 for (a) 
OFCL [blue lines], (b) the 5-member consensus model IVCN [orange lines], (c) the NOAA GFS model [green lines], and (d)  the 
ECMWF model [purple lines]. The intensity best track is denoted by the solid black line at 6-h intervals (white dots).

Hurricane Matthew     96 
 
 
Figure 15. 
Areas along the East Coast of the United States that were depicted within a Prototype 
Storm Surge Warning (magenta) at any time during Hurricane Matthew, along with 
maximum NOS tide station observations (ft) above MHHW.  Image courtesy of the NHC 
Storm Surge Unit. 
