1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 
 

2 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Datroway 100 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
One vial of powder for concentrate for solution for infusion contains 100 mg of datopotamab 
deruxtecan. After reconstitution, one vial of 5 mL solution contains 20 mg/mL of datopotamab 
deruxtecan (see section 6.6). 
 
Datopotamab deruxtecan is an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) that contains a humanised anti-TROP2 
IgG1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) produced by mammalian (Chinese Hamster Ovary) cells, covalently 
linked to DXd, an exatecan derivative and a topoisomerase I inhibitor, via a tetrapeptide-based 
cleavable linker. Approximately 4 molecules of deruxtecan are attached to each antibody molecule. 
 
Excipient with known effect 
 
Each 100 mg vial contains 1.50 mg of polysorbate 80 (E 433). 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
White to yellowish white lyophilised powder, which has a cake-like appearance. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Breast cancer 
 
Datroway as monotherapy is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with unresectable or 
metastatic hormone receptor (HR)-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer who have received 
endocrine therapy and at least one line of chemotherapy in the advanced setting (see section 5.1). 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Datroway should be prescribed by a physician and administered under the supervision of a healthcare 
professional experienced in the use of anticancer medicinal products. 
 
Patient selection 
 
Patients for treatment of unresectable or metastatic HR-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer should 
be selected on the basis of a documented HER2-negative result assessed by a CE marked IVD if 
available, or an alternative validated test. 
 

3 
Posology 
 
The recommended dose of Datroway is 6 mg/kg (up to a maximum of 540 mg for patients ≥90 kg) of 
body weight given as an intravenous infusion once every 3 weeks (21-day cycle) until disease 
progression or unacceptable toxicity. 
 
Premedication and prophylactic medicinal products 
 
Prior to each infusion of Datroway, a premedication regimen for the prevention of infusion-related 
reactions that consists of an antihistamine and paracetamol (with or without glucocorticoids) should be 
considered (see section 4.8). 
 
It is also recommended that patients receive prophylactic antiemetic agents (dexamethasone with       
5-HT3 antagonists as well as other medicinal products, such as NK1 receptor antagonists) prior to 
infusion of Datroway and on subsequent days as needed. 
 
For prophylactic treatment for keratitis and stomatitis, see section 4.4. 
 
Dose modifications 
 
Dose modifications for infusion-related reactions  
The infusion rate of Datroway should be slowed or interrupted if the patient develops an           
infusion-related reaction. Datroway should be permanently discontinued in case of life-threatening 
infusion-related reactions. 
 
Dose modifications for adverse reactions  
Management of adverse reactions may require dose delay, dose reduction, or treatment discontinuation 
per guidelines provided in Tables 1 and 2. 
 
Datroway dose should not be re-escalated after a dose reduction is made. 
 
Table 1: Dose reductions for adverse reactions 
Recommended starting dose 
6 mg/kg (up to a maximum of 540 mg for patients ≥90 kg) 
First dose reduction 
4 mg/kg (up to a maximum of 360 mg for patients ≥90 kg) 
Second dose reduction 
3 mg/kg (up to a maximum of 270 mg for patients ≥90 kg) 
 
Table 2: Dose modifications for adverse reactions 
Adverse reaction 
Severity* 
Dose modification 
Interstitial lung disease 
(ILD)/pneumonitis [see 
sections 4.4 and 4.8] 
Asymptomatic 
ILD/pneumonitis (Grade 1) 
Delay dose until resolved to 
Grade 0#, then: 
• if resolved in 28 days or less 
from date of onset, maintain 
dose. 
• if resolved in greater than 
28 days from date of onset, 
reduce dose one level (see 
Table 1). 
• consider corticosteroid 
treatment as soon as 
ILD/pneumonitis is 
suspected. 
Symptomatic 
ILD/pneumonitis (Grade 2 or 
greater) 
• Permanently discontinue. 
• Promptly initiate 
corticosteroid treatment as 
soon as ILD/pneumonitis is 
suspected. 

4 
Adverse reaction 
Severity* 
Dose modification 
Keratitis [see sections 4.4 and 
4.8] 
Grade 2 
• Delay dose until resolved to 
Grade 1 or less, then 
maintain dose. 
Grade 3 
• Delay dose until resolved to 
Grade 1 or less, then reduce 
the dose by 1 level (see 
Table 1). 
Grade 4 
• Permanently discontinue. 
Stomatitis [see sections 4.4 and 
4.8] 
Grade 2 
• Delay dose until resolved to 
Grade 1 or less. 
• Restart at the same dose for 
first occurrence. 
• Consider restarting at 
reduced dose level (see 
Table 1) if recurrent. 
Grade 3 
• Delay dose until resolved to 
Grade 1 or less.  
• Restart at reduced dose level 
(see Table 1). 
Grade 4 
• Permanently discontinue. 
* Per National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) version 5.0. 
# Grade 0 refers to full resolution of ILD/pneumonitis, including the disappearance of radiological findings 
associated with active ILD/pneumonitis. Residual scarring or fibrosis following recovery of ILD/pneumonitis 
is not considered to be active disease. 
 
Delayed or missed dose 
 
If a planned dose is delayed or missed, it should be administered as soon as possible without waiting 
until the next planned cycle. The schedule of administration should be adjusted to maintain a 3-week 
interval between doses. 
 
Special populations 
 
Elderly 
No dose adjustment of Datroway is required in patients aged 65 years or older. Data from 
datopotamab deruxtecan in patients aged 85 years or older are limited. 
 
Renal impairment 
No dose adjustment is required in patients with mild to moderate (creatinine clearance [CLcr] ≥ 30 and 
< 90 mL/min) renal impairment (see section 5.2). The recommended dosage of Datroway has not been 
established in patients with severe renal impairment (see section 5.2). Patients with severe renal 
impairment should be monitored carefully. In patients with moderate renal impairment at baseline who 
received datopotamab deruxtecan 6 mg/kg, a higher incidence of serious adverse reactions was 
observed compared to those with normal renal function. 
 
Hepatic impairment 
No dose adjustment is required in patients with mild (total bilirubin ≤ upper limit of normal (ULN) 
and any aspartate aminotransferase (AST) > ULN or total bilirubin > 1 to 1.5 times ULN and any 
AST) hepatic impairment. There are limited data to make a recommendation on dose adjustment in 
patients with moderate (total bilirubin > 1.5 to 3 times ULN and any AST) hepatic impairment. 
Insufficient data are available in patients with severe (total bilirubin > 3 times ULN and any AST) 
hepatic impairment. Therefore, patients with moderate and severe hepatic impairment should be 
monitored carefully (see section 4.4 and 5.2). 
 

5 
Paediatric population 
The safety and efficacy in children and adolescents below 18 years of age have not been established. 
No data are available. 
 
Method of administration 
 
Datroway is for intravenous use. It must be reconstituted and diluted by a healthcare professional and 
administered as an intravenous infusion. Datroway must not be administered as an intravenous push or 
bolus. 
 
The first infusion is to be administered over 90 minutes. Patients should be observed during the 
infusion and for at least 30 minutes following the initial dose for signs or symptoms of infusion-related 
reactions. 
 
Subsequent infusions are to be administered over 30 minutes if prior infusions were tolerated. Patients 
should be observed during the infusion and for at least 30 minutes after infusion. 
 
Precautions to be taken before handling or administering the medicinal product 
 
This medicinal product contains a cytotoxic component, which is covalently attached to the 
monoclonal antibody (see special handling and disposal procedures in section 6.6). 
 
For instructions on reconstitution and dilution of the medicinal product before administration, see 
section 6.6. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the name and the batch number 
of the administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Interstitial lung disease/pneumonitis 
 
Cases of interstitial lung disease (ILD), including pneumonitis, have been reported in patients treated 
with Datroway (see section 4.8). Fatal outcomes have been observed. 
 
Patients should be advised to immediately report cough, dyspnoea, fever, and/or any new or worsening 
respiratory symptoms. Patients should be monitored for signs and symptoms of ILD/pneumonitis. 
Evidence of ILD/pneumonitis should be promptly investigated. Patients with suspected 
ILD/pneumonitis should be evaluated by radiographic imaging. Consultation with a pulmonologist 
should be considered. For asymptomatic (Grade 1) ILD/pneumonitis, consider corticosteroid treatment 
(e.g. ≥ 0.5 mg/kg/day prednisolone or equivalent). Datroway should be delayed until recovery to 
Grade 0 and may be resumed according to instructions in Table 2 (see section 4.2). For symptomatic 
ILD/pneumonitis (Grade 2 or greater), promptly initiate systemic corticosteroid treatment 
(e.g. ≥ 1 mg/kg/day prednisolone or equivalent) and continue for at least 14 days followed by gradual 
taper for at least 4 weeks. Datroway should be permanently discontinued in patients who are 
diagnosed with symptomatic (Grade 2 or greater) ILD/pneumonitis (see section 4.2). Patients with a 
history of ILD/pneumonitis may be at increased risk of developing ILD/pneumonitis and should be 
monitored carefully. 
 

6 
Hypersensitivity 
 
Serious, anaphylactic reactions have been observed with datopotamab deruxtecan. Patients should be 
observed closely for hypersensitivity/allergic reactions, which may have the same clinical presentation 
as an infusion-related reaction. Medicinal products to treat such reactions, as well as emergency 
equipment, should be available for immediate use. In the event of a serious hypersensitivity reaction, 
datopotamab deruxtecan treatment must be immediately and permanently discontinued. 
 
Keratitis 
 
Datroway can cause ocular surface undesirable effects including keratitis. Signs and symptoms of 
keratitis may include dry eye, increased lacrimation, photophobia, and detrimental changes to vision 
(see section 4.8). 
 
Patients should be advised to use preservative-free lubricant eye drops several times daily for 
prophylaxis. Patients should be advised to avoid use of contact lenses unless directed by an eye care 
professional. Patients should be promptly referred for appropriate ophthalmologic assessments for any 
new or worsening ocular signs and symptoms that could suggest keratitis. Keratitis should be 
monitored and if diagnosis is confirmed, Datroway should be dose delayed, dose reduced, or 
permanently discontinued (see section 4.2). 
 
Patients with clinically significant corneal disease were excluded from the study (see section 5.1). 
Patients with pre-existing keratitis should be carefully monitored. 
 
Stomatitis 
 
Stomatitis, including mouth ulcers and oral mucositis, have been reported in patients being treated 
with Datroway (see section 4.8). 
 
In addition to practicing good oral hygiene, when starting Datroway and throughout treatment, daily 
use of a steroid-containing mouthwash (e.g. dexamethasone oral solution 0.1 mg/mL 4 times daily or a 
similar steroid-containing mouthwash regimen) is recommended for prophylaxis and treatment. Where 
clinically indicated, antifungal agents may be considered in accordance with local guidelines. In the 
absence of a prophylactic steroid-containing mouthwash, use of bland mouth rinses (e.g. a non-
alcoholic and/or bicarbonate-containing mouthwash) per local guidelines is recommended. Ice chips or 
ice water held in the mouth throughout the infusion may also be considered. If stomatitis does occur, 
frequency of mouthwashes may be increased and/or other topical treatments may be used. Based on 
the severity of the adverse reaction, dose delay, dose reduce, or permanently discontinue Datroway 
(see section 4.2). 
 
Embryo-foetal toxicity 
 
Based on findings in animals and its mechanism of action, the topoisomerase I inhibitor component of 
Datroway can cause embryo-foetal harm when administered to a pregnant woman. 
 
The pregnancy status of females of childbearing potential should be verified prior to the initiation of 
Datroway. The patient should be informed of the potential risks to the foetus. Females of reproductive 
potential should be advised to use effective contraception during treatment and for at least 7 months 
following the last dose of Datroway. Male patients with female partners of reproductive potential 
should be advised to use effective contraception during treatment with Datroway and for at least 
4 months after the last dose of Datroway (see section 4.6). 
 
Patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment 
 
There are limited data in patients with moderate hepatic impairment and severe hepatic impairment. 
As metabolism and biliary excretion are the primary routes of elimination of the topoisomerase I 

7 
inhibitor, DXd, Datroway should be administered with caution in patients with moderate and severe 
hepatic impairment (see sections 4.2 and 5.2). 
 
Excipient with known effect 
 
This medicine contains 1.5 mg of polysorbate 80 in each vial. Polysorbates may cause allergic 
reactions. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
No clinical drug interaction studies with datopotamab deruxtecan have been conducted. However, 
clinical drug-drug interaction studies were conducted with trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd), which 
contains the same DXd payload as Datroway. The Cmax of DXd was not affected by ritonavir (inhibitor 
of CYP3A4 and OATP1B1 and 1B3) or itraconazole (inhibitor of CYP3A4). The AUC was increased 
1.2-fold by both inhibitors which was not considered clinically relevant. Therefore, inhibitors of 
CYP3A4, OATP1B1 and OATP1B3 will most likely not have a clinically relevant effect on the PK of 
deruxtecan released from datopotamab deruxtecan. 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Women of childbearing potential/Contraception in females and males 
 
The pregnancy status of women of childbearing potential should be verified prior to initiation of 
Datroway. 
 
Women of childbearing potential should use effective contraception during treatment with Datroway 
and for at least 7 months following the last dose. 
 
Men with female partners of childbearing potential should use effective contraception during treatment 
with Datroway and for at least 4 months following the last dose. 
 
Pregnancy 
 
There are no available data on the use of Datroway in pregnant women. However, based on findings in 
animals and its mechanism of action, the topoisomerase I inhibitor component, DXd, can be expected 
to cause embryo-foetal harm when administered to pregnant women (see section 5.3). 
 
Datroway is not recommended during pregnancy and in women of childbearing potential not using 
contraception. Patients should be informed of the potential risks to the foetus before they become 
pregnant and to contact their doctor immediately if they become pregnant. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
It is not known if datopotamab deruxtecan is excreted in human milk. Human IgG is excreted in 
human milk. Because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in breast-fed children, women 
should discontinue breast-feeding prior to initiating treatment with Datroway. Women may begin 
breast-feeding 1 month after concluding treatment. 
 
Fertility 
 
No human data on the effect of datopotamab deruxtecan on fertility are available. Based on results 
from animal toxicity studies, Datroway may impair male and female reproductive function and fertility 
(see section 5.3). 
 
Both men and women should seek advice on fertility preservation before treatment. It is not known 
whether datopotamab deruxtecan or its metabolites are found in seminal fluid. Male patients must not 
freeze or donate sperm throughout the treatment period, and for at least 4 months after the final dose 

8 
of Datroway. Females must not donate, or retrieve for their own use, ova throughout the treatment 
period and for at least 7 months after the final dose of Datroway.  
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 
Datroway may influence the ability to drive and use machines. Patients should be advised to use 
caution when driving or operating machines in case they experience fatigue or vision changes during 
treatment with Datroway (see section 4.8). 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of safety profile 
 
The pooled safety profile has been assessed from two clinical studies involving 443 patients who 
received Datroway 6 mg/kg body weight for the treatment of breast cancer. The median exposure to 
Datroway in this data set was 6.2 months (range 0.7 to 28.5 months). 
 
The most common adverse reactions were stomatitis (64.8%), nausea (57.6%), fatigue (42.7%), 
alopecia (37.2%), constipation (33.0%), vomiting (26.0%), dry eye (25.5%), COVID-19 (17.8%), 
keratitis (17.8%), anaemia (17.2%), decreased appetite (16.3%), AST increased (16.0%), rash 
(15.3%), diarrhoea (12.9%), neutropenia (12.0%) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) increased 
(10.4%). 
 
The most common Grade 3/4 adverse reactions were stomatitis (7.9%), fatigue (4.3%), anaemia 
(3.2%), AST increased (2.7%), vomiting (1.6%), ALT increased (1.6%), nausea (1.4%), urinary tract 
infection (1.4%), COVID-19 (1.1%), decreased appetite (1.1%), neutropenia (1.1%) and pneumonia 
(1.1%). Grade 5 adverse reactions occurred in 0.7% of patients and were due to ILD/pneumonitis, 
dyspnoea and sepsis. 
 
The most common serious adverse reactions were COVID-19 (1.4%), urinary tract infection (1.1%), 
ILD/pneumonitis (1.1%) and sepsis (1.1%). 
 
The frequency of treatment discontinuation due to adverse reactions was 3.6%. The most common 
adverse reaction leading to treatment discontinuation was ILD/pneumonitis (2.0%). The frequency of 
dose reductions due to adverse reactions was 21.0%. The most common adverse reactions leading to 
dose reduction were stomatitis (12.9%), fatigue (3.2%), nausea (1.8%) and keratitis (1.4%). The 
frequency of dose interruptions due to adverse reactions was 19.6%. The most common adverse 
reactions leading to dose interruption were stomatitis (5.2%), COVID-19 (4.1%), fatigue (2.3%), 
ILD/pneumonitis (1.6%), pneumonia (1.6%), keratitis (1.4%) and infusion-related reaction (1.1%). 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
Table 3 presents adverse reactions reported with Datroway. Adverse reactions are listed by System 
Organ Class and frequency category. The adverse reaction frequencies are based on all-cause adverse 
event frequencies, where a proportion of the events for an adverse reaction may have other causes than 
datopotamab deruxtecan, such as the disease, other medicinal products or unrelated causes. The 
severity of adverse drug reactions was assessed based on the Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events (CTCAE), defining Grade 1 = mild, Grade 2 = moderate, Grade 3 = severe, 
Grade 4 = life threatening, and Grade 5 = death. 
 
Frequency categories are defined as: very common (≥ 1/10), common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10), uncommon 
(≥ 1/1 000 to < 1/100), rare (≥ 1/10 000 to < 1/1 000), very rare (< 1/10 000), and not known (cannot 
be estimated from the available data). Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are presented 
in the order of decreasing seriousness. 
 

9 
Table 3: Adverse reactions in patients treated with datopotamab deruxtecan 6 mg/kg 
System organ class 
Frequency category 
Adverse reactions 
Infections and infestations 
 
Very common 
COVID-19a 
 
Common 
urinary tract infection, 
pneumoniab, sepsis 
Blood and lymphatic system disorders 
 
Very common 
anaemia, neutropeniac 
 
Common 
leukopenia 
Immune system disorders 
 
Not known 
anaphylactic reaction  
Metabolism and nutrition disorders 
 
Very common 
decreased appetite 
Nervous system disorders 
 
Common 
dysgeusia 
Eye disorders 
 
Very common 
keratitisd, dry eye 
Common 
conjunctivitise, blurred vision, 
lacrimation increased, blepharitis, 
meibomian gland dysfunction, 
photophobia 
Uncommon 
visual impairment 
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders 
 
Common 
ILD/pneumonitisf, dyspnoea 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
 
Very common 
stomatitisg, vomiting, nausea, 
diarrhoea, constipation 
Common 
dry mouth 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders 
 
Very common 
alopecia, rashh 
Common 
pruritus, dry skin, skin 
hyperpigmentationi, madarosis 
General disorders and administration site conditions 
 
Very common 
fatiguej 
Investigations 
 
Very common 
aspartate aminotransferase 
increased, alanine 
aminotransferase increased  
Injury, poisoning and procedural complications 
 
Common 
infusion-related reactionk 
a Including COVID-19, COVID-19 pneumonia, SARS-CoV-2 test positive. 
b Including pneumonia, lower respiratory tract infection and lower respiratory tract infection fungal. 
c Including neutropenia and neutrophil count decreased. 
d Including keratitis, punctate keratitis and ulcerative keratitis. 
e Including conjunctivitis, conjunctival disorder, conjunctival hyperaemia and conjunctival irritation. 
f Including interstitial lung disease and pneumonitis. 
g Including stomatitis, aphthous ulcer, glossitis, mouth ulceration, odynophagia, oral pain, oropharyngeal pain 
and pharyngeal inflammation. 
h Including rash, erythematous rash, maculo-papular rash and pruritic rash. 
i Including skin hyperpigmentation and skin discolouration. 
j Including fatigue and asthenia. 
k Infusion-related reaction includes as any reaction (infusion-related reaction, pruritus and rash) occurring within 
the same day as Datroway infusion. 
 

10 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Interstitial lung disease/pneumonitis 
 
ILD/pneumonitis occurred in 4.7% of the pool of patients with breast cancer treated with Datroway 
6 mg/kg, of which 3.6% were adjudicated as drug-related ILD/pneumonitis by independent review. 
Most ILD/pneumonitis cases were Grade 1 (2.9%). Grade 2 events occurred in 0.9% of patients. 
Grade 3 events occurred in 0.9% of patients. Adjudicated drug-related Grade 5 events occurred in 
0.2% of patients. Median time to first onset was 5.8 months (range: 1.1 to 10.8). 
 
Ocular surface undesirable effects 
 
Ocular surface undesirable effects occurred in 49.0% of the pool of patients treated with Datroway, of 
which 35.0% were Grade 1, 12.2% were Grade 2 and 1.8% were Grade 3. Keratitis occurred in 17.8% 
of the pool of patients treated with Datroway, of which 13.3% were Grade 1, 3.6% were Grade 2 and 
0.9% were Grade 3. The median time to onset was 4.1 months (range: 0 to 23.2). Discontinuation due 
to keratitis occurred in 0.5% of patients. 
 
Stomatitis 
 
Stomatitis occurred in 64.8% of the pool of patients treated with Datroway, of which 29.3% were 
Grade 1, 27.5% were Grade 2 and 7.9% were Grade 3. Median time to first onset was 0.6 months 
(range: 0.03 to 12.2). Discontinuation due to stomatitis occurred in 0.5% of patients. 
 
Haematological events 
 
In study TROPION-Breast01 neutropenia occurred in 11.7% of patients treated with Datroway (1.1% 
were Grade ≥3). Leukopenia occurred in 3.6% of patients treated with Datroway (none were 
Grade ≥3). Colony stimulating factor was used by 2.7% of patients treated with Datroway. 
 
Elderly 
 
Of the 443 patients with breast cancer treated with Datroway 6 mg/kg, 23.3% were 65 years or older 
and 4.7% were 75 years or older. Data are limited to establish the safety in patients 85 years or older. 
 
There was a numerically lower proportion of Grade 3/4 adverse reactions (24.3% vs 25.0%) and a 
numerically higher proportion of serious adverse reactions (9.7% vs 6.8%) and adverse reactions 
leading to discontinuation (3.9% vs 3.5%) observed in patients aged 65 years or older compared to 
patients younger than 65 years old. 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
There is currently no specific treatment in the event of an overdose. Higher than the indicated dosing 
may increase risk of adverse reactions. Physicians should follow general supportive measures and 
institute appropriate treatment. 
 
 

11 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Antineoplastic agents, monoclonal antibodies and antibody drug 
conjugates, ATC code: L01FX35 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Datopotamab deruxtecan is a TROP2-directed antibody-drug conjugate. The antibody is a humanised 
anti-TROP2 IgG1 attached to deruxtecan, a topoisomerase I inhibitor (DXd) bound by a     
tetrapeptide-based cleavable linker. The antibody-drug conjugate is stable in plasma. The antibody 
binds to TROP2 expressed on the surface of certain tumour cells. After binding, datopotamab 
deruxtecan undergoes internalisation into the tumour cells. Subsequently, the release of DXd results in 
DNA damage and apoptotic cell death via topoisomerase I inhibition. Datopotamab deruxtecan may 
also exhibit indirect cytotoxicity as shown in vitro through mechanisms of antibody-dependent cellular 
cytotoxicity (ADCC), antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis (ADCP) and bystander cytotoxicity of 
DXd against TROP2 expressing tumour cells and neighbouring cells. 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
 
Immunogenicity 
 
As with all therapeutic proteins, there is a potential for immunogenicity. 
During the median 5.5 month treatment period across clinical studies in NSCLC and breast cancer 
patients treated with Datroway at 6 mg/kg, the incidence of anti-datopotamab deruxtecan antibodies 
was 16% (146 out of 912) and the incidence of neutralising antibodies against datopotamab deruxtecan 
was 2.5% (23 out of 912). There was no apparent effect of anti-drug antibodies on the 
pharmacokinetics or effectiveness of datopotamab deruxtecan. No clinically meaningful impact on the 
safety of datopotamab deruxtecan was observed. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety 
 
HR+/HER2- breast cancer 
 
TROPION-Breast01 (NCT05104866) 
The efficacy of Datroway was evaluated in study TROPION-Breast01, a multicentre, open-label, 
randomised study of 732 patients with unresectable or metastatic HR-positive, HER2-negative (IHC 0, 
IHC1+ or IHC2+/ISH-) breast cancer. Patients must have progressed on and been unsuitable for 
endocrine therapy. Patients were required to have received 1 to 2 lines of prior chemotherapy in the 
unresectable or metastatic disease setting. Patients with clinically inactive brain metastases were 
included in the study. Patients were excluded for a history of ILD/pneumonitis requiring treatment 
with steroids, ongoing ILD/pneumonitis, or clinically significant cardiac, pulmonary or corneal disease 
at screening. Patients were also excluded for Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 
performance status > 1. 
 
A total of 732 patients were randomised 1:1 to receive either Datroway 6 mg/kg (N=365) by 
intravenous infusion every 3 weeks or physician’s choice of chemotherapy (N=367, eribulin 59.9%, 
capecitabine 20.7%, vinorelbine 10.4% or gemcitabine 9.0%) until unacceptable toxicity or disease 
progression. Randomisation was stratified by previous lines of chemotherapy (one or two), prior 
treatment with a CDK4/6 inhibitor (yes or no) and geographical region (United States, Canada, 
Europe, or Rest of World). Tumour imaging was obtained every 6 weeks until disease progression. 
 
The dual primary efficacy endpoints were progression-free survival (PFS) as assessed by blinded 
independent central review (BICR) based on Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours 
(RECIST) v.1.1 and overall survival (OS). Confirmed objective response rate (ORR) and duration of 
response (DOR) were secondary endpoints. 

12 
 
Baseline demographics and disease characteristics were similar between treatment arms. The median 
age was 55 years (range 28 to 86); 22.3% were ≥ 65 years and 98.8% were female; 47.8% were White, 
1.5% were Black or African American, 40.7% were Asian and 11.3% were of Hispanic/Latino 
ethnicity; 57% had ECOG PS 0 and 42.3% had ECOG PS of 1; 97.3% had visceral disease, 71.9% had 
liver metastases and 7.9% had stable brain metastases at baseline at the time of randomisation. 
 
There were 60.2% of patients who received prior endocrine therapy in the (neo) adjuvant setting, 
88.5% received prior endocrine therapy in the unresectable or metastatic setting and all patients 
received prior chemotherapy regimens in the unresectable or metastatic setting. Overall, 80.7% of 
patients had received prior taxanes and 63.8% had received prior anthracyclines. There were 62% of 
patients who had 1 prior chemotherapy regimen and 37.7% of patients who had 2 prior chemotherapy 
regimens for treatment of unresectable or metastatic disease. 82.5% of patients had prior treatment 
with a CDK4/6 inhibitor. 
 
Efficacy results are shown in Table 4 and Figure 1 and 2. 
 
Table 4: Efficacy results in TROPION-Breast01 
Efficacy parameter  
Datroway 
(N=365) 
Chemotherapy 
(N=367) 
Progression-free survival by BICRa 
Number of events (%) 
212 (58.1) 
235 (64.0) 
Median, months (95% CI) 
6.9 (5.7, 7.4) 
4.9 (4.2, 5.5) 
Hazard ratio (95% CI) 
0.63 (0.52, 0.76) 
p-valueb 
< 0.0001 
Overall Survivalc, d 
Number of events (%) 
223 (61.1) 
213 (58.0) 
Median, months (95% CI) 
18.6 (17.3, 20.1) 
18.3 (17.3, 20.5) 
Hazard ratio (95% CI) 
1.01 (0.83, 1.22) 
p-valuee 
0.9445 
Objective response rate by BICRa, f 
n (%) 
133 (36.4) 
84 (22.9) 
95% CI 
31.4, 41.3 
18.6, 27.2 
Duration of response by BICRa, f 
Median, months (95% CI) 
6.7 (5.6, 9.8) 
5.7 (4.9, 6.8) 
a Data cutoff 17 July 2023 
b Predefined p-value boundary was 0.01. 
c Data cutoff 24 July 2024 
d 12.3% and 24.0% of patients in the datopotamab deruxtecan and ICC arms, respectively, received subsequent 
treatment with trastuzumab deruxtecan and/or sacituzumab govitecan post discontinuation. 
e Predefined p-value boundary was 0.0403. 
f Endpoints were analysed descriptively. 
 

13 
Figure 1: Kaplan-Meier plot of PFS by BICR in TROPION-Breast01 (data cutoff 17 July 2023) 
 
The improvement in PFS by BICR was consistent amongst the prespecified subgroups of patients 
including by geographic region, prior use of CDK4/6 inhibitor and previous line of therapy. 
 
Figure 2: Kaplan-Meier plot of final OS in TROPION-Breast01 (data cutoff 24 July 2024) 
 
 
Paediatric population 
 
The European Medicines Agency has waived the obligation to submit the results of studies with 
Datroway in all subsets of the paediatric population in breast cancer (see section 4.2 for information 
on paediatric use). 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
The pharmacokinetics of datopotamab deruxtecan was evaluated in 729 patients. 
 
At the recommended dosage of Datroway, the geometric mean (coefficient of variation [CV]%) Cmax 
of datopotamab deruxtecan and DXd were 154 µg/mL (20.3%) and 2.82 ng/mL (58.1%), respectively, 
and the AUC (area under the plasma concentration versus time curve) of datopotamab deruxtecan and 
DXd were 671 µg*day/mL (31.4%) and 18.5 ng*day/mL (42.6%) after the first dose in cycle 1, 
respectively. 
 
Time Since Randomisation (Months) 
                  Censored 
                     Datopotamab deruxtecan (N=365) 
                     ICC (N=367) 
Numbers at Risk 
Datopotamab 
deruxtecan (N=365) 
           ICC (N=367) 
Progression-free Survival (%) 
Censored 
Datopotamab deruxtecan (N=365) 
ICC (N=367) 
Overall Survival (%) 
Time Since Randomisation (Months) 
Number at risk 
Datopotamab deruxtecan (N=365) 
ICC (N=367 

14 
Distribution 
 
Steady state volume of distribution of datopotamab deruxtecan is 3.52 L. In vitro, across the 
concentration range of 10 ng/mL to 100 ng/mL, the mean human plasma protein binding of DXd was 
96.8 to 98.0%, and the blood-to-plasma concentration ratio of DXd was 0.59-0.62. 
 
Biotransformation 
 
Datopotamab deruxtecan undergoes intracellular cleavage by lysosomal enzymes to release DXd. The 
humanised TROP2 IgG1 monoclonal antibody is expected to be degraded into small peptides and 
amino acids via catabolic pathways in the same manner as endogenous IgG. In vitro metabolism 
studies in human liver microsomes indicate that DXd is primarily metabolised by CYP3A4 via 
oxidative pathways and does not undergo significant metabolism by UGT or other CYP enzymes. 
 
Elimination 
 
Following intravenous administration of datopotamab deruxtecan in patients, the clearance of 
datopotamab deruxtecan was estimated to be 0.57 L/day. The median elimination half-life (t1/2) of 
datopotamab deruxtecan was 4.82 days and apparent median t1/2 of released DXd was approximately 
5.50 days. In vitro, DXd was a substrate of P-gp, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, MATE2-K, MRP1 and 
BCRP. DXd excretion was not studied in humans.  
 
In vitro interactions 
 
Effects of Datroway on the pharmacokinetics of other medicinal products 
 
In vitro studies indicate DXd does not inhibit or induce major CYP450 enzymes including CYP1A2, 
2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A. In vitro studies indicate that DXd does not inhibit OAT1, OAT3, 
OCT1, OCT2, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, MATE1, MATE2-K, P-gp, BCRP or BSEP transporters. 
 
Effects of other medicinal products on the pharmacokinetics of Datroway 
 
In vitro, DXd was a substrate of P-gp, OATP1B1, OATP1B3, MATE2-K, MRP1 and BCRP.  
No clinically meaningful interaction is expected with medicinal products that are inhibitors of 
MATE2-K, MRP1, P-gp, OATP1B1 or BCRP transporters (see section 4.5). 
 
Linearity/non-linearity 
 
The exposure of datopotamab deruxtecan and released DXd when administered intravenously 
increased in proportion to dose in the 4 mg/kg to 10 mg/kg dose range (approximately 0.7 to 1.7 times 
the recommended dose). No accumulation of datopotamab deruxtecan was observed at the 6 mg/kg 
dose between cycle 1 and cycle 3. 
 
Special populations 
 
Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis, age (26 to 86 years), race, region, and sex did not have 
a clinically meaningful effect on exposure of datopotamab deruxtecan or DXd. The mean volume of 
distribution and clearance of datopotamab deruxtecan and DXd increase with increasing body weight 
(35.6 kg to 156 kg). This is considered clinically relevant. See section 4.2 for dose recommendations. 
 
Renal impairment 
 
No dedicated renal impairment study was conducted. Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis 
including patients with mild to moderate (CLcr ≥ 30 and <90 mL/min) renal impairment (estimated by 
Cockcroft-Gault), the pharmacokinetics of datopotamab deruxtecan or DXd was not affected by mild 
to moderate renal impairment as compared to normal renal function (CLcr ≥ 90 mL/min) (see 
section 4.2). 

15 
 
Hepatic impairment 
 
No dedicated hepatic impairment study was conducted. Based on population pharmacokinetic analysis 
including patients with mild hepatic impairment (total bilirubin ≤ ULN and any AST > ULN or total 
bilirubin > 1 to 1.5 times ULN and any AST), the pharmacokinetics of datopotamab deruxtecan or 
DXd was not affected by mild hepatic impairment as compared to normal hepatic function. There are 
limited data in patients with moderate (total bilirubin > 1.5 to 3 times ULN and any AST) hepatic 
impairment to draw conclusions. Insufficient data are available for patients with severe (total bilirubin 
> 3 times ULN and any AST) hepatic impairment. Therefore, patients with moderate and severe 
hepatic impairment should be monitored carefully (see section 4.2 and 4.4). 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
Repeat-dose toxicity 
 
In animals, toxicities were observed in lymphatic and haematopoietic organs, intestines, kidneys, male 
and female reproductive tracts, lung, skin, eye (cornea), liver and incisor teeth following the 
administration of datopotamab deruxtecan at exposure levels of the topoisomerase I inhibitor below 
clinical plasma exposure. In these animals, ADC exposure levels were similar or above clinical plasma 
exposure. 
 
Genotoxicity 
 
DXd was clastogenic in both an in vivo rat bone marrow micronucleus assay and an in vitro Chinese 
hamster lung chromosome aberration assay. 
 
Carcinogenicity 
 
Carcinogenicity studies have not been conducted with datopotamab deruxtecan. 
 
Reproductive and developmental toxicity 
 
Dedicated fertility studies have not been conducted with datopotamab deruxtecan. Based on the results 
from an animal toxicity study in rats, datopotamab deruxtecan at 200 mg/kg (approximately 29 times 
the human recommended dose of 6 mg/kg based on AUC) may impair male and female reproductive 
function and fertility at exposure levels of the topoisomerase I inhibitor below clinical plasma 
exposure. Toxicity to male reproductive tract included testis (degeneration of germinal epithelium and 
atrophy of seminiferous tubule) and epididymis (single cell necrosis of ductal epithelium, cell debris in 
duct and decreased number of spermatozoa in duct), which did not reverse after 8 weeks of treatment 
cessation, except for single cell necrosis of ductal epithelium. The effects on female fertility, including 
an increase in the number of atretic follicles in the ovaries and single cell necrosis of mucosal 
epithelium in the vagina, may be reversible. 
 
Reproductive and developmental toxicity studies have not been conducted with datopotamab 
deruxtecan. Based on results from general animal toxicity studies, datopotamab deruxtecan and DXd 
were toxic to rapidly dividing cells (testes), and DXd was genotoxic, suggesting the potential for 
embryotoxicity and teratogenicity. 
 
 

16 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
L-histidine 
L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate 
Sucrose 
Polysorbate 80 (E 433) 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal 
products. 
 
Sodium chloride solution for infusion must not be used for reconstitution or dilution since it may cause 
particulate formation. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
Unopened vial 
 
4 years. 
 
Reconstituted solution 
 
Chemical and physical in-use stability has been demonstrated for up to 48 hours at 2 °C to 8 °C. From 
a microbiological point of view, the product should be used immediately. If not used immediately, in-
use storage times and conditions prior to use are the responsibility of the user and would normally not 
be longer than 24 hours at 2 °C to 8 °C, unless reconstitution has taken place in controlled and 
validated aseptic conditions. 
 
Diluted solution 
 
It is recommended that the diluted solution be used immediately. If not used immediately, the diluted 
solution may be stored at room temperature (≤ 25 °C) for up to 4 hours or in a refrigerator at 
2 °C to 8 °C for up to 24 hours, including preparation and infusion, protected from light. 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2 °C – 8 °C). 
Do not freeze. 
 
For storage conditions after reconstitution and dilution of the medicinal product, see section 6.3. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
Datroway is provided in a 10 mL Type 1 amber borosilicate glass vial sealed with a fluoro-resin 
laminated butyl rubber stopper, and a polypropylene/aluminium blue flip-off crimp cap. 
 
Each carton contains 1 vial. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
Datroway contains a cytotoxic component and should be administered under the supervision of a 
physician experienced in the use of cytotoxic agents. Appropriate procedures for proper preparation, 
handling and disposal of antineoplastic and cytotoxic medicinal products should be used. 
 

17 
Appropriate aseptic technique should be used for the following reconstitution and dilution procedures. 
 
Reconstitution 
 
• 
Reconstitute immediately before dilution. 
• 
More than one vial may be needed for a full dose. Calculate the dose (mg), the total volume of 
reconstituted Datroway solution required, and the number of vial(s) of Datroway needed (see 
section 4.2). 
• 
Reconstitute each 100 mg vial using a sterile syringe to slowly inject 5 mL of water for injection 
into each vial to obtain a final concentration of 20 mg/mL. 
• 
Swirl the vial gently until completely dissolved. Do not shake. 
• 
From a microbiological point of view, the product should be used immediately. If not used 
immediately, chemical and physical in-use stability has been demonstrated for up to 48 hours at 
2 ºC to 8 ºC. Store the reconstituted Datroway vials in a refrigerator at 2 °C to 8 °C, protected 
from light. Do not freeze. 
• 
The reconstituted product contains no preservative and is intended for single use only. 
 
Dilution 
 
• 
Withdraw the calculated amount from the vial(s) using a sterile syringe. Inspect the 
reconstituted solution for particulates and discolouration. The solution should be clear and 
colourless to light yellow. Do not use if visible particles are observed or if the solution is cloudy 
or discoloured. 
• 
Dilute the calculated volume of reconstituted Datroway in an infusion bag containing 100 mL of 
5% glucose solution. Do not use sodium chloride solution (see section 6.2). An infusion bag 
made of polyvinylchloride (PVC) or polyolefin (polypropylene (PP) or copolymer of ethylene 
and propylene) is recommended. 
• 
Gently invert the infusion bag to thoroughly mix the solution. Do not shake. 
• 
Cover the infusion bag to protect from light. 
• 
If not used immediately, store at room temperature (≤ 25 °C) for up to 4 hours including 
preparation and infusion, or in a refrigerator at 2 °C to 8 °C for up to 24 hours, protected from 
light. Do not freeze. 
• 
Discard any unused portion left in the vial. 
 
Administration 
 
• 
If the prepared infusion solution was stored refrigerated (2 °C to 8 °C), it is recommended that 
the solution be allowed to reach to room temperature prior to administration, protected from 
light. 
• 
Administer Datroway as an intravenous infusion only with an infusion line and tubing set made 
of PVC, polybutadiene (PBD), or low density polyethylene (LDPE). 
• 
Administer Datroway with a 0.2 micron in-line polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), 
polyethersulfone (PES) or nylon 66 filter. 
• 
Do not administer as an intravenous push or bolus (see section 4.2). 
• 
Cover the infusion bag to protect from light. 
• 
Do not mix Datroway with other medicinal products or administer other medicinal products 
through the same intravenous line. 
 
Disposal 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 

18 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Daiichi Sankyo Europe GmbH 
Zielstattstrasse 48 
81379 Munich 
Germany 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER 
 
EU/1/25/1915/001 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 04 April 2025 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 

19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURERS OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE 
SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR 
BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO 
THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT 
 
 

20 
A. 
MANUFACTURERS OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturers of the biological active substance 
 
Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd. 
Onahama Plant 
389-4 Aza Otsurugi, Izumimachi Shimogawa, Iwaki 
Fukushima 971-8183 
Japan 
 
Lonza AG 
Lonzastrasse 
3930 Visp 
Switzerland 
 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release 
 
Daiichi Sankyo Europe GmbH 
Luitpoldstrasse 1 
85276 Pfaffenhofen 
Germany 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription. (see Annex I: Summary of Product 
Characteristics, section 4.2). 
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union 
reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any 
subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall submit the first PSUR for this product within 
6 months following authorisation. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance activities 
and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the marketing authorisation 
and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• 
At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• 
Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new 
information being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or 

21 
as the result of an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being 
reached. 
 
 

22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 
 

23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 
 
 

24 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
OUTER CARTON 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Datroway 100 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion 
datopotamab deruxtecan 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE 
 
One vial of powder for concentrate for solution for infusion contains 100 mg of datopotamab 
deruxtecan. 
After reconstitution, one vial of 5 mL solution contains 20 mg/mL of datopotamab deruxtecan. 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
Excipients: L-histidine, L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, sucrose, polysorbate 80 (E 433). 
See leaflet for further information. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
Powder for concentrate for solution for infusion 
1 vial 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
for intravenous use after reconstitution and dilution 
 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING, IF NECESSARY 
 
cytotoxic 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 

25 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 
Store in a refrigerator. 
Do not freeze. 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Daiichi Sankyo Europe GmbH 
81366 Munich 
Germany 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER 
 
EU/1/25/1915/001 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
Justification for not including Braille accepted. 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 

26 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
VIAL LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Datroway 100 mg powder for concentrate 
datopotamab deruxtecan 
for IV use after reconstitution and dilution 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
 
100 mg 
 
 
6. 
OTHER 
 
cytotoxic 
 
 

27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 
 

28 
Package leaflet: Information for the patient 
 
Datroway 100 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion 
datopotamab deruxtecan 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you are given this medicine because it contains important 
information for you. 
• 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
• 
If you have any further questions, ask your healthcare provider (doctor, pharmacist or nurse). 
• 
If you get any side effects, talk to your healthcare provider. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What Datroway is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you are given Datroway 
3. 
How you are given Datroway 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store Datroway 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What Datroway is and what it is used for 
 
Datroway is a medicine that contains the active substance datopotamab deruxtecan. 
 
Datroway is used to treat adults who have been diagnosed with a type of cancer known as hormone 
receptor positive (HR+) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative breast 
cancer. It is used when the cancer has spread to other parts of the body or cannot be removed by 
surgery in patients who have received hormone therapy and at least one additional cancer treatment for 
unresectable or metastatic disease. 
 
One part of the medicine is a monoclonal antibody (datopotamab) that attaches specifically to cells 
that have the protein TROP2, which is present in larger numbers on the surface of TROP2-expressing 
breast cancer cells. The other active part of Datroway is DXd, a substance that can kill cancer cells. 
Once the medicine has attached to TROP2-expressing cancer cells, the DXd enters the cells and kills 
them. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you are given Datroway 
 
You must not be given Datroway 
 
• 
if you are allergic to datopotamab deruxtecan or any of the other ingredients of this medicine 
(listed in section 6). 
 
If you are not sure if you are allergic, talk to your doctor or nurse before you are given Datroway. 
 
Warnings and precautions 
 
Talk to your doctor or nurse before you are given Datroway, or during treatment if you have: 
• 
cough, shortness of breath, fever, or other new or worsening breathing problems. These may be 
symptoms of a serious and potentially fatal lung disease called interstitial lung disease. A 

29 
history of lung disease may increase the risk of developing interstitial lung disease. Your doctor 
may have to monitor your lungs while you are taking this medicine. 
 
Datroway may also cause: 
• 
allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis: allergic reactions which can be serious can occur 
during or shortly after the infusion. Your doctor will observe you closely while you are being 
given Datroway. For signs and symptoms of allergic reactions see section 4. Possible side 
effects. If you experience a serious allergic reaction your doctor will permanently stop your 
treatment. 
• 
eye problems. You should use preservative-free lubricating eye drops several times daily to 
prevent dry eye and other eye problems. You should avoid the use of contact lenses during 
treatment. If you have or develop eye problems, which may include dry eyes, increased tears, 
sensitivity to light or vision changes during treatment, contact your doctor or nurse. Your doctor 
may refer you to an eye care provider if needed.  
• 
mouth ulcers and sores. In addition to good oral hygiene and dietary recommendations, your 
doctor or nurse will also recommend a non-alcoholic mouthwash to use 4 times a day. This 
mouthwash may contain steroids. If you develop pain, discomfort, or open sores in your mouth, 
tell your doctor or nurse. Follow your doctor or nurse’s instructions on how to use mouthwash 
to prevent or treat mouth ulcers and sores. 
 
If you have liver problems; your doctor may have to monitor you more closely while you are taking 
this medicine. 
 
Children and adolescents 
 
Datroway is not recommended for anyone under the age of 18 years: there is no information on how 
well it works in this age group. 
 
Other medicines and Datroway 
 
Tell your doctor or nurse if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other medicines. 
 
Contraception 
 
You should use effective contraception (birth control) to avoid becoming pregnant while being treated 
with Datroway and for a period of time after your last dose. 
 
• 
Women taking Datroway should continue contraception for at least 7 months after the last 
dose of Datroway. 
 
• 
Men taking Datroway whose partner may become pregnant should continue using effective 
contraception for at least 4 months after the last dose of Datroway. 
 
Talk to your doctor about the best contraception for you. Also talk to your doctor before you stop your 
contraception. 
 
Pregnancy 
 
Datroway is not recommended during pregnancy because this medicine may harm the unborn baby. 
Speak with your doctor immediately if you are pregnant, think you may be pregnant or are planning to 
become pregnant before or during treatment. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
You should not breast-feed during treatment with Datroway and for at least 1 month after your last 
dose. This is because it is not known whether Datroway passes into breast milk. Talk to your doctor 
about this. 

30 
 
Fertility 
 
If you are being treated with Datroway, you should take advice on conserving sperm or eggs (ova) 
before treatment because the medicine may reduce your fertility. Therefore, discuss this with your 
doctor before starting treatment. 
 
Driving and using machines 
 
Datroway could impact your ability to drive or use machines. Be careful if you feel tired or have 
trouble seeing. 
 
Datroway contains polysorbate 80 
 
This medicine contains 1.5 mg of polysorbate 80 in each vial. Polysorbates may cause allergic 
reactions. Tell your doctor if you have any known allergies. 
 
 
3. 
How you are given Datroway 
 
Datroway will be given to you in a hospital or clinic by a doctor or nurse experienced in the use of 
cancer medicines. 
 
The recommended dose is 6 mg for every kilogram of your body weight, every 3 weeks. Your doctor 
or nurse will calculate the dose you need based on your body weight and will decide how many 
treatments you need. 
 
Your doctor or nurse will give you Datroway as an infusion (drip) into your vein. 
 
Your first infusion will be given over 90 minutes. If this goes well, the infusion on your next visits 
may be given over 30 minutes. 
 
After each infusion, you will be monitored for side effects for 30 minutes. Your doctor or nurse may 
lower your dose, or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment depending on your side effects. 
 
Before each Datroway infusion, your doctor or nurse may give you medicines to help prevent nausea, 
vomiting, and infusion-related reactions. 
 
Before each Datroway infusion and during the treatment period, your doctor or nurse may recommend 
using a mouthwash to help prevent mouth ulcers and sores. If you get infusion-related symptoms, your 
doctor or nurse may slow down your infusion or interrupt or stop your treatment. 
 
During the treatment period, you should use preservative-free lubricating eye drops several times daily 
and avoid the use of contact lenses. 
 
If you miss an appointment to get Datroway 
 
Contact your doctor or treatment centre right away to reschedule your appointment. 
It is very important that you do not miss a dose of this medicine. 
 
If you stop receiving Datroway 
 
Do not stop treatment with Datroway without checking with your doctor or nurse. 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor or nurse. 
 
 

31 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Tell your 
doctor or nurse if you get any side effects, including those not listed in this leaflet. 
 
Some side effects may be serious, and possibly fatal. Speak with your doctor or nurse immediately 
if you notice any of the following: 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Mouth ulcers and sores (stomatitis). 
• 
Inflammation of the cornea (keratitis). Symptoms can include dry eyes, increased tears, 
sensitivity to light or vision changes. Inflammation of the cornea (the transparent layer in front 
of the eye that covers the pupil and iris) may lead to an ulcer. 
 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Interstitial lung disease. Symptoms can include cough, shortness of breath, fever, or other new 
or worsening breathing problems. 
 
Not known (frequency cannot be estimated from the available data) 
• 
Allergic reaction, including anaphylaxis: may include signs and symptoms such as rash, severe 
itching, flushing, dizziness, swelling of the face, lips, tongue and/or throat (angioedema), 
difficulty breathing or swallowing, and/or low blood pressure. 
 
Getting medical treatment right away may help keep these problems from becoming more serious. 
 
Other side effects 
 
The frequency and severity of side effects may vary with the dose you received. Tell your doctor or 
nurse if you notice any of the following side effects: 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
• 
nausea (feeling sick) 
• 
tiredness (fatigue) 
• 
hair loss (alopecia) 
• 
constipation 
• 
vomiting 
• 
dry eye 
• 
COVID-19 
• 
low levels of red blood cells (anaemia), as seen in blood tests 
• 
decreased appetite 
• 
increased levels of liver enzyme (aspartate aminotransferase) in the blood 
• 
rash 
• 
diarrhoea 
• 
low levels of neutrophils, a type of white blood cell that fights infection (neutropenia) 
• 
increased levels of liver enzyme (alanine aminotransferase) in the blood 
 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
• 
redness and discomfort in the eye (conjunctivitis) 
• 
infusion-related reactions. These may include fever, chills, itching or rash 
• 
increased tears production 
• 
infection of the parts of the body that collect and pass out urine 
• 
dry skin 
• 
dry mouth 
• 
itching (pruritus) 
• 
inflammation of the eyelid (blepharitis) 

32 
• 
difficulty breathing (dyspnoea) 
• 
taste disturbance (dysgeusia) 
• 
dysfunction of the glands of the eyelids (meibomian glands) 
• 
skin discoloration (hyperpigmentation) 
• 
blurred vision 
• 
infection of the lungs 
• 
low levels of white blood cells which fight infection (leukopenia) 
• 
loss of eyelashes (madarosis) 
• 
abnormal sensitivity of the eyes to light 
• 
shiver, fever, general discomfort, pale or discoloured skin, shortness of breath due to 
overwhelmed bloodstream by bacteria (sepsis) 
 
Uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
• 
visual impairment 
 
Reporting of side effects 
 
If you get any side effects, talk to your healthcare provider. This includes any possible side effects not 
listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting system listed in 
Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the safety of this 
medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store Datroway 
 
Datroway will be stored by healthcare professionals at the hospital or clinic where you receive 
treatment. The following information is intended for your doctor or nurse. 
 
• 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
• 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the outer carton and vial after 
EXP. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
• 
Store in a refrigerator (2 °C – 8 °C). Do not freeze. 
• 
The prepared solution for infusion is stable for up to 24 hours at 2 °C – 8 °C protected from 
light and must be discarded thereafter. 
 
Applicable special handling and disposal procedures must be followed. Your healthcare provider is 
responsible for disposing of any unused Datroway correctly. These measures will help protect the 
environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What Datroway contains 
 
• 
The active substance is datopotamab deruxtecan. 
One vial of powder for concentrate for solution for infusion contains 100 mg of datopotamab 
deruxtecan. After reconstitution, one vial of 5 mL solution contains 20 mg/mL of datopotamab 
deruxtecan. 
• 
The other ingredients are L-histidine, L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, sucrose and 
polysorbate 80 (see section 2). 
 
What Datroway looks like and contents of the pack 
 
Datroway is a white to yellowish white lyophilised powder supplied in a clear amber vial with a 
rubber stopper, aluminium seal and plastic flip-off cap. 
Each carton contains 1 vial. 

33 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Daiichi Sankyo Europe GmbH 
Zielstattstrasse 48 
81379 Munich 
Germany 
 
Manufacturer 
Daiichi Sankyo Europe GmbH 
Luitpoldstrasse 1 
85276 Pfaffenhofen 
Germany 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
 
België/Belgique/Belgien 
Daiichi Sankyo Belgium N.V.-S.A 
Tél/Tel: +32-(0) 2 227 18 80 
Lietuva 
UAB AstraZeneca Lietuva 
Tel: +370 5 2660550 
България 
АстраЗенека България ЕООД 
Тел.: +359 24455000 
Luxembourg/Luxemburg 
Daiichi Sankyo Belgium N.V.-S.A 
Tél/Tel: +32-(0) 2 227 18 80 
Česká republika 
AstraZeneca Czech Republic s.r.o. 
Tel: +420 222 807 111 
Magyarország 
AstraZeneca Kft. 
Tel.: +36 1 883 6500 
Danmark 
Daiichi Sankyo Nordics ApS 
Tlf.: +45 (0) 33 68 19 99 
Malta 
Daiichi Sankyo Europe GmbH 
Tel: +49-(0) 89 7808 0 
Deutschland 
Daiichi Sankyo Deutschland GmbH 
Tel: +49-(0) 89 7808 0 
Nederland 
Daiichi Sankyo Nederland B.V. 
Tel: +31-(0) 20 4 07 20 72 
Eesti 
AstraZeneca 
Tel: +372 6549 600 
Norge 
Daiichi Sankyo Nordics ApS 
Tlf: +47 (0) 21 09 38 29 
Ελλάδα 
Daiichi Sankyo Greece Single Member S.A 
Τηλ: +30 2104448037 
Österreich 
Daiichi Sankyo Austria GmbH 
Tel: +43-(0) 1 4858642 0 
España 
Daiichi Sankyo España, S.A. 
Tel: +34 91 539 99 11 
Polska 
AstraZeneca Pharma Poland Sp. z o.o. 
Tel: +48 22 245 73 00 
France 
Daiichi Sankyo France S.A.S. 
Tél: +33 (0) 1 55 62 14 60 
Portugal 
Daiichi Sankyo Portugal, Unip. LDA 
Tel: +351 21 4232010 
Hrvatska 
AstraZeneca d.o.o. 
Tel: +385 1 4628 000 
România 
AstraZeneca Pharma SRL 
Tel: +40 21 317 60 41 
Ireland 
Daiichi Sankyo Ireland Ltd 
Tel: +353-(0) 1 489 3000 
Slovenija 
AstraZeneca UK Limited 
Tel: +386 1 51 35 600 

34 
Ísland 
Icepharma hf 
Sími: +354 540 8000 
Slovenská republika 
AstraZeneca AB, o.z. 
Tel: +421 2 5737 7777 
Italia 
Daiichi Sankyo Italia S.p.A. 
Tel: +39-06 85 2551 
Suomi/Finland 
Daiichi Sankyo Nordics ApS 
Puh/Tel: +358 (0) 9 3540 7081 
Κύπρος 
Daiichi Sankyo Europe GmbH 
Τηλ: +49-(0) 89 7808 0 
Sverige 
Daiichi Sankyo Nordics ApS 
Tel: +46 (0) 40 699 2524 
Latvija 
SIA AstraZeneca Latvija 
Tel: +371 67377100 
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in 
 
Other sources of information 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 
The following information is intended for healthcare professionals only: 
 
Datroway contains a cytotoxic component and should be administered under the supervision of a 
physician experienced in the use of cytotoxic agents. Appropriate procedures for proper preparation, 
handling and disposal of antineoplastic and cytotoxic medicinal products should be used. 
 
Appropriate aseptic technique should be used for the following reconstitution and dilution procedures. 
 
Reconstitution 
• 
Reconstitute immediately before dilution. 
• 
More than one vial may be needed for a full dose. Calculate the dose (mg), the total volume of 
reconstituted Datroway solution required, and the number of vial(s) of Datroway needed. 
• 
Reconstitute each 100 mg vial using a sterile syringe to slowly inject 5 mL of water for injection 
into each vial to obtain a final concentration of 20 mg/mL. 
• 
Swirl the vial gently until completely dissolved. Do not shake. 
• 
From a microbiological point of view, the product should be used immediately. If not used 
immediately, chemical and physical in-use stability has been demonstrated for up to 48 hours at 
2 ºC to 8 ºC. Store the reconstituted Datroway vials in a refrigerator at 2 °C to 8 °C, protected 
from light. Do not freeze. 
• 
The reconstituted product contains no preservative and is intended for single use only. 
 
Dilution 
• 
Withdraw the calculated amount from the vial(s) using a sterile syringe. Inspect the 
reconstituted solution for particulates and discolouration. The solution should be clear and 
colourless to light yellow. Do not use if visible particles are observed or if the solution is cloudy 
or discoloured. 
• 
Dilute the calculated volume of reconstituted Datroway in an infusion bag containing 100 mL of 
5% glucose solution. Do not use sodium chloride solution. An infusion bag made of 
polyvinylchloride (PVC) or polyolefin (polypropylene (PP) or copolymer of ethylene and 
propylene) is recommended. 
• 
Gently invert the infusion bag to thoroughly mix the solution. Do not shake. 
• 
Cover the infusion bag to protect from light. 

35 
• 
If not used immediately, store at room temperature (≤ 25 °C) for up to 4 hours including 
preparation and infusion, or in a refrigerator at 2 °C to 8 °C for up to 24 hours, protected from 
light. Do not freeze. 
• 
Discard any unused portion left in the vial. 
 
Administration 
• 
If the prepared infusion solution was stored refrigerated (2 °C to 8 °C), it is recommended that 
the solution be allowed to reach to room temperature prior to administration, protected from 
light. 
• 
Administer Datroway as an intravenous infusion only with an infusion line and tubing set made 
of PVC, polybutadiene (PBD), or low density polyethylene (LDPE). 
• 
Administer Datroway with a 0.2 micron in-line polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), 
polyethersulfone (PES) or nylon 66 filter. 
• 
Do not administer as an intravenous push or bolus. 
• 
Cover the infusion bag to protect from light. 
• 
Do not mix Datroway with other medicinal products or administer other medicinal products 
through the same intravenous line. 
 
Disposal 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
