 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 
 

 
2 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Dazparda 100 units/ml solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each pre-filled pen contains 3 ml equivalent to 300 units. 1 ml solution contains 100 units insulin 
aspart* (equivalent to 3.5 mg). 
 
*Insulin aspart is produced in E.coli by recombinant DNA technology. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled pen (VitaClick). 
 
Clear, colourless and aqueous. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Dazparda is indicated for treatment of diabetes mellitus in adults, adolescents and children aged 1 year 
and above. 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Posology 
 
The potency of insulin analogues, including insulin aspart, is expressed in units, whereas the potency 
of human insulin is expressed in international units. 
 
Dazparda dosing is individual and determined in accordance with the needs of the patient. It should 
normally be used in combination with intermediate-acting or long-acting insulin. 
 
Blood glucose monitoring and insulin dose adjustments are recommended to achieve optimal 
glycaemic control. 
 
The individual insulin requirement in adults and children is usually between 0.5 and 1.0 unit/kg/day. In 
a basal-bolus treatment regimen 50%–70% of this requirement may be provided by Dazparda and the 
remainder by intermediate-acting or long-acting insulin. 
 
Adjustment of dose may be necessary if patients undertake increased physical activity, change their 
usual diet or during concomitant illness. 
 

 
3 
Special populations 
 
Elderly (≥ 65 years old) 
Insulin aspart can be used in elderly patients. 
In elderly patients, glucose monitoring should be intensified and the insulin aspart dose adjusted on an 
individual basis. 
 
Renal impairment 
Renal impairment may reduce the patient’s insulin requirements. 
In patients with renal impairment, glucose monitoring should be intensified and the insulin aspart dose 
adjusted on an individual basis. 
 
Hepatic impairment 
Hepatic impairment may reduce the patient’s insulin requirements. 
In patients with hepatic impairment, glucose monitoring should be intensified and the insulin aspart 
dose adjusted on an individual basis. 
 
Paediatric population 
Insulin aspart can be used in children and adolescents aged 1 year and above in preference to soluble 
human insulin when a rapid onset of action might be beneficial, for example, in the timing of the 
injections in relation to meals (see sections 5.1 and 5.2). 
 
The safety and efficacy of insulin aspart in children below 1 year of age have not been established. 
No data are available. 
 
Transfer from other insulin medicinal products 
 
When transferring from other insulin medicinal products, adjustment of the Dazparda dose and the 
dose of the basal insulin may be necessary. Dazparda has a faster onset and a shorter duration of action 
than soluble human insulin. When injected subcutaneously into the abdominal wall, the onset of action 
will occur within 10–20 minutes of injection. The maximum effect is exerted between 1 and 3 hours 
after the injection. The duration of action is 3 to 5 hours. 
 
Close glucose monitoring is recommended during the transfer and in the initial weeks thereafter (see 
section 4.4). 
 
Method of administration 
 
Insulin aspart is a rapid-acting insulin analogue. 
Insulin aspart is administered subcutaneously by injection in the abdominal wall, the thigh, the upper 
arm, the deltoid region or the gluteal region. Injection sites should always be rotated within the same 
region in order to reduce the risk of lipodystrophy and cutaneous amyloidosis (see sections 4.4 and 
4.8). Subcutaneous injection in the abdominal wall ensures a faster absorption than other injection 
sites. Compared to soluble human insulin the faster onset of action of insulin aspart is maintained 
regardless of the injection site. The duration of action will vary according to the dose, injection site, 
blood flow, temperature and level of physical activity. 
 
Due to the faster onset of action, insulin aspart should generally be given immediately before a meal. 
When necessary, insulin aspart can be given soon after a meal. 
 
Dazparda 100 units/ml solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
Each pre-filled pen delivers 1–60 units in increments of 1 unit. The pre-filled pen is only suitable for 
subcutaneous injections. 
 

 
4 
Patients must visually verify the dialled units on the dose counter of the pen. Therefore, the 
requirement for patients to self-inject is that they can read the dose counter on the pen. Patients who 
are blind or have poor vision must be instructed to always get help/assistance from another person who 
has good vision and is trained in using the insulin device. 
 
Dazparda is only available as 100 units/ml solution for injection in pre-filled pen, for subcutaneous use 
only. Therefore, if an alternative route of administration is required, other insulin aspart medicinal 
products offering such options should be used. 
 
For detailed user instructions, please refer to the package leaflet. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients (see section 6.1). 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the name and the batch number of 
the administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Hyperglycaemia 
 
Inadequate dosing or discontinuation of treatment, especially in type 1 diabetes, may lead to 
hyperglycaemia and diabetic ketoacidosis. Usually, the first symptoms of hyperglycaemia develop 
gradually over a period of hours or days. They include thirst, increased frequency of urination, nausea, 
vomiting, drowsiness, flushed dry skin, dry mouth, loss of appetite as well as acetone odour of breath. 
In type 1 diabetes, untreated hyperglycaemic events eventually lead to diabetic ketoacidosis, which is 
potentially lethal. 
 
Hypoglycaemia 
 
Omission of a meal or unplanned, strenuous physical exercise may lead to hypoglycaemia. 
Especially in children, care should be taken to match insulin doses (especially in basal-bolus regimens) 
with food intake, physical activities and current blood glucose level in order to minimise the risk of 
hypoglycaemia. 
 
Hypoglycaemia may occur if the insulin dose is too high in relation to the insulin requirement. In case 
of hypoglycaemia or if hypoglycaemia is suspected insulin aspart must not be injected. After 
stabilisation of patient’s blood glucose adjustment of the dose should be considered (see sections 4.8 
and 4.9). 
 
Patients whose blood glucose control is greatly improved, e.g. by intensified insulin therapy, may 
experience a change in their usual warning symptoms of hypoglycaemia, and should be advised 
accordingly. Usual warning symptoms may disappear in patients with longstanding diabetes. 
 
A consequence of the pharmacodynamics of rapid-acting insulin analogues is that if hypoglycaemia 
occurs, it may occur earlier after an injection when compared with soluble human insulin. 
 
Since insulin aspart should be administered in immediate relation to a meal, the rapid onset of action 
should be considered in patients with concomitant diseases or treatment where a delayed absorption of 
food might be expected. 
 

 
5 
Concomitant illness, especially infections and feverish conditions, usually increases the patient’s 
insulin requirements. Concomitant diseases in the kidney, liver or affecting the adrenal, pituitary or 
thyroid gland can require changes in the insulin dose. 
 
When patients are transferred between different types of insulin medicinal products, the early warning 
symptoms of hypoglycaemia may change or become less pronounced than those experienced with their 
previous insulin. 
 
Transfer from other insulin medicinal products 
 
Transferring a patient to another type or brand of insulin should be done under strict medical 
supervision. Changes in strength, brand (manufacturer), type, origin (animal, human insulin or human 
insulin analogue) and/or method of manufacture (recombinant DNA versus animal source insulin) may 
result in the need for a change in dose. Patients transferred to insulin aspart from another type of 
insulin may require an increased number of daily injections or a change in dose from that used with 
their usual insulin medicinal products. If an adjustment is needed, it may occur with the first dose or 
during the first few weeks or months. 
 
Injection site reactions 
 
As with any insulin therapy, injection site reactions may occur and include pain, redness, hives, 
inflammation, bruising, swelling and itching. Continuous rotation of the injection site within a given 
area reduces the risk of developing these reactions. Reactions usually resolve in a few days to a few 
weeks. On rare occasions, injection site reactions may require discontinuation of insulin aspart. 
 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders 
 
Patients must be instructed to perform continuous rotation of the injection site to reduce the risk of 
developing lipodystrophy and cutaneous amyloidosis. There is a potential risk of delayed insulin 
absorption and worsened glycaemic control following insulin injections at sites with these reactions. A 
sudden change in the injection site to an unaffected area has been reported to result in hypoglycaemia. 
Blood glucose monitoring is recommended after the change in the injection site from an affected to an 
unaffected area, and dose adjustment of antidiabetic medications may be considered. 
 
Combination of insulin aspart with pioglitazone 
 
Cases of cardiac failure have been reported when pioglitazone was used in combination with insulin, 
especially in patients with risk factors for development of cardiac heart failure. This should be kept in 
mind if treatment with the combination of pioglitazone and insulin aspart is considered. If the 
combination is used, patients should be observed for signs and symptoms of heart failure, weight gain 
and oedema. Pioglitazone should be discontinued if any deterioration in cardiac symptoms occurs. 
 
Avoidance of accidental mix-ups/medication errors 
 
Patients must be instructed to always check the insulin label before each injection to avoid accidental 
mix-ups between insulin aspart and other insulin products. 
 
Insulin antibodies 
 
Insulin administration may cause insulin antibodies to form. In rare cases, the presence of such insulin 
antibodies may necessitate adjustment of the insulin dose in order to correct a tendency to hyper- or 
hypoglycaemia. 
 
Travel 
 

 
6 
Before travelling between different time zones, the patient should seek the doctor’s advice since this 
may mean that the patient has to take the insulin and meals at different times. 
 
Sodium 
 
This medicinal product contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per dose, that is to say essentially 
‘sodium-free’. 
 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
A number of medicinal products are known to interact with the glucose metabolism. 
 
The following substances may reduce the patient's insulin requirements: 
Oral antidiabetic medicinal products, monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI), beta-blockers, 
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, salicylates, anabolic steroids and sulphonamides. 
 
The following substances may increase the patient’s insulin requirements: 
Oral contraceptives, thiazides, glucocorticoids, thyroid hormones, sympathomimetics, growth hormone 
and danazol. 
 
Beta-blockers may mask the symptoms of hypoglycaemia. 
 
Octreotide/lanreotide may either increase or decrease the insulin requirement. 
 
Alcohol may intensify or reduce the hypoglycaemic effect of insulin. 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Pregnancy 
 
Dazparda (insulin aspart) can be used in pregnancy. Data from two randomised controlled clinical 
trials (322 and 27 exposed pregnancies) do not indicate any adverse effect of insulin aspart on 
pregnancy or on the health of the foetus/newborn when compared to human insulin (see section 5.1). 
 
Intensified blood glucose control and monitoring of pregnant women with diabetes (type 1 diabetes, 
type 2 diabetes or gestational diabetes) are recommended throughout pregnancy and when 
contemplating pregnancy. Insulin requirements usually fall in the first trimester and increase 
subsequently during the second and third trimester. After delivery, insulin requirements normally 
return rapidly to pre-pregnancy values. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
There are no restrictions on treatment with Dazparda during breast-feeding. Insulin treatment of the 
nursing mother presents no risk to the baby. However, the Dazparda dose may need to be adjusted. 
 
Fertility 
 
Animal reproduction studies have not revealed any differences between insulin aspart and human 
insulin regarding fertility. 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 

 
7 
The patient’s ability to concentrate and react may be impaired as a result of hypoglycaemia. This may 
constitute a risk in situations where these abilities are of special importance (e.g. driving a car or 
operating machinery). 
 
Patients should be advised to take precautions to avoid hypoglycaemia while driving. This is 
particularly important in those who have reduced or absent awareness of the warning signs of 
hypoglycaemia or have frequent episodes of hypoglycaemia. The advisability of driving should be 
considered in these circumstances. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
Adverse reactions observed in patients using insulin aspart are mainly due to the pharmacologic effect 
of insulin. 
 
The most frequently reported adverse reaction during treatment is hypoglycaemia. The frequencies of 
hypoglycaemia vary with patient population, dose regimens and level of glycaemic control (see 
section 4.8, Description of selected adverse reactions). 
 
At the beginning of the insulin treatment, refraction anomalies, oedema and injection site reactions 
(pain, redness, hives, inflammation, bruising, swelling and itching at the injection site) may occur. 
These reactions are usually of transitory nature. Fast improvement in blood glucose control may be 
associated with acute painful neuropathy, which is usually reversible. Intensification of insulin therapy 
with abrupt improvement in glycaemic control may be associated with temporary worsening of 
diabetic retinopathy, while long-term improved glycaemic control decreases the risk of progression of 
diabetic retinopathy. 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
Adverse reactions listed below are based on clinical trial data and classified according to MedDRA 
frequency and System Organ Class. Frequency categories are defined according to the following 
convention: Very common (≥ 1/10); common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10); uncommon (≥ 1/1 000 to < 1/100); 
rare (≥ 1/10 000 to < 1/1 000); very rare (< 1/10 000); not known (cannot be estimated from the 
available data). 
  
Immune system disorders   
Uncommon – Urticaria, rash, eruptions 
 
Very rare – Anaphylactic reactions* 
  
Metabolism and nutrition 
disorders 
  
Very common – Hypoglycaemia* 
  
Nervous system disorders  
Rare – Peripheral neuropathy (painful neuropathy) 
 
Eye disorders 
  
Uncommon – Refraction disorders 
  
Uncommon – Diabetic retinopathy 
  
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
disorders  
Uncommon – Lipodystrophy* 
 
Not known – Cutaneous amyloidosis*† 
  

 
8 
General disorders and 
administration site conditions  
Uncommon – Injection site reactions  
Uncommon – Oedema 
  
* see section 4.8, Description of selected adverse reactions. 
† ADR from post-marketing sources. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Anaphylactic reactions 
The occurrence of generalised hypersensitivity reactions (including generalised skin rash, itching, 
sweating, gastrointestinal upset, angioneurotic oedema, difficulties in breathing, palpitation and 
reduction in blood pressure) is very rare but can potentially be life threatening. 
 
Hypoglycaemia 
The most frequently reported adverse reaction is hypoglycaemia. It may occur if the insulin dose is too 
high in relation to the insulin requirement. Severe hypoglycaemia may lead to unconsciousness and/or 
convulsions and may result in temporary or permanent impairment of brain function or even death. 
The symptoms of hypoglycaemia usually occur suddenly. They may include cold sweats, cool pale 
skin, fatigue, nervousness or tremor, anxiousness, unusual tiredness or weakness, confusion, difficulty 
in concentration, drowsiness, excessive hunger, vision changes, headache, nausea and palpitation. 
 
In clinical trials, the frequency of hypoglycaemia varied with patient population, dose regimens and 
level of glycaemic control. During clinical trials the overall rates of hypoglycaemia did not differ 
between patients treated with insulin aspart compared to human insulin. 
 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders 
Lipodystrophy (including lipohypertrophy, lipoatrophy) and cutaneous amyloidosis may occur at the 
injection site and delay local insulin absorption. Continuous rotation of the injection site within the 
given injection area may help to reduce or prevent these reactions (see section 4.4). 
 
Paediatric population 
 
Based on post-marketing sources and clinical trials, the frequency, type and severity of adverse 
reactions observed in the paediatric population do not indicate any differences to the broader 
experience in the general population. 
 
Other special populations 
 
Based on post-marketing sources and clinical trials, the frequency, type and severity of adverse 
reactions observed in the elderly patients and in patients with renal or hepatic impairment do not 
indicate any differences to the broader experience in the general population. 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
A specific overdose for insulin cannot be defined, however, hypoglycaemia may develop over 
sequential stages if too high doses relative to the patient’s requirement are administered: 
 

 
9 
• 
Mild hypoglycaemic episodes can be treated by oral administration of glucose or sugary 
products. It is therefore recommended that the diabetic patient always carries sugar-containing 
products. 
• 
Severe hypoglycaemic episodes, where the patient has become unconscious, can be treated with 
glucagon (0.5 to 1 mg) given intramuscularly or subcutaneously by a trained person, or with 
glucose given intravenously by physicians or other healthcare staff. Glucose must be given 
intravenously, if the patient does not respond to glucagon within 10 to 15 minutes. Upon 
regaining consciousness, administration of oral carbohydrates is recommended for the patient in 
order to prevent a relapse. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Drugs used in diabetes. Insulins and analogues for injection, fast-acting. 
ATC code: A10AB05. 
 
Dazparda is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the 
European Medicines Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu/en. 
 
Mechanism of action and pharmacodynamic effects 
 
The blood glucose lowering effect of insulin aspart is due to the facilitated uptake of glucose following 
binding of insulin to receptors on muscle and fat cells and to the simultaneous inhibition of glucose 
output from the liver. 
 
Insulin aspart produces a more rapid onset of action compared to soluble human insulin, together with 
a lower glucose concentration, as assessed within the first four hours after a meal. Insulin aspart has a 
shorter duration of action compared to soluble human insulin after subcutaneous injection. 
 
 
 
Fig. I. Blood glucose concentrations following a single pre-meal dose of insulin aspart injected 
immediately before a meal (solid curve) or soluble human insulin administered 30 minutes before a 
meal (hatched curve) in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. 

 
10 
 
When insulin aspart is injected subcutaneously, the onset of action will occur within 10 to 20 minutes 
of injection. The maximum effect is exerted between 1 and 3 hours after injection. The duration of 
action is 3 to 5 hours. 
 
Clinical efficacy 
 
Clinical trials in patients with type 1 diabetes have demonstrated a lower postprandial blood glucose 
with insulin aspart compared to soluble human insulin (Fig. I). In two long-term open label trials in 
patients with type 1 diabetes comprising 1 070 and 884 patients, respectively, insulin aspart reduced 
glycated haemoglobin by 0.12 [95% C.I. 0.03; 0.22] percentage points and by 0.15 [95% C.I. 0.05; 
0.26] percentage points compared to human insulin; a difference of limited clinical significance. 
 
Clinical trials in patients with type 1 diabetes have demonstrated a reduced risk of nocturnal 
hypoglycaemia with insulin aspart compared with soluble human insulin. The risk of daytime 
hypoglycaemia was not significantly increased. 
 
Insulin aspart is equipotent to soluble human insulin on a molar basis. 
 
 
Special populations 
 
Elderly 
A randomised, double-blind cross-over PK/PD trial comparing insulin aspart with soluble human 
insulin was performed in elderly patients with type 2 diabetes (19 patients aged 65–83 years, mean age 
70 years). The relative differences in the pharmacodynamic properties (GIRmax, AUCGIR, 0–120 min) 
between insulin aspart and soluble human insulin in the elderly were similar to those seen in healthy 
subjects and in younger patients with diabetes. 
 
Paediatric population 
A clinical trial comparing preprandial soluble human insulin with postprandial insulin aspart was 
performed in small children (20 patients aged 2 to less than 6 years, studied for 12 weeks, among those 
four were younger than 4 years old) and a single dose PK/PD trial was performed in children (6– 
12 years) and adolescents (13–17 years). The pharmacodynamic profile of insulin aspart in children 
was similar to that seen in adults. 
 
The efficacy and safety of insulin aspart given as bolus insulin in combination with either insulin 
detemir or insulin degludec as basal insulin has been studied for up to 12 months, in two randomised 
controlled clinical trials in adolescents and children aged 1 to less than 18 years (n=712). The trials 
included 167 children aged 1–5 years, 260 aged 6–11 and 285 aged 12–17. The observed 
improvements in HbA1c and the safety profiles were comparable between all age groups. 
 
Pregnancy 
A clinical trial comparing safety and efficacy of insulin aspart vs. human insulin in the treatment of 
pregnant women with type 1 diabetes (322 exposed pregnancies (insulin aspart: 157; human insulin: 
165)) did not indicate any adverse effect of insulin aspart on pregnancy or on the health of the 
foetus/newborn. 
In addition, the data from a clinical trial including 27 women with gestational diabetes randomised to 
treatment with insulin aspart vs. human insulin (insulin aspart: 14; human insulin: 13) showed similar 
safety profiles between treatments. 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
Absorption, distribution and elimination 
 

 
11 
In insulin aspart substitution of amino acid proline with aspartic acid at position B28 reduces the 
tendency to form hexamers as observed with soluble human insulin. Insulin aspart is therefore more 
rapidly absorbed from the subcutaneous layer compared to soluble human insulin. 
 
The time to maximum concentration is, on average, half of that for soluble human insulin. A mean 
maximum plasma concentration of 492±256 pmol/l was reached 40 (interquartile range: 30–40) 
minutes after a subcutaneous dose of 0.15 unit/kg bodyweight in type 1 diabetic patients. The insulin 
concentrations returned to baseline about 4 to 6 hours after dose. The absorption rate was somewhat 
slower in type 2 diabetic patients, resulting in a lower Cmax (352±240 pmol/l) and later tmax (60 
(interquartile range: 50–90) minutes). The intra-individual variability in time to maximum 
concentration is significantly less for insulin aspart than for soluble human insulin, whereas the 
intraindividual variability in Cmax for insulin aspart is larger. 
 
Special populations 
 
Elderly 
The relative differences in pharmacokinetic properties between insulin aspart and soluble human 
insulin in elderly patients (65–83 years, mean age 70 years) with type 2 diabetes were similar to those 
observed in healthy subjects and in younger patients with diabetes. A decreased absorption rate was 
observed in elderly patients, resulting in a later tmax (82 (interquartile range: 60–120) minutes), whereas 
Cmax was similar to that observed in younger patients with type 2 diabetes and slightly lower than in 
patients with type 1 diabetes. 
 
Hepatic impairment 
A single dose pharmacokinetic study of insulin aspart was performed in 24 subjects with hepatic 
function ranging from normal to severely impaired. In patients with hepatic impairment, absorption 
rate was decreased and more variable, resulting in delayed tmax from about 50 min in subjects with 
normal hepatic function to about 85 min in patients with moderate and severe hepatic impairment. 
AUC, Cmax and CL/F were similar in patients with reduced hepatic function compared with subjects 
with normal hepatic function. 
 
Renal impairment 
A single dose pharmacokinetic study of insulin aspart in 18 subjects with renal function ranging from 
normal to severely impaired was performed. No apparent effect of creatinine clearance values on AUC, 
Cmax, CL/F and tmax of insulin aspart was found. Data were limited in patients with moderate and 
severe renal impairment. Patients with renal failure necessitating dialysis treatment were not 
investigated. 
 
Paediatric population 
The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of insulin aspart were investigated in children 
(6–12 years) and adolescents (13–17 years) with type 1 diabetes. Insulin aspart was rapidly absorbed 
in both age groups, with similar tmax as in adults. However, Cmax differed between the age groups, 
stressing the importance of the individual titration of insulin aspart. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
Non-clinical data reveal no special hazard for humans based on conventional studies of safety 
pharmacology, repeated dose toxicity, genotoxicity and toxicity to reproduction and development. 
 
In in vitro tests, including binding to insulin and IGF-1 receptor sites and effects on cell growth, 
insulin aspart behaved in a manner that closely resembled human insulin. Studies also demonstrate that 
the dissociation of binding to the insulin receptor of insulin aspart is equivalent to human insulin. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 

 
12 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
Glycerol 
Phenol 
Metacresol 
Zinc chloride 
Disodium hydrogen phosphate 
Sodium chloride 
Hydrochloric acid (for pH adjustment) 
Sodium hydroxide (for pH adjustment) 
Water for injections 
 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
This medicinal product must not be diluted or mixed with other medicinal products. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
Before opening 
 
30 months. 
 
During use or when carried as a spare 
 
4 weeks. 
Store below 30 °C. Do not freeze. Keep the pen cap on the pen in order to protect from light 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2 °C – 8 °C). Do not freeze. 
For storage conditions of the medicinal product after first opening, see section 6.3. 
 
6.5  
Nature and contents of container 
 
3 ml solution in cartridge (type 1 glass) with a plunger (bromobutyl) and a rubber closure 
(bromobutyl/polyisoprene) contained in a pre-filled multidose disposable pen made of polypropylene. 
 
Pack sizes of 1 and 5 pre-filled pens (without needles). Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
6.6  
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
Do not use this medicinal product if you notice that the solution is not clear, colourless and aqueous. 
 
Dazparda which has been frozen must not be used. 
 
Only use needles that are compatible for use with Dazparda pre-filled pen, which sizes compatible with 
this pen: 
– 
31G, 5 mm 
– 
32G, 4-6 mm 
– 
33G, 4 mm 
– 
34G, 4 mm 
 

 
13 
To prevent the possible transmission of disease, each pen must be used by one patient only, even if the 
needle is changed. Needles, syringes, and pre-filled pens must not be shared. 
 
The patient should be advised to discard the needle after each injection. 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Gan & Lee Pharmaceuticals Europe GmbH 
Prinzenallee 11a 
40549 Düsseldorf 
Germany. 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBERS 
 
EU/1/26/2029/001 
EU/1/26/2029/002 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 

 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURERS OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE 
SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURERS RESPONSIBLE FOR 
BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE 
SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT  
 

 
15 
A. 
MANUFACTURERS OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND 
MANUFACTURERS RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturers of the biological active substance 
 
Gan & Lee Pharmaceuticals 
No.8 Nanfeng West First Road 
Huoxian Town 
Tongzhou District 
Beijing, China, 101109 
 
Name and address of the manufacturers responsible for batch release 
 
IL-CSM Clinical Supplies Management GmbH 
Marie-Curie-Strasse 8 
Loerrach, Baden-Wuerttemberg, 79539, Germany 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription. 
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union 
reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any 
subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE 
USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance activities 
and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the marketing authorisation 
and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• 
At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• 
Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of 
an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 
 
  
  
 

 
16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 
 

 
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 
 

 
18 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING  
 
OUTER CARTON 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Dazparda 100 units/ml solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
insulin aspart 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
 
Each pre-filled pen contains 3 ml equivalent to 300 units. 1 ml solution contains 100 units insulin 
aspart (equivalent to 3.5 mg), 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
glycerol, phenol, metacresol, zinc chloride, disodium hydrogen phosphate, sodium chloride, 
hydrochloric acid/sodium hydroxide for pH adjustment and water for injections. See leaflet for further 
information. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
Solution for injection in a pre-filled pen (VitaClick) 
 
1 pen of 3 ml 
5 pens of 3 ml 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Use solution only if clear and colourless 
For use by one person only 
 
Read the package leaflet before use 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
Only use needles that are compatible for use with Dazparda 
 
 

 
19 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
During use: Use within 4 weeks 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 
Before opening: Store in a refrigerator (2°C to 8°C) 
During use: Store below 30°C 
Do not freeze 
Keep the pen cap on in order to protect from light 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
Discard the needle after each injection 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Gan & Lee Pharmaceuticals 
Europe GmbH 
40549 Düsseldorf 
Germany 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/26/2029/001 1 pen of 3 ml 
EU/1/26/2029/002 5 pens of 3 ml 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
Dazparda 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 

 
20 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 
 
 
  
 

 
21 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
PEN LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Dazparda 100 units/ml solution for injection 
insulin aspart 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
 
3 ml 
 
 
6. 
OTHER 
 
 
  
 

 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET 
  
 

 
23 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user 
 
Dazparda 100 units/ml solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
insulin aspart 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new safety 
information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 for how 
to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
– 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
– 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. 
– 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
– 
If you get any side effects, talk with your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What Dazparda is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Dazparda 
3. 
How to use Dazparda 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store Dazparda 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What Dazparda is and what it is used for 
 
Dazparda is a modern insulin (insulin analogue) with a rapid-acting effect. Modern insulin products are 
improved versions of human insulin. 
 
Dazparda is used to reduce the high blood sugar level in adults, adolescents and children aged 1 year 
and above with diabetes mellitus (diabetes). Diabetes is a disease where your body does not produce 
enough insulin to control the level of your blood sugar. Treatment with insulin aspart helps to prevent 
complications from your diabetes. 
 
Insulin aspart will start to lower your blood sugar 10–20 minutes after you inject it, a maximum effect 
occurs between 1 and 3 hours after the injection and the effect lasts for 3–5 hours. Due to this short 
action insulin aspart should normally be taken in combination with intermediate-acting or long-acting 
insulin preparations. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Dazparda 
 
Do not use Dazparda 
• 
If you are allergic to insulin aspart, or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in 
section 6). 
• 
If you suspect hypoglycaemia (low blood sugar) is starting (see “a) Summary of serious and very 
common side effects” in section 4). 
• 
If the pre-filled pen is dropped, damaged or crushed. 
• 
If it has not been stored correctly or been frozen (see section 5 “How to store Dazparda”). 

 
24 
• 
If the insulin does not appear clear and colourless.  
 
If any of these applies, do not use Dazparda. Talk with your doctor, nurse or pharmacist for advice. 
 
Before using Dazparda 
• 
Check the label to make sure it is the right type of insulin. 
• 
Always use a new needle for each injection to prevent contamination. 
• 
Needles and the pre-filled pen must not be shared. 
• 
Dazparda is only suitable for injecting under the skin. Speak to your doctor if you need to inject 
your insulin by another method. 
 
Warnings and precautions 
Record the brand name (“Dazparda”) and Lot number (included on the outer cartons and labels of each 
pre-filled pen) of the product you are using and provide this information when reporting any side 
effects. 
Some conditions and activities can affect your need for insulin. Consult your doctor: 
• 
If you have trouble with your kidneys or liver, or with your adrenal, pituitary or thyroid glands. 
• 
If you exercise more than usual or if you want to change your usual diet, as this may affect your 
blood sugar level. 
• 
If you are ill, carry on taking your insulin and consult your doctor. 
• 
If you are going abroad, travelling over time zones may affect your insulin needs and the timing of 
your injections. 
 
Skin changes at the injection site 
The injection site should be rotated to help prevent changes to the fatty tissue under the skin, such as 
skin thickening, skin shrinking or lumps under the skin. The insulin may not work very well if you 
inject into a lumpy, shrunken or thickened area (see section 3 “How to use Dazparda”). Tell your 
doctor if you notice any skin changes at the injection site. Tell your doctor if you are currently injecting 
into these affected areas before you start injecting in a different area. Your doctor may tell you to check 
your blood sugar more closely, and to adjust your insulin or your other antidiabetic medications dose. 
 
Children and adolescents 
Do not give this medicine to children below 1 year of age since no clinical studies have been carried 
out in children below the age of 1 year. 
 
Other medicines and Dazparda 
Tell your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other 
medicines. 
Some medicines affect your blood sugar level and this may mean that your insulin dose has to change. 
Listed below are the most common medicines which may affect your insulin treatment. 
 
Your blood sugar level may fall (hypoglycaemia) if you take: 
• 
Other medicines for the treatment of diabetes 
• 
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI) (used to treat depression) 
• 
Beta-blockers (used to treat high blood pressure) 
• 
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (used to treat certain heart conditions or high 
blood pressure) 
• 
Salicylates (used to relieve pain and lower fever) 
• 
Anabolic steroids (such as testosterone) 
• 
Sulphonamides (used to treat infections). 
 
Your blood sugar level may rise (hyperglycaemia) if you take: 
• 
Oral contraceptives (birth control pills) 
• 
Thiazides (used to treat high blood pressure or excessive fluid retention) 
• 
Glucocorticoids (such as ‘cortisone’ used to treat inflammation) 

 
25 
• 
Thyroid hormones (used to treat thyroid gland disorders) 
• 
Sympathomimetics (such as epinephrine [adrenaline], or salbutamol, terbutaline used to treat 
asthma) 
• 
Growth hormone (medicine for stimulation of skeletal and somatic growth and pronounced 
influence on the body’s metabolic processes) 
• 
Danazol (medicine acting on ovulation). 
 
Octreotide and lanreotide (used for treatment of acromegaly, a rare hormonal disorder that usually 
occurs in middle-aged adults, caused by the pituitary gland producing excess growth hormone) may 
either increase or decrease your blood sugar level. 
 
Beta-blockers (used to treat high blood pressure) may weaken or suppress entirely the first warning 
symptoms which help you to recognise low blood sugar. 
 
Pioglitazone (tablets used for the treatment of type 2 diabetes) 
Some patients with long-standing type 2 diabetes and heart disease or previous stroke who were treated 
with pioglitazone and insulin experienced the development of heart failure. Inform your doctor as soon 
as possible if you experience signs of heart failure such as unusual shortness of breath or rapid increase 
in weight or localised swelling (oedema). 
 
If you have taken any of the medicines listed here, tell your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. 
 
Dazparda and alcohol 
If you drink alcohol, your need for insulin may change as your blood sugar level may either rise or fall. 
Careful monitoring is recommended. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding 
If you are pregnant, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask your doctor for 
advice before taking this medicine. Dazparda can be used during pregnancy. Your insulin dose may 
need to be changed during pregnancy and after delivery. Careful control of your diabetes, particularly 
prevention of hypoglycaemia, is important for the health of your baby. 
There are no restrictions on treatment with Dazparda during breast-feeding. 
 
Ask your doctor, nurse or pharmacist for advice before taking this medicine while pregnant or breast-
feeding. 
 
Driving and using machines 
Please ask your doctor whether you can drive a car or operate a machine: 
• 
If you have frequent hypoglycaemia. 
• 
If you find it hard to recognise hypoglycaemia. 
 
If your blood sugar is low or high, your concentration and ability to react might be affected and 
therefore also your ability to drive or operate a machine. Bear in mind that you could endanger yourself 
or others. 
 
Dazparda has a rapid onset of effect therefore if hypoglycaemia occurs, you may experience it earlier 
after an injection when compared to soluble human insulin. 
 
Dazparda contains sodium 
This medicine contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per dose, i.e. that is to say essentially 
‘sodium-free’. 
 
 
3. 
How to use Dazparda 
 

 
26 
Dose and when to use your insulin 
Always use your insulin and adjust your dose exactly as your doctor has told you. Check with your 
doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you are not sure. 
Insulin aspart is generally used immediately before a meal. Eat a meal or snack within 10 minutes of 
the injection to avoid low blood sugar. When necessary, insulin aspart can be given soon after a meal. 
See How and where to inject below for information. 
 
Do not change your insulin unless your doctor tells you to. If your doctor has switched you from one 
type or brand of insulin to another, your dose may have to be adjusted by your doctor. 
 
Use in children and adolescents 
Insulin aspart can be used in adolescents and children aged 1 year and above instead of soluble human 
insulin when a rapid onset of effect is preferred. For example, when it is difficult to dose the child in 
relation to meals. 
 
Use in special patient groups 
If you have reduced kidney or liver function, or if you are above 65 years of age, you need to check 
your blood sugar more regularly and discuss changes in your insulin dose with your doctor. 
 
How and where to inject 
Dazparda is for injection under the skin (subcutaneously). You must never inject yourself directly into a 
vein (intravenously) or muscle (intramuscularly). Dazparda is only suitable for injecting under the skin. 
Speak to your doctor if you need to inject your insulin by another method. 
 
With each injection, change the injection site within the particular area of skin that you use. This may 
reduce the risk of developing lumps or skin pitting (see section 4 “Possible side effects”). The best 
places to give yourself an injection are: the front of your waist (abdomen), the upper arm or the front of 
your thighs. The insulin will work more quickly if injected into the front of your waist. You should 
always measure your blood sugar regularly. 
 
How to handle Dazparda pre-filled pen 
Read carefully the instructions for use included in this package leaflet. You must use the pen as 
described in the INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE. 
 
Always ensure you use the correct pen before you inject your insulin. 
 
If you use more insulin than you should 
If you use too much insulin your blood sugar gets too low (hypoglycaemia). See “a) Summary of 
serious and very common side effects” in section 4. 
 
If you forget to use your insulin 
If you forget to use your insulin your blood sugar may get too high (hyperglycaemia). See “c) Effects 
from diabetes” in section 4. 
 
If you stop taking your insulin 
Do not stop taking your insulin without speaking with a doctor, who will tell you what needs to be 
done. This could lead to very high blood sugar (severe hyperglycaemia) and ketoacidosis. See “c) 
Effects from diabetes” in section 4. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 

 
27 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
a)  
Summary of serious and very common side effects 
 
Low blood sugar (hypoglycaemia) is a very common side effect. It may affect more than 1 in 
10 people. 
 
Low blood sugar may occur if you: 
• 
Inject too much insulin. 
• 
Eat too little or miss a meal. 
• 
Exercise more than usual. 
• 
Drink alcohol (see “Dazparda and alcohol” in section 2). 
 
Signs of low blood sugar: Cold sweat; cool pale skin; headache; rapid heartbeat; feeling sick; feeling 
very hungry; temporary changes in vision; drowsiness; unusual tiredness and weakness; nervousness or 
tremor; feeling anxious; feeling confused; difficulty in concentrating. 
 
Severe low blood sugar can lead to unconsciousness. If prolonged severe low blood sugar is not 
treated, it can cause brain damage (temporary or permanent) and even death. You may recover more 
quickly from unconsciousness with an injection of the hormone glucagon by someone who knows how 
to use it. If you are given glucagon, you will need glucose or a sugar snack as soon as you are 
conscious. If you do not respond to glucagon treatment, you will have to be treated in a hospital. 
 
What to do if you experience low blood sugar: 
• 
If you experience low blood sugar, eat glucose tablets or another high sugar snack (e.g. sweets, 
biscuits, fruit juice). Measure your blood sugar if possible and rest. Always carry glucose tablets 
or high sugar snacks with you, just in case. 
• 
When symptoms of low blood sugar have disappeared or when blood sugar level is stabilised, 
continue insulin treatment as usual. 
• 
If you have such a low blood sugar that it makes you pass out, if you have had need for injection 
of glucagon, or if you have experienced many incidents of low blood sugar, talk with a doctor. 
The amount or timing of insulin, food or exercise may need to be adjusted. 
 
Tell relevant people that you have diabetes and what the consequences may be, including the risk of 
passing out (become unconscious) due to low blood sugar. Let them know that if you pass out, they 
must turn you on your side and get medical help straight away. They must not give you any food or 
drink due to risk of suffocation. 
 
Serious allergic reactions to Dazparda or one of its ingredients (called a systemic allergic reaction) is 
a very rare side effect but can potentially be life threatening. It may affect less than 1 in 10 000 people. 
 
Seek medical advice immediately: 
• 
If signs of allergy spread to other parts of your body. 
• 
If you suddenly feel unwell, and you: start sweating; start being sick (vomiting); have difficulty 
in breathing; have a rapid heartbeat; feel dizzy. 
If you notice any of these signs, seek medical advice immediately. 
 
Skin changes at the injection site: If you inject insulin at the same place, the fatty tissue may shrink 
(lipoatrophy) or thicken (lipohypertrophy) (may affect less than 1 in 100 people). Lumps under the skin 
may also be caused by build-up of a protein called amyloid (cutaneous amyloidosis; how often this 
occurs is not known). The insulin may not work very well if you inject into a lumpy, shrunken or 
thickened area. Change the injection site with each injection to help prevent these skin changes. 
 
b)  
List of other side effects 

 
28 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect less than 1 in 100 people) 
 
Signs of allergy: Local allergic reactions (pain, redness, hives, inflammation, bruising, swelling and 
itching) at the injection site may occur. These usually disappear after a few weeks of taking your 
insulin. If they do not disappear, or if they spread throughout your body, talk to your doctor 
immediately. See also Serious allergic reactions above. 
 
Vision problems: When you first start your insulin treatment, it may disturb your vision, but the 
disturbance is usually temporary. 
 
Swollen joints: When you start taking insulin, water retention may cause swelling around your ankles 
and other joints. Normally this soon disappears. If not, talk to your doctor. 
 
Diabetic retinopathy (an eye disease related to diabetes which can lead to loss of vision): If you have 
diabetic retinopathy and your blood sugar level improves very fast, the retinopathy may get worse. Ask 
your doctor about this. 
 
Rare side effects (may affect less than 1 in 1 000 people) 
 
Painful neuropathy (pain due to nerve damage): If your blood sugar level improves very fast, you may 
get nerve related pain. This is called acute painful neuropathy and is usually transient. 
 
Reporting of side effects 
If you get any side effects, talk with your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 
c)  
Effects from diabetes 
 
High blood sugar (hyperglycaemia) 
High blood sugar may occur if you: 
• 
Have not injected enough insulin. 
• 
Forget to inject your insulin or stop taking insulin. 
• 
Repeatedly inject less insulin than you need. 
• 
Get an infection and/or a fever. 
• 
Eat more than usual. 
• 
Exercise less than usual. 
 
Warning signs of high blood sugar: 
The warning signs appear gradually. They include: increased urination; feeling thirsty; losing your 
appetite; feeling sick (nausea or vomiting); feeling drowsy or tired; flushed; dry skin; dry mouth and a 
fruity (acetone) smell of the breath. 
 
What to do if you experience high blood sugar: 
• 
If you get any of the above signs: test your blood sugar level, test your urine for ketones if you 
can, then seek medical advice immediately. 
• 
These may be signs of a very serious condition called diabetic ketoacidosis (build-up of acid in 
the blood because the body is breaking down fat instead of sugar). If you do not treat it, this 
could lead to diabetic coma and eventually death. 
 
 
5. 
How to store Dazparda 

 
29 
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the pre-filled pen label and carton, 
after ‘EXP’. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
Always keep the pen cap on your pre-filled pen when you are not using it in order to protect it from 
light. 
 
Before opening: Dazparda pre-filled pen that is not being used is to be stored in the refrigerator at 2°C 
to 8°C, away from the cooling element. Do not freeze. 
 
During use or when carried as a spare: You can carry your Dazparda pre-filled pen with you and 
keep it at a temperature below 30°C for up to 4 weeks. Do not freeze. 
 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to 
throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What Dazparda contains 
• 
The active substance is insulin aspart. Each ml contains 100 units of insulin aspart. Each pre-
filled pen contains 300 units of insulin aspart in 3 ml solution for injection. 
• 
The other ingredients are glycerol, phenol, metacresol, zinc chloride,  disodium hydrogen 
phosphate, sodium chloride, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide (see section 2 “Dazparda 
contains sodium”), and water for injections. 
 
What Dazparda looks like and contents of the pack 
Dazparda 100 units/ml solution for injection in a pre-filled pen (VitaClick) is a clear, colourless and 
aqueous solution. 
Pack sizes of 1 and 5 (without needles) pre-filled pens of 3 ml. Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Gan & Lee Pharmaceuticals Europe GmbH, Prinzenallee 11a, 40549 Düsseldorf, Germany. 
 
Manufacturer 
IL-CSM Clinical Supplies Management GmbH Marie-Curie-Strasse 8 Loerrach, Baden-Wuerttemberg, 
79539, Germany 
 
Now turn over for information on how to use your pre-filled pen. 
 
This leaflet was last revised in 
 
Other sources of information 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency website: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 

 
30 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
Dazparda solution for injection in pre-filled pen (VitaClick) 
 
Dazparda (VitaClick) is a pre-filled pen for the injection of insulin aspart. 
 
Talk with your doctor, pharmacist or nurse about proper injection technique before using Dazparda. 
 
People who are blind or have vision problems should not use the Pen without help from a person 
trained to use the pen. 
 
Read all package leaflet information and instructions carefully before using your Dazparda. If you are 
not able to use Dazparda or follow all the instructions completely on your own, you must use 
Dazparda only if you have help from a person who is able to follow the instructions completely. 
 
You can set doses from 1 to 60 units in steps of 1 unit. You can give yourself multiple doses using one 
pen. If your prescribed dose is more than 60 units, you will need to give yourself more than 1 
injection. 
 
Keep this leaflet for future reference. 
 
 
Figure A Overview Dazparda pre-filled pen (VitaClick) and needles (example) 

 
31 
 
Important information you need to know before injecting Dazparda 
 
• 
Always read the label of your pen before injecting. If you use more than 1 type of insulin Pen, 
store the Pens with different medicine in separate areas and read the label of your pen before 
injecting. If you take the wrong type of insulin, your blood sugar level may get too high or too 
low. 
• 
Do not share your Dazparda with other people, even if the needle has been changed. This 
pen is only for your use. You may give other people a serious infection, or get a serious infection 
from them. 
• 
Do not use your pen, if it is damaged or if you are not sure that it is working properly. Be careful 
not to bend or damage the needle before use. 
• 
Do not select a dose and/or press the injection button without a needle attached. 
• 
Do not re-use needles. Always attach a new needle before each use. 
• 
If your injection is given by another person, special caution must be taken by this person to avoid 
accidental needle injury and transmission of infection. 
• 
Always perform the safety test before each injection (see Step 3). 
• 
Always have a spare pen and spare needles in case they get lost or damaged. 
 
Need Help? 
 
If you have any questions about Dazparda or about diabetes, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse or 
call the local representative number on the front of this leaflet. 
 
Materials needed 
 
Make sure you have the following items: 
 
Included in your carton 
• 
Your Dazparda (see Figure A) 
 
Not included in your carton (Obtain separately) 
• 
New sterile needle. Only use needles that are compatible for use with Dazparda pre-filled pen, 
which sizes compatible with this pen: 
– 
31G, 5 mm 
– 
32G, 4-6 mm 
– 
33G, 4 mm 
– 
34G, 4 mm 
• 
Alcohol swab 
• 
Sharps disposal container for used needles 
 
Step 1. Check the pen and insulin 
 
If your Dazparda is in the refrigerator, take it out 1 to 2 hours before you inject to allow it to reach 
room temperature. Injecting cold insulin can be uncomfortable. 
 
• 
Wash your hands with soap and water. 
 
A. Check the name of the pen, to make sure you have the correct insulin (see Figure B) – this is 
especially important if you have other pens. 
• 
Dazparda is orange and yellow with an orange injection button. 
 
 

 
32 
 
 
B. Check the expiration date (EXP). 
• 
Do not use your pen after the expiration date. 
 
C. Pull off the pen cap (see Figure C). 
 
 
 
D. Check the appearance of the insulin. Dazparda is a clear insulin. 
• 
Do not use your pen, if the insulin does not appear clear and colourless. 
 
Step 2. Attach a new needle 
 
Always use a new sterile needle for each injection. This helps prevent contamination and potential 
needle blocks. 
 
A. Wipe the rubber seal with an alcohol swab. 
 
B. Remove the protective seal from a new needle. 
 
C. Keep the needle straight and screw it onto the pen until fixed (see Figure D). 
• 
If the needle is not kept straight while you attach it, it can damage the rubber seal, cause the 
insulin to leak, or break the needle. 
 
 
 
Step 3. Perform a safety test 
 
Always perform a safety test before each injection to: 
• 
make sure the pen and needle work properly. 
• 
make sure you get the correct dose by removing air bubbles. 
 
A. Select a dose of 2 units by turning the dose selector (see Figure E). 
• 
If necessary, the selected dose can be corrected by turning the dose selector back down. 
 

 
33 
 
 
B. Pull off the outer needle cap (see Figure F) and keep it to remove the used needle after injection. 
 
C. Pull off the inner needle cap (see Figure F) and discard it. 
 
 
 
D. Hold the pen with the needle pointing upwards. Tap the insulin reservoir (see Figure G) so that 
any air bubbles rise up towards the needle. 
 
 
 
E. Press the injection button all the way in (see Figure H). 
• 
Check if insulin comes out of the needle tip. Your pen is working correctly if insulin comes out of 
the needle. If you do not check the insulin flow, you may get too little insulin or no insulin at all. 
This may lead to too high blood sugar level. 
 
 
 
You may have to perform the safety test several times before insulin comes out of the needle tip. 

 
34 
• 
If no insulin comes out of the needle tip, check for air bubbles and repeat the safety test two more 
times to remove them. 
• 
If still no insulin comes out, the needle may be blocked. Change the needle and repeat the safety 
test (see Step 3). 
• 
If no insulin comes out after changing the needle, your pen may be damaged. Do not use this pen. 
Use a new pen. 
 
Step 4. Select your dose 
 
You can set the dose from 1 to 60 units in steps of 1 unit of insulin (one step equals 1 unit of insulin). If 
you need a dose greater than 60 units, you should give it as two or more injections. 
 
A. Check that the dose window shows "0" following the safety test. 
 
B. Select your required dose by turning the dose selector until the dose indicator lines up with your 
dose (see Figure I: selected dose is 30 units in this example). 
 
 
 
• 
If you turn past your dose, you can turn back down. 
• 
You will hear a click for every single unit dialled. Do not set the dose by counting the number of 
clicks you hear because you may get an incorrect dose. Even numbers are shown in line with the 
dose indicator, odd numbers are shown as a line between even numbers (see Figure J). 
 
 
 
• 
Always check the number in the Dose Window to make sure you have dialed the correct dose. 
• 
The pen will not let you dial more than the number of units left in the pen. 
• 
If the insulin left in the pen is less than your dose, inject what is remaining in the pen and 
complete your dose with a new pen, or use a new pen for your full dose. 
• 
You can see roughly how many units of insulin are left by looking at where the plunger is on the 
insulin scale. Do not use this scale printed on the cartridge to measure your dose of insulin. 
 
Step 5. Inject the dose 
 
Use the injection method as instructed by your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
A. Choose your injection site. 
• 
The pen can be injected in your thigh, stomach area (abdomen), buttocks or upper arm (see 
Figure K). 
• 
Change (rotate) your injection site for each injection. 
• 
Do not inject where the skin has pits, is thickened or has lumps. 

 
35 
• 
Do not inject where the skin is tender, bruised, scaly or hard or into scars or damaged skin. 
 
 
 
B. Clean the injection site with an alcohol swab. Let it dry before injecting. 
 
C. Insert the needle into the skin (see Figure L). 
 
 
 
D. Press the orange injection button all the way in to deliver the dose. The number in the dose 
window will return to "0" as you inject. Do not try to inject your insulin by turning the dose 
selector. You will not receive your insulin by turning the dose selector. 
• 
Always make sure that the dose selector returns to "0" after the injection. If the dose selector stops 
before it returns to "0", the full dose has not been delivered and the remaining units still to be 
injected with a new pen are shown in the dose window. 
 
E. Keep holding the orange injection button pressed all the way in. Slowly count to 6 (see 
Figure M) before you pull out the needle from the skin. This ensures that the full dose is given. A 
drop of insulin at the needle tip is normal. It will not affect your dose. 
 
 
 
The pen plunger moves with each dose. The plunger will reach the end of the cartridge when the total 
of 300 units of insulin has been used. If you see blood after you take the needle out of your skin, press 
the injection site lightly with a piece of gauze or a swab. 
 
 

 
36 
If you find it hard to press the injection button in: 
• 
Do not force it as this may break your pen. 
• 
Change the needle (see Step 6 and Step 2) and prime your Pen (see Step 3). 
• 
If you still find it hard to press in, get a new Pen. 
• 
Never use a syringe to remove insulin from your pen. 
 
Step 6. Remove and discard the needle 
 
Always remove the needle after each injection and store the pen without a needle attached. This 
helps prevent: 
• 
Contamination and/or infection 
• 
Entry of air into the insulin reservoir and leakage of insulin, which can cause inaccurate dosing. 
 
A. Carefully put the outer needle cap back on the needle (see Figure N), to reduce the risk of 
accidental needle injury. 
• 
Never replace the inner needle cap. 
 
 
 
B. Pinch the base of the outer needle cap to unscrew the used needle (See Figure O). 
 
 
 
C. Dispose of the needle safely, as instructed by your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
D. Always put the pen cap back on (see Figure P). Store the pen until your next injection. 
 
 
 
Storage instructions 
 
Before first use 
• 
Keep your pen in the refrigerator between 2°C to 8°C until first use. 
• 
Do not freeze. Throw away your pen if it has been frozen. 
 
After first use 
• 
Store the pen you are currently using at room temperature below 30°C, and away from light, dust 
and dirt. 
• 
The pen in use must not be stored in a refrigerator. 

 
37 
• 
Once you take your pen out of the refrigerator, you can use it for up to 28 days. Do not use it after 
this time. 
• 
Do not store your pen with the needle attached. 
• 
Keep your pen out of the reach and sight of children and any other persons who are not 
supposed to handle it. 
• 
When the pen is empty, throw it away without a needle on, as instructed by your doctor, 
pharmacist or nurse. 
 
Maintenance 
• 
You can clean the outside of your pen by wiping it with a damp cloth (water only). 
• 
Do not soak, wash or lubricate the pen as this may damage it. 
• 
Your pen should be handled with care. Avoid situations where the pen might be damaged. If you 
are concerned that your pen may be damaged, use a new one. 
 
 
 
This instructions for used was last revised in MM/YYYY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
