1 
ANNEX I 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 

2 
 
▼This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions  
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Dazublys 150 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
Dazublys 420 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Dazublys 150 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
One vial contains 150 mg of trastuzumab, a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody produced by 
mammalian (Chinese hamster ovary) cell suspension culture and purified by affinity and ion exchange 
chromatography, including specific viral inactivation and removal procedures. 
 
Dazublys 420 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
One vial contains 420 mg of trastuzumab, a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody produced by 
mammalian (Chinese hamster ovary) cell suspension culture and purified by affinity and ion exchange 
chromatography, including specific viral inactivation and removal procedures. 
 
The reconstituted Dazublys solution contains 21 mg/mL of trastuzumab. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Powder for concentrate for solution for infusion (powder for concentrate). 
 
White to pale yellow lyophilized powder. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Breast cancer 
 
Metastatic breast cancer 
 
Dazublys is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer 
(MBC): 
 
- 
as monotherapy for the treatment of those patients who have received at least two chemotherapy 
regimens for their metastatic disease. Prior chemotherapy must have included at least an 
anthracycline and a taxane unless patients are unsuitable for these treatments. Hormone receptor-
positive patients must also have failed hormonal therapy unless patients are unsuitable for these 
treatments. 
 
- 
in combination with paclitaxel for the treatment of those patients who have not received 
chemotherapy for their metastatic disease and for whom an anthracycline is not suitable. 
 

3 
 
- 
in combination with docetaxel for the treatment of those patients who have not received 
chemotherapy for their metastatic disease. 
 
- 
in combination with an aromatase inhibitor for the treatment of postmenopausal patients with 
hormone-receptor-positive MBC, not previously treated with trastuzumab. 
 
Early breast cancer 
 
Dazublys is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with HER2-positive early breast cancer 
(EBC). 
 
- 
following surgery, chemotherapy (neoadjuvant or adjuvant) and radiotherapy (if applicable) (see 
section 5.1). 
 
- 
following adjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide in combination with 
paclitaxel or docetaxel. 
 
- 
in combination with adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of docetaxel and carboplatin. 
 
- 
in combination with neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by adjuvant Dazublys therapy for locally 
advanced (including inflammatory) disease or tumors> 2 cm in diameter (see sections 4.4 and 5.1). 
 
Dazublys should only be used in patients with metastatic or early breast cancer whose tumors have 
either HER2 overexpression or HER2 gene amplification as determined by an accurate and validated 
assay (see sections 4.4 and 5.1). 
 
Metastatic gastric cancer 
 
Dazublys in combination with capecitabine or 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin is indicated for the 
treatment of adult patients with HER2 positive metastatic adenocarcinoma of the stomach or gastro-
esophageal junction who have not received prior anti-cancer treatment for their metastatic disease. 
 
Dazublys should only be used in patients with metastatic gastric cancer (MGC) whose tumors have 
HER2 overexpression as defined by IHC2+ and a confirmatory SISH or FISH result or by an IHC 3+ 
result. Accurate and validated assay methods should be used (see sections 4.4 and 5.1). 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
HER2 testing is mandatory prior to initiation of therapy (see sections 4.4 and 5.1). Trastuzumab 
treatment should only be initiated by a physician experienced in the administration of cytotoxic 
chemotherapy (see section 4.4) and should be administered by a healthcare professional only. 
 
Dazublys intravenous formulation is not intended for subcutaneous administration and should be 
administered via an intravenous infusion only. 
 
If an alternate route of administration is required, other trastuzumab products offering such an option 
should be used. 
 
In order to prevent treatment errors, it is important to check the vial labels to ensure that the drug 
being prepared and administered is Dazublys (trastuzumab) and not another trastuzumab-containing 
product (e.g., trastuzumab emtansine or trastuzumab deruxtecan). 
 
Posology 
 
Metastatic breast cancer 
 
Three-weekly schedule 

4 
 
 
The recommended initial loading dose is 8 mg/kg body weight. The recommended maintenance dose 
at three-weekly intervals is 6 mg/kg body weight, beginning three weeks after the loading dose. 
 
Weekly Schedule 
 
The recommended initial loading dose of trastuzumab is 4 mg/kg body weight. The recommended 
weekly maintenance dose of trastuzumab is 2 mg/kg body weight, beginning one week after the 
loading dose. 
 
Administration in combination with paclitaxel or docetaxel 
 
In the pivotal trials (H0648g, M77001), paclitaxel or docetaxel was administered the day following the 
first dose of trastuzumab (for dose, see the Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) for paclitaxel 
or docetaxel) and immediately after the subsequent doses of trastuzumab if the preceding dose of 
trastuzumab was well tolerated. 
 
Administration in combination with an aromatase inhibitor 
 
In the pivotal trial (BO16216), trastuzumab and anastrozole were administered from day 1. There were 
no restrictions on the relative timing of trastuzumab and anastrozole at administration (for dose, see 
the SmPC for anastrozole or other aromatase inhibitors). 
 
Early breast cancer 
 
Three-weekly and weekly schedule 
 
As a three-weekly regimen the recommended initial loading dose of trastuzumab is 8 mg/kg body 
weight. The recommended maintenance dose of trastuzumab at three-weekly intervals is 6 mg/kg body 
weight, beginning three weeks after the loading dose. As a weekly regimen (initial loading dose of 
4 mg/kg followed by 2 mg/kg every week) concomitantly with paclitaxel following chemotherapy 
with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide. 
 
See section 5.1 for chemotherapy combination dosing. 
 
Metastatic gastric cancer 
 
Three-weekly schedule 
 
The recommended initial loading dose is 8 mg/kg body weight. The recommended maintenance dose 
at three-weekly intervals is 6 mg/kg body weight, beginning three weeks after the loading dose. 
 
Breast cancer and gastric cancer 
 
Duration of treatment 
 
Patients with MBC or MGC should be treated with trastuzumab until the progression of the disease. 
Patients with EBC should be treated with trastuzumab for 1 year or until disease recurrence, whichever 
occurs first; extending treatment in EBC beyond one year is not recommended (see section 5.1). 
 
Dose reduction 
 
No reductions in the dose of trastuzumab were made during clinical trials. Patients may continue 
therapy during periods of reversible, chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression but they should be 
monitored carefully for complications of neutropenia during this time. Refer to the SmPC for 
paclitaxel, docetaxel, or aromatase inhibitors for information on dose reduction or delays. 
 

5 
 
If the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) percentage drops ≥ 10 points from baseline AND to 
below 50%, treatment should be suspended and a repeat LVEF assessment performed within 
approximately 3 weeks. If LVEF has not improved, or has declined further, or if symptomatic 
congestive heart failure (CHF) has developed, discontinuation of trastuzumab should be strongly 
considered, unless the benefits for the individual patient are deemed to outweigh the risks. All such 
patients should be referred for assessment by a cardiologist and followed up. 
 
Missed doses 
 
If the patient has missed a dose of trastuzumab by one week or less, then the usual maintenance dose 
(weekly regimen: 2 mg/kg; three-weekly regimen: 6 mg/kg) should be administered as soon as 
possible. Do not wait until the next planned cycle. Subsequent maintenance doses should be 
administered 7 days or 21 days later according to the weekly or three-weekly schedules, respectively. 
 
If the patient has missed a dose of trastuzumab by more than one week, a re-loading dose of 
trastuzumab should be administered over approximately 90 minutes (weekly regimen: 4 mg/kg; three-
weekly regimen: 8 mg/kg) as soon as possible. Subsequent trastuzumab maintenance doses (weekly 
regimen: 2 mg/kg; three-weekly regimen 6 mg/kg respectively) should be administered 7 days or 21 
days later according to the weekly or three-weekly schedules respectively. 
  
Special populations 
 
Dedicated pharmacokinetic studies in the elderly and those with renal or hepatic impairment have not 
been carried out. In a population pharmacokinetic analysis, age and renal impairment were not shown 
to affect trastuzumab disposition. 
 
Pediatric population 
 
There is no relevant use of trastuzumab in the pediatric population. 
 
 Method of administration 
 
Trastuzumab loading dose should be administered as a 90-minute intravenous infusion. Do not 
administer as an intravenous push or bolus. Trastuzumab intravenous infusion should be administered 
by a health- care provider prepared to manage anaphylaxis and an emergency kit should be available. 
Patients should be observed for at least six hours after the start of the first infusion and for two hours 
after the start of the subsequent infusions for symptoms like fever and chills or other infusion-related 
symptoms (see sections 4.4 and 4.8). Interruption or slowing the rate of the infusion may help control 
such symptoms. The infusion may be resumed when symptoms abate. 
 
If the initial loading dose is well tolerated, the subsequent doses can be administered as a 30-minute 
infusion. 
 
For instructions on reconstitution of trastuzumab intravenous formulation before administration, see               
section 6.6. 
 
Infusion Bags used for administering the trastuzumab finished product should be DEHP free. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
• 
Hypersensitivity to trastuzumab, murine proteins, or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1 
• 
Severe dyspnoea at rest due to complications of advanced malignancy or requiring supplementary 
oxygen therapy. 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 

6 
 
 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the trade name and the batch 
number of the administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
HER2 testing must be performed in a specialized laboratory which can ensure adequate validation of 
the testing procedures (see section 5.1). 
Currently, no data from clinical trials are available on re-treatment of patients with previous exposure 
to trastuzumab in the adjuvant setting. 
 
Cardiac dysfunction 
 
General considerations 
 
Patients treated with trastuzumab are at increased risk for developing CHF (New York Heart 
Association [NYHA] Class II-IV) or asymptomatic cardiac dysfunction. These events have been 
observed in patients receiving trastuzumab therapy alone or in combination with paclitaxel or 
docetaxel, particularly following anthracycline (doxorubicin or epirubicin) containing chemotherapy. 
These may be moderate to severe and have been associated with death (see section 4.8). In addition, 
caution should be exercised in treating patients with increased cardiac risk, e.g., hypertension, 
documented coronary artery disease, CHF, LVEF of < 55%, and older age. 
 
All candidates for treatment with trastuzumab, but especially those with prior anthracycline and 
cyclophosphamide (AC) exposure, should undergo baseline cardiac assessment including history and 
physical examination, electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiogram, and/or multigated acquisition 
(MUGA) scan or magnetic resonance imaging. Monitoring may help to identify patients who develop 
cardiac dysfunction. Cardiac assessments, as performed at baseline, should be repeated every 3 months 
during treatment and every 6 months following discontinuation of treatment until 24 months from the 
last administration of trastuzumab. A careful risk-benefit assessment should be made before deciding 
to treat with trastuzumab. 
 
trastuzumab may persist in circulation for up to 7 months after stopping Dazublys treatment based on 
population pharmacokinetic analysis of all available data (see section 5.2). Patients who receive 
anthracyclines after stopping trastuzumab may possibly be at increased risk of cardiac dysfunction. If 
possible, physicians should avoid anthracycline-based therapy for up to 7 months after stopping 
trastuzumab. If anthracyclines are used, the patient’s cardiac function should be monitored carefully. 
 
Formal cardiological assessment should be considered in patients in whom there are cardiovascular 
concerns following baseline screening. In all patients cardiac function should be monitored during 
treatment (e.g. every 12 weeks). Monitoring may help to identify patients who develop cardiac 
dysfunction. Patients who develop asymptomatic cardiac dysfunction may benefit from more frequent 
monitoring (e.g. every 6 - 8 weeks). If patients have a continued decrease in left ventricular function, 
but remain asymptomatic, the physician should consider discontinuing therapy if no clinical benefit of 
trastuzumab therapy has been seen. 
 
The safety of continuation or resumption of trastuzumab in patients who experience cardiac 
dysfunction has not been prospectively studied. If LVEF percentage drops ≥ 10 points from baseline 
AND to below 50%, treatment should be suspended and a repeat LVEF assessment performed within 
approximately 3 weeks. If LVEF has not improved, or declined further, or symptomatic CHF has 
developed, discontinuation of trastuzumab should be strongly considered, unless the benefits for the 
individual patient are deemed to outweigh the risks. All such patients should be referred for 
assessment by a cardiologist and followed up. 
 
If symptomatic cardiac failure develops during trastuzumab therapy, it should be treated with standard 
medicinal products for CHF. Most patients who developed CHF or asymptomatic cardiac dysfunction 
in pivotal trials improved with standard CHF treatment consisting of an angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) and a beta-blocker. The majority of 
patients with cardiac symptoms and evidence of a clinical benefit of trastuzumab treatment continued 

7 
 
on therapy without additional clinical cardiac events. 
 
Metastatic breast cancer 
 
trastuzumab and anthracyclines should not be given concurrently in combination in the MBC setting. 
Patients with MBC who have previously received anthracyclines are also at risk of cardiac dysfunction 
with trastuzumab treatment, although the risk is lower than with concurrent use of trastuzumab and 
anthracyclines. 
 
Early breast cancer 
 
For patients with EBC, cardiac assessments, as performed at baseline, should be repeated every 3 
months during treatment and every 6 months following discontinuation of treatment until 24 months 
from the last administration of trastuzumab. In patients who receive anthracycline-containing 
chemotherapy further monitoring is recommended and should occur yearly up to 5 years from the last 
administration of trastuzumab, or longer if a continuous decrease of LVEF is observed. 
 
Patients with history of myocardial infarction (MI), angina pectoris requiring medical treatment, 
history of or existing CHF (NYHA Class II –IV), LVEF of < 55%, other cardiomyopathy, cardiac 
arrhythmia requiring medical treatment, clinically significant cardiac valvular disease, poorly 
controlled hypertension (hypertension controlled by standard medical treatment eligible), and 
hemodynamic effective pericardial effusion were excluded from adjuvant and neoadjuvant EBC 
pivotal trials with trastuzumab and therefore treatment cannot be recommended in such patients. 
 
Adjuvant treatment 
 
Trastuzumab and anthracyclines should not be given concurrently in combination in the adjuvant 
treatment setting. 
 
In patients with EBC an increase in the incidence of symptomatic and asymptomatic cardiac events 
was observed when trastuzumab was administered after anthracycline-containing chemotherapy 
compared to administration with a non-anthracycline regimen of docetaxel and carboplatin and was 
more marked when trastuzumab was administered concurrently with taxanes than when administered 
sequentially to taxanes. Regardless of the regimen used, most symptomatic cardiac events occurred 
within the first 18 months. In one of the 3 pivotal studies conducted in which a median follow-up of 
5.5 years was available (BCIRG006) a continuous increase in the cumulative rate of symptomatic 
cardiac or LVEF events was observed in patients who were administered trastuzumab concurrently 
with a taxane following anthracycline therapy up to 2.37% compared to approximately 1% in the two 
comparator arms (anthracycline plus cyclophosphamide followed by taxane and taxane, carboplatin 
and trastuzumab). 
 
Risk factors for a cardiac event identified in four large adjuvant studies included advanced age (> 50 
years), low LVEF (< 55%) at baseline, prior to or following the initiation of paclitaxel treatment, 
decline in LVEF by 10-15 points, and prior or concurrent use of anti-hypertensive medicinal products. 
In patients receiving trastuzumab after completion of adjuvant chemotherapy, the risk of cardiac 
dysfunction was associated with a higher cumulative dose of anthracycline given prior to initiation of 
trastuzumab and a body mass index (BMI) > 25 kg/m2. 
 
Neoadjuvant-adjuvant treatment 
 
In patients with EBC eligible for neoadjuvant-adjuvant treatment, trastuzumab should be used 
concurrently with anthracyclines only in chemotherapy-naive patients and only with low-dose 
anthracycline regimens i.e. maximum cumulative doses of doxorubicin 180 mg/m2 or epirubicin     
360 mg/m2. 
 
If patients have been treated concurrently with a full course of low-dose anthracyclines and 
trastuzumab in the neoadjuvant setting, no additional cytotoxic chemotherapy should be given after 

8 
 
surgery. In other situations, the decision on the need for additional cytotoxic chemotherapy is 
determined based on individual factors. 
 
Experience of concurrent administration of trastuzumab with low dose anthracycline regimens is 
currently limited to two trials (MO16432 and BO22227) 
 
In the pivotal trial MO16432, trastuzumab was administered concurrently with neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy containing three cycles of doxorubicin (cumulative dose 180 mg/m2). 
The incidence of symptomatic cardiac dysfunction was 1.7% in the trastuzumab arm. 
 
In the pivotal study BO22227, trastuzumab was administered concurrently with neoadjuvant 
chemotherapy that contained four cycles of epirubicin (cumulative dose 300 mg/m2); at a median 
follow-up exceeding 70 months, the incidence of cardiac failure/congestive cardiac failure was 0.3% 
in the trastuzumab intravenous arm. 
 
Clinical experience is limited in patients above 65 years of age.  
 
Infusion-related reactions (IRRs) and hypersensitivity 
Serious IRRs to trastuzumab infusion including dyspnoea, hypotension, wheezing, hypertension, 
bronchospasm, supraventricular tachyarrhythmia, reduced oxygen saturation, anaphylaxis, respiratory 
distress, urticaria and angioedema have been reported (see section 4.8). Pre-medication may be used to 
reduce risk of occurrence of these events. The majority of these events occur during or within 2.5 
hours of the start of the first infusion. Should an infusion reaction occur the infusion should be 
discontinued or the rate of infusion slowed and the patient should be monitored until resolution of all 
observed symptoms (see section 4.2). These symptoms can be treated with an analgesic/antipyretic 
such as meperidine or paracetamol, or an antihistamine such as diphenhydramine. The majority of 
patients experienced resolution of symptoms and subsequently received further infusions of 
trastuzumab. Serious reactions have been treated successfully with supportive therapy such as oxygen, 
beta- agonists, and corticosteroids. In rare cases, these reactions are associated with a clinical course 
culminating in a fatal outcome. Patients experiencing dyspnoea at rest due to complications of 
advanced malignancy and comorbidities may be at increased risk of a fatal infusion reaction. 
Therefore, these patients should not be treated with trastuzumab (see section 4.3). 
 
Initial improvement followed by clinical deterioration and delayed reactions with rapid clinical 
deterioration have also been reported. Fatalities have occurred within hours and up to one week 
following infusion. On very rare occasions, patients have experienced the onset of infusion symptoms 
and pulmonary symptoms more than six hours after the start of the trastuzumab infusion. Patients 
should be warned of the possibility of such a late onset and should be instructed to contact their 
physician if these symptoms occur. 
 
Pulmonary events 
 
Severe pulmonary events have been reported with the use of trastuzumab in the post-marketing setting 
(see section 4.8). These events have occasionally been fatal. In addition, cases of interstitial lung 
disease including lung infiltrates, acute respiratory distress syndrome, pneumonia, pneumonitis, 
pleural effusion, respiratory distress, acute pulmonary oedema and respiratory insufficiency have been 
reported. Risk factors associated with interstitial lung disease include prior or concomitant therapy 
with other anti-neoplastic therapies known to be associated with it such as taxanes, gemcitabine, 
vinorelbine and radiation therapy. These events may occur as part of an infusion-related reaction or 
with a delayed onset. Patients experiencing dyspnoea at rest due to complications of advanced 
malignancy and comorbidities may be at increased risk of pulmonary events. Therefore, these patients 
should not be treated with trastuzumab (see section 4.3). Caution should be exercised for pneumonitis, 
especially in patients being treated concomitantly with taxanes. 
 
Sodium 
 

9 
 
Dazublys contains less than 1 mmol of sodium (23 mg) per dose, that is to say essentially sodium-free. 
 
Polysorbate-20 
 
This medicine contains 0.6 mg or 1.7 mg of polysorbate 20 in each 150 mg/vial or 420 mg/vial  which 
is equivalent to 0.6 mg/60 kg/7.4 mLor 1.7 mg/60 kg/20.8 mL, respectively. Polysorbates may cause 
allergic reactions. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
No drug interaction studies have been performed. Clinically significant interactions between 
trastuzumab and the concomitant medicinal products used in clinical trials have not been observed. 
 
Effect of trastuzumab on the pharmacokinetics of other antineoplastic agents 
 
Pharmacokinetic data from studies BO15935 and M77004 in women with HER2-positive MBC 
suggested that exposure to paclitaxel and doxorubicin (and their major metabolites 6-α hydroxyl- 
paclitaxel, POH, and doxorubicinol, DOL) was not altered in the presence of trastuzumab (8 mg/kg or 
4 mg/kg IV loading dose followed by 6 mg/kg q3w or 2 mg/kg q1w IV, respectively). 
However, trastuzumab may elevate the overall exposure of one doxorubicin metabolite, (7-deoxy-13 
dihydro-doxorubicinone, D7D). The bioactivity of D7D and the clinical impact of the elevation of this 
metabolite was unclear. 
 
Data from study JP16003, a single-arm study of trastuzumab (4 mg/kg IV loading dose and 2 mg/kg 
IV weekly) and docetaxel (60 mg/m2 IV) in Japanese women with HER2- positive MBC, suggested 
that concomitant administration of trastuzumab had no effect on the single dose pharmacokinetics of 
docetaxel. Study JP19959 was a sub study of BO18255 (ToGA) performed in male and female 
Japanese patients with advanced gastric cancer to study the pharmacokinetics of capecitabine and 
cisplatin when used with or without trastuzumab. The results of this sub study suggested that the 
exposure to the bioactive metabolites (e.g. 5-FU) of capecitabine was not affected by concurrent use of 
cisplatin or by concurrent use of cisplatin plus trastuzumab. However, capecitabine itself showed 
higher concentrations and a longer half-life when combined with trastuzumab. The data also suggested 
that the pharmacokinetics of cisplatin were not affected by concurrent use of capecitabine or by 
concurrent use of capecitabine plus trastuzumab. 
 
Pharmacokinetic data from Study H4613g/GO01305 in patients with metastatic or locally advanced 
inoperable HER2-positive cancer suggested that trastuzumab had no impact on the PK of carboplatin. 
 
Effect of antineoplastic agents on trastuzumab pharmacokinetics 
 
By comparison of simulated serum trastuzumab concentrations after trastuzumab monotherapy 
(4 mg/kg loading/2 mg/kg q1w IV) and observed serum concentrations in Japanese women with 
HER2- positive   MBC (study JP16003) no evidence of a PK effect of concurrent administration of 
docetaxel on the pharmacokinetics of trastuzumab was found. 
 
Comparison of PK results from two Phase II studies (BO15935 and M77004) and one Phase III study 
(H0648g) in which patients were treated concomitantly with trastuzumab and paclitaxel and two Phase 
II  studies in which trastuzumab was administered as monotherapy (W016229 and MO16982), in 
women with HER2-positive MBC indicates that individual and mean trastuzumab trough serum 
concentrations varied within and across studies but there was no clear effect of the concomitant 
administration of paclitaxel on the pharmacokinetics of trastuzumab. Comparison of trastuzumab PK 
data from Study M77004 in which women with HER2-positive MBC were treated concomitantly with 
trastuzumab, paclitaxel and doxorubicin to trastuzumab PK data in studies where trastuzumab was 
administered as monotherapy (H0649g) or in combination with anthracycline plus cyclophosphamide 
or paclitaxel (Study H0648g), suggested no effect of doxorubicin and paclitaxel on the 
pharmacokinetics of trastuzumab. 
 

10 
 
Pharmacokinetic data from Study H4613g/GO01305 suggested that carboplatin had no impact on the 
PK of trastuzumab. 
 
The administration of concomitant anastrozole did not appear to influence the pharmacokinetics of 
trastuzumab. 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Women of childbearing potential 
 
Women of childbearing potential should be advised to use effective contraception during treatment 
with trastuzumab and for 7 months after treatment has concluded (see section 5.2). 
 
Pregnancy 
 
Reproduction studies have been conducted in Cynomolgus monkeys at doses up to 25 times that of the 
weekly human maintenance dose of 2 mg/kg trastuzumab intravenous formulation and have revealed 
no evidence of impaired fertility or harm to the foetus. Placental transfer of trastuzumab during the 
early (days 20–50 of gestation) and late (days 120–150 of gestation) foetal development period was 
observed. It is not known whether trastuzumab can affect reproductive capacity. As animal 
reproduction studies are not always predictive of human response, trastuzumab should be avoided 
during pregnancy unless the potential benefit for the mother outweighs the potential risk to the foetus. 
 
In the post-marketing setting, cases of foetal renal growth and/or function impairment in association 
with oligohydramnios, some associated with fatal pulmonary hypoplasia of the foetus, have been 
reported in pregnant women receiving trastuzumab. Women who become pregnant should be advised 
of the possibility of harm to the foetus. If a pregnant woman is treated with trastuzumab, or if a patient 
becomes pregnant while receiving trastuzumab or within 7 months following the last dose of 
trastuzumab, close monitoring by a multidisciplinary team is desirable. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
A study conducted in Cynomolgus monkeys at doses 25 times that of the weekly human maintenance 
dose of 2 mg/kg trastuzumab intravenous formulation from days 120 to 150 of pregnancy 
demonstrated that trastuzumab is secreted in the milk postpartum. The exposure to trastuzumab in 
utero and the presence of trastuzumab in the serum of infant monkeys was not associated with any 
adverse effects on their growth or development from birth to 1 month of age. It is not known whether 
trastuzumab is secreted in human milk. As human IgG1 is secreted into human milk, and the potential 
for harm to the infant is unknown, women should not breast-feed during trastuzumab therapy and for 7 
months after the last dose. 
 
Fertility 
 
There is no fertility data available. 
 
4.7 
Effects on the ability to drive and use machines. 
 
Dazublys has a minor influence on the ability to drive or use machines (see section 4.8). Dizziness and 
somnolence may occur during treatment with trastuzumab (see section 4.8). Patients experiencing 
infusion-related symptoms (see section 4.4) should be advised not to drive and use machines until 
symptoms abate. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
Amongst the most serious and/or common adverse reactions reported in trastuzumab usage 

11 
 
intravenous  formulations to date are cardiac dysfunction, infusion-related reactions, haematotoxicity 
(in particular neutropenia), infections and pulmonary adverse reactions. 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
In this section, the following categories of frequency have been used: very common (≥1/10), common 
(≥ 1/100 to < 1/10), uncommon (≥ 1/1,000 to < 1/100), rare (≥ 1/10,000 to < 1/1,000), very rare 
(< 1/10,000), not known (cannot be estimated from the available data). Within each frequency 
grouping, adverse reactions are presented in order of decreasing seriousness. 
 
Presented in Table 1 are adverse reactions that have been reported in association with the use of 
intravenous trastuzumab alone or in combination with chemotherapy in pivotal clinical trials and in the  
post-marketing setting. 
 
All the terms included are based on the highest percentage seen in pivotal clinical trials. In addition, 
terms reported in the post marketing setting are included in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Undesirable Effects Reported with Intravenous trastuzumab Monotherapy or in 
Combination with Chemotherapy in Pivotal Clinical Trials (N = 8386) and in Post-Marketing 
System organ class 
Adverse reaction 
Frequency 
Infections and infestations 
Infection 
Very common 
Nasopharyngitis 
Very common 
Neutropenic sepsis 
Common 
Cystitis 
Common 
Influenza 
Common 
Sinusitis 
Common 
Skin infection 
Common 
Rhinitis 
Common 
Upper respiratory tract infection 
Common 
Urinary tract infection 
Common 
Pharyngitis 
Common 
Neoplasms benign, 
malignant and unspecified 
(incl. Cysts and polyps) 
Malignant neoplasm progression 
Not known 
Neoplasm progression 
Not known 
Blood and lymphatic 
system disorders 
Febrile neutropenia 
Very common 
Anaemia 
Very common 
Neutropenia 
Very common 
White blood cell count 
decreased/leukopenia 
Very common 
Thrombocytopenia 
Very common 
Hypoprothrombinaemia 
Not known 
Immune thrombocytopenia 
Not known 
Immune system disorders 
Hypersensitivity 
Common 
+Anaphylactic reaction 
Rare 
+Anaphylactic shock 
Rare 
Metabolism and nutrition 
disorders 
Weight decreased/Weight loss 
Very common 
Anorexia 
Very common 
Tumour lysis syndrome 
Not known 
Hyperkalaemia 
Not known 
Psychiatric disorders 
Insomnia 
Very common 
Anxiety 
Common 
Depression 
Common 
Nervous system disorders 
1Tremor 
Very common 
Dizziness 
Very common 
Headache 
Very common 

12 
 
System organ class 
Adverse reaction 
Frequency 
Paraesthesia 
Very common 
Dysgeusia 
Very common 
Peripheral neuropathy 
Common 
Hypertonia 
Common 
Somnolence 
Common 
Eye disorders 
Conjunctivitis 
Very common 
Lacrimation increased 
Very common 
Dry eye 
Common 
Papilloedema 
Not known 
Retinal haemorrhage 
Not known 
Ear and labyrinth 
disorders 
Deafness 
Uncommon 
Cardiac disorders 
1 Blood pressure decreased 
Very common 
1 Blood pressure increased 
Very common 
1 Heart beat irregular 
Very common 
1Cardiac flutter 
Very common 
Ejection fraction decreased* 
Very common 
+Cardiac failure (congestive) 
Common 
+1Supraventricular tachyarrhythmia 
Common 
Cardiomyopathy 
Common 
1Palpitation 
Common 
Pericardial effusion 
Uncommon 
Cardiogenic shock 
Not known 
Gallop rhythm present 
Not known 
Vascular disorders 
Hot flush 
Very common 
+1 Hypotension 
Common 
Vasodilatation 
Common 
Respiratory, thoracic and 
mediastinal disorders 
+Dyspnoea 
Very common 
Cough 
Very common 
Epistaxis 
Very common 
Rhinorrhoea 
Very common 
+Pneumonia 
Common 
Asthma 
Common 
Lung disorder 
Common 
+Pleural effusion 
Common 
+1Wheezing 
Uncommon 
Pneumonitis 
Uncommon 
+Pulmonary fibrosis 
Not known 
+Respiratory distress 
Not known 
+Respiratory failure 
Not known 
+Lung infiltration 
Not known 
+Acute pulmonary oedema 
Not known 
+Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
Not known 
+Bronchospasm 
Not known 
+Hypoxia 
Not known 
+Oxygen saturation decreased 
Not known 
Laryngeal oedema 
Not known 
Orthopnoea 
Not known 
Pulmonary oedema 
Not known 
Interstitial lung disease 
Not known 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Diarrhoea 
Very common 
Vomiting 
Very common 
Nausea 
Very common 
1 Lip swelling 
Very common 

13 
 
System organ class 
Adverse reaction 
Frequency 
Abdominal pain 
Very common 
Dyspepsia 
Very common 
Constipation 
Very common 
Stomatitis 
Very common 
Haemorrhoids 
Common 
Dry mouth 
Common 
Hepatobiliary disorders 
Hepatocellular injury 
Common 
Hepatitis 
Common 
Liver tenderness 
Common 
Jaundice 
Rare 
Skin and subcutaneous 
tissue disorders 
Erythema 
Very common 
Rash 
Very common 
1 Swelling face 
Very common 
Alopecia 
Very common 
Nail disorder 
Very common 
Palmar-plantar erythrodysaesthesia 
Syndrome 
Very common 
Acne 
Common 
Dry skin 
Common 
Ecchymosis 
Common 
Hyperhydrosis 
Common 
Maculopapular rash 
Common 
Pruritus 
Common 
Onychoclasis 
Common 
Dermatitis 
Common 
Urticaria 
Uncommon 
Angioedema 
Not known 
Musculoskeletal and 
connective tissue 
disorders 
Arthralgia 
Very common 
1Muscle tightness 
Very common 
Myalgia 
Very common 
Arthritis 
Common 
Back pain 
Common 
Bone pain 
Common 
Muscle spasms 
Common 
Neck Pain 
Common 
Pain in extremity 
Common 
Renal and urinary 
disorders 
Renal disorder 
Common 
Glomerulonephritis membranous 
Not known 
Glomerulonephropathy 
Not known 
Renal failure 
Not known 
Pregnancy, puerperium 
and perinatal conditions 
Oligohydramnios 
Not known 
Renal hypoplasia 
Not known 
Pulmonary hypoplasia 
Not known 
Reproductive system and 
breast disorders 
Breast inflammation/mastitis 
Common 
General disorders and 
administration site 
conditions 
Asthenia 
Very common 
Chest pain 
Very common 
Chills 
Very common 
Fatigue 
Very common 
Influenza-like symptoms 
Very common 
Infusion related reaction 
Very common 

14 
 
System organ class 
Adverse reaction 
Frequency 
Pain 
Very common 
Pyrexia 
Very common 
Mucosal inflammation 
Very common 
Peripheral oedema 
Very common 
Malaise 
Common 
Oedema 
Common 
Injury, poisoning and 
procedural complications 
Contusion 
Common 
+ Denotes adverse reactions that have been reported in association with a fatal outcome. 
1 Denotes adverse reactions that are reported largely in association with Infusion-related reactions. Specific 
percentages for these are not available. 
* Observed with combination therapy following anthracyclines and combined with taxanes 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Cardiac dysfunction 
 
Congestive heart failure (NYHA Class II – IV) is a common adverse reaction associated with the use 
of trastuzumab and has been associated with a fatal outcome (see section 4.4). Signs and symptoms of 
cardiac dysfunction, such as dyspnoea, orthopnoea, increased cough, pulmonary edema, S3 gallop, or 
reduced ventricular ejection fraction, have been observed in patients treated with trastuzumab (see 
section 4.4). 
In 3 pivotal clinical trials of adjuvant trastuzumab given in combination with chemotherapy, the 
incidence of grade 3/4 cardiac dysfunction (specifically symptomatic Congestive Heart Failure) was 
similar in patients who were administered chemotherapy alone (ie did not receive trastuzumab) and in 
patients who were administered trastuzumab sequentially after a taxane (0.3 - 0.4%). The rate was 
highest           in patients who were administered trastuzumab concurrently with a taxane (2.0%). In the 
neoadjuvant setting, the experience of concurrent administration of trastuzumab and low dose 
anthracycline regimen is limited (see section 4.4). 
 
When trastuzumab was administered after completion of adjuvant chemotherapy NYHA Class III-IV 
heart failure was observed in 0.6% of patients in the one-year arm after a median follow-up of 12 
months. In study BO16348, after a median follow-up of 8 years the incidence of severe CHF (NYHA 
Class III & IV) in the trastuzumab 1 year treatment arm was 0.8%, and the rate of mild symptomatic 
and                       asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction was 4.6%. 
 
Reversibility of severe CHF (defined as a sequence of at least two consecutive LVEF values ≥ 50% 
after the event) was evident for 71.4% of trastuzumab-treated patients. Reversibility of mild 
symptomatic and asymptomatic left ventricular dysfunction was demonstrated for 79.5% of patients. 
Approximately 17% of cardiac dysfunction related events occurred after completion of trastuzumab. 
 
In the pivotal metastatic trials of intravenous trastuzumab, the incidence of cardiac dysfunction varied 
between 9% and 12% when it was combined with paclitaxel compared with 1% – 4% for paclitaxel 
alone. For monotherapy, the rate was 6% – 9%. The highest rate of cardiac dysfunction was seen in 
patients receiving trastuzumab concurrently with anthracycline/cyclophosphamide (27%), and was 
significantly higher than for anthracycline/cyclophosphamide alone (7% – 10%). In a subsequent trial 
with prospective monitoring of cardiac function, the incidence of symptomatic CHF was 2.2% in 
patients receiving trastuzumab and docetaxel, compared with 0% in patients receiving docetaxel alone. 
Most of the patients (79%) who developed cardiac dysfunction in these trials experienced an 
improvement after receiving standard treatment for CHF. 
 
Infusion reactions, allergic-like reactions and hypersensitivity 
 
It is estimated that approximately 40% of patients who are treated with trastuzumab will experience 
some form of infusion-related reaction. However, the majority of infusion-related reactions are mild to 
moderate in intensity (NCI-CTC grading system) and tend to occur earlier in treatment, i.e. during 
infusions one, two and three and lessen in frequency in subsequent infusions. Reactions include chills, 

15 
 
fever, dyspnoea, hypotension, wheezing, bronchospasm, tachycardia, reduced oxygen saturation, 
respiratory distress, rash, nausea, vomiting and headache (see section 4.4). The rate of infusion-related 
reactions of all grades varied between studies depending on the indication, the data collection 
methodology, and whether trastuzumab was given concurrently with chemotherapy or as 
monotherapy. 
 
Severe anaphylactic reactions requiring immediate additional intervention can occur usually during 
either the first or second infusion of trastuzumab (see section 4.4) and have been associated with a 
fatal outcome. 
 
Anaphylactoid reactions have been observed in isolated cases. 
 
Haematotoxicity 
 
Febrile neutropenia, leukopenia, anaemia, thrombocytopenia and neutropenia occurred very 
commonly. The frequency of occurrence of hypoprothrombinemia is not known. The risk of 
neutropenia may be slightly increased when trastuzumab is administered with docetaxel following 
anthracycline therapy. 
 
Pulmonary events 
 
Severe pulmonary adverse reactions occur in association with the use of trastuzumab and have been 
associated with a fatal outcome. These include, but are not limited to, pulmonary infiltrates, acute 
respiratory distress syndrome, pneumonia, pneumonitis, pleural effusion, respiratory distress, acute 
pulmonary oedema and respiratory insufficiency (see section 4.4). 
 
Details of risk minimisation measures that are consistent with the EU Risk Management Plan are 
presented in (section 4.4) Warnings and Precautions. 
 
Immunogenicity 
 
In the neoadjuvant-adjuvant EBC study (BO22227), at a median follow-up exceeding 70 months, 
10.1% (30/296) of patients treated with trastuzumab intravenous developed antibodies against 
trastuzumab. Neutralizing anti-trastuzumab antibodies were detected in post-baseline samples in 2 of 
30 patients in the trastuzumab intravenous arm. 
 
The clinical relevance of these antibodies is not known. The presence of anti-trastuzumab antibodies 
had no impact on pharmacokinetics, efficacy (determined by pathological Complete Response [pCR] 
and event free survival [EFS]) and safety determined by occurrence of administration related reactions 
(ARRs) of trastuzumab intravenous. 
 
There are no immunogenicity data available for trastuzumab in gastric cancer. 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
There is no experience with overdose in human clinical trials. Single doses of trastuzumab alone 
greater than 10 mg/kg have not been administered in the clinical trials; a maintenance dose of 10 mg/kg 
q3w following a loading dose of 8 mg/kg has been studied in a clinical trial with metastatic gastric 
cancer patients. Doses up to this level were well tolerated. 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 

16 
 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Antineoplastic agents, monoclonal antibodies, ATC code: L01FD01  
 
Dazublys is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the 
European Medicines Agency http://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
Trastuzumab is a recombinant humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody against the human epidermal 
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). Overexpression of HER2 is observed in 20% - 30% of primary 
breast cancers. Studies of HER2-positivity rates in gastric cancer (GC) using immunohistochemistry 
(IHC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) have 
shown that there is a broad variation of HER2-positivity ranging from 6.8% to 34.0% for IHC and 
7.1% to 42.6% for FISH. Studies indicate that breast cancer patients whose tumors overexpress HER2 
have a shortened disease-free survival compared to patients whose tumors do not overexpress HER2. 
The extracellular domain of the receptor (ECD, p105) can be shed into the blood stream and measured 
in serum samples. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Trastuzumab binds with high affinity and specificity to sub-domain IV, a juxta-membrane region of 
HER2’s extracellular domain. The binding of trastuzumab to HER2 inhibits ligand-independent HER2 
signaling and prevents the proteolytic cleavage of its extracellular domain, an activation mechanism of 
HER2. As a result, trastuzumab has been shown, in both in vitro assays and in animals, to inhibit the 
proliferation of human tumor cells that overexpress HER2. Additionally, trastuzumab is a potent 
mediator of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC). In vitro, trastuzumab-mediated 
ADCC has been shown to be preferentially exerted on HER2 overexpressing cancer cells compared 
with cancer cells that do not overexpress HER2. 
 
Detection of HER2 overexpression or HER2 gene amplification 
 
Detection of HER2 overexpression or HER2 gene amplification in breast cancer 
Trastuzumab should only be used in patients whose tumors have HER2 overexpression or HER2 gene 
amplification as determined by an accurate and validated assay. HER2 overexpression should be 
detected using an immunohistochemistry (IHC)-based assessment of fixed tumor blocks (see section 
4.4). HER2 gene amplification should be detected using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or 
chromogenic in situ hybridization (CISH) of fixed tumor blocks. Patients are eligible for trastuzumab 
treatment if they show strong HER2 overexpression as described by a 3+ score by IHC or a positive 
FISH or CISH result. 
 
To ensure accurate and reproducible results, the testing must be performed in a specialized laboratory, 
which can ensure validation of the testing procedures. 
 
The recommended scoring system to evaluate the IHC staining patterns is as stated in Table 2:  
Table 2: Recommended Scoring System to Evaluate the IHC Staining Patterns in Breast Cancer 
Score 
Staining pattern 
HER2 verexpression 
assessment 
0 
No staining is observed or membrane staining is 
observed in < 10% of the tumor cells 
Negative 
1+ 
A faint/barely perceptible membrane staining is 
detected in > 10% of the tumour cells. The cells 
are only stained in part of their membrane. 
Negative 
2+ 
A weak to moderate complete membrane staining is 
detected in > 10% of the tumour cells. 
Equivocal 

17 
 
3+ 
Strong complete membrane staining is detected in 
> 10% of the tumour cells. 
Positive 
 
In general, FISH is considered positive if the ratio of the HER2 gene copy number per tumour cell to 
the chromosome 17 copy number is greater than or equal to 2, or if there are more than 4 copies of the   
HER2 gene per tumour cell if no chromosome 17 control is used. 
 
In general, CISH is considered positive if there are more than 5 copies of the HER2 gene per nucleus in 
greater than 50% of tumors cells. 
 
For full instructions on assay performance and interpretation please refer to the package inserts of 
validated FISH and CISH assays. Official recommendations on HER2 testing may also apply. 
 
For any other method that may be used for the assessment of HER2 protein or gene expression, the 
analyses should only be performed by laboratories that provide adequate state-of-the-art performance 
of validated methods. Such methods must clearly be precise and accurate enough to demonstrate 
overexpression of HER2 and must be able to distinguish between moderate (congruent with 2+) and 
strong (congruent with 3+) overexpression of HER2. 
 
Detection of HER2 over expression or HER2 gene amplification in gastric cancer 
 
Only an accurate and validated assay should be used to detect HER2 over expression or HER2 gene 
amplification. IHC is recommended as the first testing modality and in cases where HER2 gene 
amplification status is also required, either a silver-enhanced in situ hybridization (SISH) or a FISH 
technique must be applied. SISH technology is however, recommended to allow for the parallel 
evaluation of tumor histology and morphology. To ensure validation of testing procedures and the 
generation of accurate and reproducible results, HER2 testing must be performed in a laboratory 
staffed by trained personnel. Full instructions on assay performance and results interpretation should be 
taken from the product information leaflet provided with the HER2 testing assays used. 
 
In the ToGA (BO18255) trial, patients whose tumours were either IHC3 + or FISH positive were 
defined as HER2 positive and thus included in the trial. Based on the clinical trial results, the 
beneficial effects were limited to patients with the highest level of HER2 protein overexpression, 
defined by a 3 + score by IHC, or a 2 + score by IHC and a positive FISH result. 
 
In a method comparison study (study D008548), a high degree of concordance (> 95%) was observed 
for SISH and FISH techniques for the detection of HER2 gene amplification in gastric cancer patients.  
 
HER2 overexpression should be detected using an immunohistochemistry (IHC)-based assessment of 
fixed tumor blocks; HER2 gene amplification should be detected using in situ hybridization using 
either SISH or FISH on fixed tumor blocks. 
 
The recommended scoring system to evaluate the IHC staining patterns is as stated in Table 3:  
 
Table 3: Recommended Scoring System to Evaluate the IHC Staining Patterns in Gastric 
Cancer 
Score 
Surgical specimen - staining 
pattern 
Biopsy specimen – 
staining pattern 
HER2 
overexpression 
assessment 
0 
No reactivity or membranous 
reactivity in < 10% of tumour 
cells 
No reactivity or membranous 
reactivity in any tumour cell 
Negative 

18 
 
1+ 
Faint ⁄ barely perceptible 
membranous reactivity in ≥ 10% 
of tumour cells; cells are reactive 
only in part of their 
Membrane 
Tumour cell cluster with a faint ⁄ 
barely perceptible membranous 
reactivity irrespective of 
percentage of tumour cells 
Stained 
Negative 
2+ 
Weak to moderate complete, 
basolateral or lateral 
membranous reactivity in 
≥ 10% of tumour cells 
Tumour cell cluster with a weak 
to moderate complete, 
basolateral or lateral 
membranous reactivity 
irrespective of percentage of 
tumour cells stained 
Equivocal 
3+ 
Strong complete, basolateral or 
lateral membranous reactivity in 
≥ 10% of tumour  cells 
Tumour cell cluster with a 
strong complete, basolateral or 
lateral membranous reactivity 
irrespective of percentage of 
tumour cells stained 
Positive 
 
In general, SISH or FISH is considered positive if the ratio of the HER2 gene copy number per tumour 
cell to the chromosome 17 copy number is greater than or equal to 2. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety 
 
Metastatic breast cancer 
 
Trastuzumab has been used in clinical trials as monotherapy for patients with MBC who have tumours 
that overexpress HER2 and who have failed one or more chemotherapy regimens for their metastatic 
disease (trastuzumab alone). 
 
Trastuzumab has also been used in combination with paclitaxel or docetaxel for the treatment of 
patients who have not received chemotherapy for their metastatic disease. Patients who had previously 
received anthracycline-based adjuvant chemotherapy were treated with paclitaxel (175 mg/m2 infused 
over 3 hours) with or without trastuzumab. In the pivotal trial of docetaxel (100 mg/m2 infused over 1 
hour) with or without trastuzumab, 60% of the patients had received prior anthracycline-based 
adjuvant chemotherapy. Patients were treated with trastuzumab until the progression of disease. 
 
The efficacy of trastuzumab in combination with paclitaxel in patients who did not receive prior 
adjuvant  anthracyclines has not been studied. However, trastuzumab plus docetaxel was efficacious in 
patients whether or not they had received prior adjuvant anthracyclines. 
 
The test method for HER2 overexpression used to determine eligibility of patients in the pivotal 
trastuzumab monotherapy and trastuzumab plus paclitaxel clinical trials employed 
immunohistochemical       staining for HER2 of fixed material from breast tumours using the murine 
monoclonal antibodies CB11 and 4D5. These tissues were fixed in formalin or Bouin’s fixative. This 
investigative clinical trial assay performed in a central laboratory utilised a 0 to 3+ scale. Patients 
classified as staining 2+ or 3+ were included, while those staining 0 or 1+ were excluded. Greater than 
70 % of patients enrolled exhibited 3+ overexpression. The data suggest that beneficial effects were 
greater among those patients with higher levels of overexpression of HER2 (3+). 
 
The main test method used to determine HER2 positivity in the pivotal trial of docetaxel, with or 
without trastuzumab, was immunohistochemistry. A minority of patients was tested using fluorescence 
in-situ hybridization (FISH). In this trial, 87% of patients entered had disease that was IHC3+, and 95% 
of patients entered had disease that was IHC3+ and/or FISH-positive. 
 
Weekly dosing in metastatic breast cancer 
 
The efficacy results from the monotherapy and combination therapy studies are summarised in 
Table 4: 
 

19 
 
Table 4: Efficacy Results from the Monotherapy and Combination Therapy Studies 
Parameter 
Monotherapy 
Combination 
Therapy 
trastuzumab1 
N = 172 
trastuzumab 
plus paclitaxel 
2 
N = 68 
Paclitaxel 2 
N = 77 
trastuzumab n 
plus docetaxel3 
N = 92 
Docetaxel 3 
N = 94 
Response 
rate 
(95%CI) 
18% 
(13 - 25) 
49% 
(36 - 61) 
17% 
(9 - 27) 
61% 
(50 - 71) 
34% 
(25 - 45) 
Median 
duration of 
response 
(months) 
(95%CI) 
9.1 
(5.6 - 10.3) 
8.3 
(7.3 - 8.8) 
4.6 
(3.7 - 7.4) 
11.7 
(9.3 – 15.0) 
5.7 
(4.6 - 7.6) 
Median 
TTP 
(months) 
(95%CI) 
3.2 
(2.6 - 3.5) 
7.1 
(6.2 - 12.0) 
3.0 
(2.0 - 4.4) 
11.7 
(9.2 - 13.5) 
6.1 
(5.4 - 7.2) 
Median 
Survival 
(months) 
(95%CI) 
16.4 
(12.3 - n
e) 
24.8 
(18.6 - 33.7) 
17.9 
(11.2 - 23.8
) 
31.2 
(27.3 - 40.8) 
22.74 
(19.1 - 30.
8) 
TTP = time to progression; "ne" indicates that it could not be estimated or it was not yet reached. 
1. 
Study H0649g: IHC3+ patient subset 
2. 
Study H0648g: IHC3+ patient subset 
3. 
Study M77001: Full analysis set (intent-to-treat), 24 months results 
 
Combination treatment with trastuzumab and anastrozole 
 
Trastuzumab has been studied in combination with anastrozole for first line treatment of MBC in 
HER2 overexpressing, hormone-receptor (i.e., estrogen-receptor (ER) and/or progesterone-receptor 
(PR)) positive postmenopausal patients. Progression-freee survival was doubled in the trastuzumab 
plus anastrozole arm compared to anastrozole (4.8 months versus 2.4 months). For the other 
parameters the improvements seen for the combination were for overall response (16.5% versus 6.7%); 
clinical benefit rate (42.7% versus 27.9%); time to progression (4.8 months versus 2.4 months). For 
time to response and duration of response, no difference could be recorded between the arms. The 
median overall survival was extended by 4.6 months for patients in the combination arm. The 
difference was not statistically significant, however more than half of the patients in the anastrozole 
alone arm crossed over to a trastuzumab containing regimen after progression of disease. 
 
Three -weekly dosing in metastatic breast cancer 
 
The efficacy results from the non-comparative monotherapy and combination therapy studies are 
summarized in Table 5: 
 
Table 5: Efficacy Results from the Non-Comparative Monotherapy and Combination Therapy 
Studies 
Parameter 
Monotherapy 
Combination Therapy 
trastuzumab1 
N = 105 
trastuzumab2 
N = 72 
trastuzumab plus 
paclitaxel3 
N = 32 
trastuzumab plus 
docetaxel4 
N = 110 
Response rate 
(95%CI) 
24% 
(15 - 35) 
27% 
(14 - 43) 
59% 
(41 - 76) 
73% 
(63 - 81) 

20 
 
Median duration 
of response 
(months) (range) 
10.1 
(2.8 - 35.6) 
7.9 
(2.1 - 18.8) 
10.5 
(1.8 - 21) 
13.4 
(2.1 - 55.1) 
Median TTP 
(months) 
(95%CI) 
3.4 
(2.8 - 4.1) 
7.7 
(4.2 - 8.3) 
12.2  
(6.2 - ne) 
13.6 
(11 - 16) 
Median Survival 
(months) 
(95%CI) 
Ne 
Ne 
ne 
47.3  
(32 - ne) 
TTP = time to progression; "ne" indicates that it could not be estimated or it was not yet reached. 
1. 
Study WO16229: loading dose 8 mg/kg, followed by 6 mg/kg 3 weekly schedule 
2. 
Study MO16982: loading dose 6 mg/kg weekly x 3; followed by 6 mg/kg 3-weekly schedule 
3. 
Study BO15935 
4. 
Study MO16419 
 
Sites of progression 
 
The frequency of progression in the liver was significantly reduced in patients treated with the 
combination of trastuzumab and paclitaxel, compared to paclitaxel alone (21.8% versus 45.7%; 
p = 0.004). More patients treated with trastuzumab and paclitaxel progressed in the central nervous 
system than those treated with paclitaxel alone (12.6% versus 6.5%; p = 0.377). 
 
Early breast cancer (adjuvant setting) 
 
Early breast cancer is defined as non-metastatic primary invasive carcinoma of the breast.  
In the adjuvant treatment setting, trastuzumab was investigated in 4 large multicenter, randomized 
trials. 
 
- 
Study BO16348 was designed to compare one and two years of three-weekly trastuzumab 
treatment versus observation in patients with HER2 positive EBC following surgery, established 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy (if applicable). In addition, a comparison of two years of 
trastuzumab treatment versus one year of trastuzumab treatment was performed. Patients 
assigned to receive trastuzumab were given an initial loading dose of 8 mg/kg, followed by 
6 mg/kg every three weeks for either one or two years. 
- 
The NSABP B-31 and NCCTG N9831 studies that comprise the joint analysis were designed to 
investigate the clinical utility of combining trastuzumab treatment with paclitaxel following AC 
chemotherapy. Additionally, the NCCTG N9831 study also investigated adding trastuzumab 
sequentially to AC→P chemotherapy in patients with HER2 positive EBC following surgery. 
- 
The BCIRG 006 study was designed to investigate combining trastuzumab treatment with 
docetaxel either following AC chemotherapy or in combination with docetaxel and carboplatin 
in patients with HER2-positive EBC following surgery. 
 
Early breast cancer in the HERA trial was limited to operable, primary, invasive adenocarcinoma of 
the breast, with axillary nodes positive or axillary nodes negative if tumors at least 1 cm in diameter. 
 
In the joint analysis of the NSABP B-31 and NCCTG N9831 studies, EBC was limited to women with 
operable breast cancer at high risk, defined as HER2-positive and axillary lymph node positive or 
HER2 positive and lymph node negative with high risk features (tumor size > 1 cm and ER negative or 
tumor size > 2 cm, regardless of hormonal status). 
 
In the BCIRG 006 study HER2 positive, EBC was defined as either lymph node positive or high risk 
node negative patients with no (pN0) lymph node involvement, and at least 1 of the following factors: 
tumour size greater than 2 cm, estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor negative, histological 
and/or nuclear grade 2-3, or age < 35 years). 
 
The efficacy results from the BO16348 trial following 12 months* and 8 years** median follow-up are 

21 
 
summarized in Table 6: 
 
Table 6: Efficacy Results from Study BO16348 
Parameter 
Median follow-up 12 
months* 
Median follow-up 8 
years** 
Observation 
N = 1693 
trastuzumab 
1 Year 
N = 1693 
Observation 
N = 1697*** 
trastuzumab 
1 Year 
N = 1702*** 
Disease-free survival 
- No. patients with event 
219 (12.9%) 
127 (7.5%) 
570 (33.6%) 
471 (27.7%) 
- No. patients without 
event 
1474 (87.1%) 
1566 (92.5%) 
1127 (66.4%) 
1231 (72.3%) 
P-value versus Observation 
< 0.0001 
< 0.0001 
Hazard Ratio versus 
Observation 
0.54 
0.76 
Recurrence-free survival 
- No. patients with event 
208 (12.3%) 
113 (6.7%) 
506 (29.8%) 
399 (23.4%) 
- No. patients without 
event 
1485 (87.7%) 
1580 (93.3%) 
1191 (70.2%) 
1303 (76.6%) 
P-value versus Observation 
< 0.0001 
< 0.0001 
Hazard Ratio versus 
Observation 
0.51 
0.73 
Distant disease-free 
survival 
- No. patients with event 
184 (10.9%) 
99 (5.8%) 
488 (28.8%) 
399 (23.4%) 
- No. patients without 
event 
1508 (89.1%) 
1594 (94.6%) 
1209 (71.2%) 
1303 (76.6%) 
P-value versus Observation 
< 0.0001 
< 0.0001 
Hazard Ratio versus 
Observation 
0.50 
0.76 
Overall survival (death) 
- No. patients with event 
40 (2.4%) 
31 (1.8%) 
350 (20.6%) 
278 (16.3%) 
- No. patients without 
event 
1653 (97.6%) 
1662 (98.2%) 
1347 (79.4%) 
1424 (83.7%) 
P-value versus Observation 
0.24 
0.0005 
Hazard Ratio versus 
Observation 
0.75 
0.76 
*Co-primary endpoint of DFS of 1 year versus observation met the pre-defined statistical boundary 
**Final analysis (including crossover of 52% of patients from the observation arm to trastuzumab) 
*** There is a discrepancy in the overall sample size due to a small number of patients who were randomized 
after the cut-off date for the 12-month median follow-up analysis 
 
The efficacy results from the interim efficacy analysis crossed the protocol pre-specified statistical 
boundary for the comparison of 1-year of trastuzumab versus observation. After a median follow-up of 
12 months, the hazard ratio (HR) for disease free survival (DFS) was 0.54 (95% CI 0.44, 0.67) which 
translates into an absolute benefit, in terms of a 2-year disease-free survival rate, of 7.6 percentage 
points (85.8% versus 78.2%) in favour of the trastuzumab arm. 
 
A final analysis was performed after a median follow-up of 8 years, which showed that 1 year 
trastuzumab treatment is associated with a 24 % risk reduction compared to observation only 
(HR=0.76, 95% CI 0.67, 0.86). This translates into an absolute benefit in terms of an 8 year disease 
free survival rate of 6.4 percentage points in favour of 1 year trastuzumab treatment. 
 
In this final analysis, extending trastuzumab treatment for a duration of two years did not show 
additional benefit over treatment for 1 year [DFS HR in the intent to treat (ITT) population of 2 years 

22 
 
versus 1 year=0.99 (95% CI: 0.87, 1.13), p-value=0.90 and OS HR=0.98 (0.83, 1.15); p-value= 0.78]. 
The rate of asymptomatic cardiac dysfunction was increased in the 2-year treatment arm (8.1% versus 
4.6 % in the 1-year treatment arm). More patients experienced at least one grade 3 or 4 adverse event in 
the 2-year treatment arm (20.4%) compared with the 1-year treatment arm (16.3%). 
 
In the NSABP B-31 and NCCTG N9831 studies trastuzumab was administered in combination with 
paclitaxel, following AC chemotherapy. 
 
Doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide were administered concurrently as follows: 
- 
intravenous push doxorubicin, at 60 mg/ m2, given every 3 weeks for 4 cycles. 
- 
intravenous cyclophosphamide, at 600 mg/ m2 over 30 minutes, given every 3 weeks for 4 cycles. 
 
Paclitaxel, in combination with trastuzumab, was administered as follows: 
- 
intravenous paclitaxel – 80 mg/m2 as a continuous intravenous infusion, given every week for 12 
weeks. 
or 
- 
intravenous paclitaxel – 175 mg/m2 as a continuous intravenous infusion, given every 3 weeks for 4 
cycles (day 1 of each cycle). 
 
The efficacy results from the joint analysis of the NSABP B-31 and NCCTG 9831 trials at the time of 
the definitive analysis of DFS* are summarized in Table 7. The median duration of follow up was 1.8 
years for the patients in the AC→P arm and 2.0 years for patients in the AC→PH arm. 
 
Table 7: Summary of Efficacy results from the joint analysis of the NSABP B-31 and NCCTG 
N9831 trials at the time of the definitive DFS analysis* 
Parameter 
AC→P 
(n = 1679) 
AC→PH 
(n = 1672) 
Hazard Ratio vs AC→P 
(95% CI) 
p-value 
Disease-free survival 
No. patients with event (%) 
261 (15.5) 
133 (8.0) 
0.48 (0.39, 0.59) p< 0.0001 
Distant Recurrence No. 
patients with event 
193 (11.5) 
96 (5.7) 
0.47 (0.37, 0.60) p< 0.0001 
Death (OS event): 
No. patients with event 
92 (5.5) 
62 (3.7) 
0.67 (0.48, 0.92) 
P = 0.014** 
A: doxorubicin; C: cyclophosphamide; P: paclitaxel; H: trastuzumab 
* At median duration of follow up of 1.8 years for the patients in the AC→P arm and 2.0 years for patients in the 
AC→PH arm 
** p value for OS did not cross the pre-specified statistical boundary for comparison of AC→PH vs. AC→P 
 
For the primary endpoint, DFS, the addition of trastuzumab to paclitaxel chemotherapy resulted in a 
52% decrease in the risk of disease recurrence. The hazard ratio translates into an absolute benefit, in 
terms of 3-year disease-free survival rate estimates of 11.8 percentage points (87.2% versus 75.4%) in 
favour of the AC→PH (trastuzumab) arm. 
 
At the time of a safety update after a median of 3.5 - 3.8 years follow up, an analysis of DFS 
reconfirms the magnitude of the benefit shown in the definitive analysis of DFS. Despite the cross-over 
to trastuzumab in the control arm, the addition of trastuzumab to paclitaxel chemotherapy resulted in a 
52% decrease in the risk of disease recurrence. The addition of trastuzumab to paclitaxel 
chemotherapy also resulted in a 37% decrease in the risk of death. 
 
The pre-planned final analysis of OS from the joint analysis of studies NSABP B-31 and NCCTG 
N9831 was performed when 707 deaths had occurred (median follow-up 8.3 years in the AC→P H 
group). Treatment with AC→PH resulted in a statistically significant improvement in OS compared 
with AC→P (stratified HR=0.64; 95% CI [0.55, 0.74]; log-rank p-value < 0.0001). At 8 years, the 
survival rate was estimated to be 86.9% in the AC→PH arm and 79.4% in the AC→P arm, an absolute 
benefit of 7.4% (95% CI 4.9%, 10.0%). 

23 
 
 
The final OS results from the joint analysis of studies NSABP B-31 and NCCTG N9831 are 
summarized in Table 8 below: 
 
Table 8:Final Overall Survival Analysis from the joint analysis of trials NSABP B-31 and 
NCCTG N9831 
Parameter 
AC→P 
(N = 2032) 
AC→PH 
(N = 2031) 
p-value versus 
AC→P 
Hazard Ratio versus 
AC→P 
(95% CI) 
Death (OS event): 
No. patients with event (%) 
418 (20.6%) 
289 (14.2%) 
< 0.0001 
0.64 
(0.55, 0.74) 
A: doxorubicin; C: cyclophosphamide; P: paclitaxel; H: trastuzumab 
 
DFS analysis was also performed at the final analysis of OS from the joint analysis of studies NSABP B-31 and 
NCCTG N9831. The updated DFS analysis results (stratified HR = 0.61; 95% CI [0.54, 0.69]) showed a similar 
DFS benefit compared to the definitive primary DFS analysis, despite 24.8% patients in the AC→P arm who 
crossed over to receive trastuzumab. At 8 years, the disease-free survival rate was estimated to be 77.2% (95% 
CI: 75.4, 79.1) in the AC→PH arm, an absolute benefit of 11.8% compared with the AC→P arm. 
 
In the BCIRG 006 study trastuzumab was administered either in combination with docetaxel, 
following AC chemotherapy (AC→DH) or in combination with ocetaxel and carboplatin (DCarbH). 
 
Docetaxel was administered as follows: 
- 
intravenous docetaxel – 100 mg/m2 as an intravenous infusion over 1 hour, given every 3 weeks for 4 
cycles (day 2 of first docetaxel cycle, then day 1 of each subsequent cycle) 
or 
- 
intravenous docetaxel – 75 mg/m2 as an intravenous infusion over 1 hour, given every 3 weeks for 6 
cycles (day 2 of cycle 1, then day 1 of each subsequent cycle) 
which was followed by: 
- 
carboplatin – at target AUC = 6 mg/mL/min administered by intravenous infusion over 30- 60 minutes 
repeated every 3 weeks for a total of six cycles 
 
trastuzumab was administered weekly with chemotherapy and 3 weekly thereafter for a total of 52 
weeks. 
 
The efficacy results from the BCIRG 006 are summarized in Tables 9 and 10. The median duration of 
follow up was 2.9 years in the AC→D arm and 3.0 years in each of the AC→DH and DCarbH arms. 
 
Table 9: Overview of Efficacy Analyses BCIRG 006 AC→D versus AC→DH 
Parameter 
AC→D 
(n = 1073) 
AC→DH 
(n = 1074) 
Hazard Ratio vs AC→D 
(95% CI) 
p-value 
Disease-free survival 
195 
134 
0.61 (0.49, 0.77) 
P< 0.0001 
No. patients with event 
Distant recurrence 
144 
95 
0.59 (0.46, 0.77) p< 0.0001 
No. patients with event 
Death (OS event) 
No. patients with event 
80 
49 
0.58 (0.40, 0.83) p = 0.0024 
 
AC→D = doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide, followed by docetaxel; AC→DH = doxorubicin plus 
cyclophosphamide, followed by docetaxel plus trastuzumab; CI = confidence interval 
 
 
Table 10: Overview of Efficacy Analyses BCIRG 006 AC→D versus DCarbH 
 

24 
 
Parameter 
AC→D 
(n = 1073) 
DCarbH 
(n = 1074) 
Hazard Ratio vs 
AC→D 
(95% CI) 
Disease-free survival 
No. patients with event 
195 
145 
0.67 (0.54, 0.83) 
p = 0.0003 
Distant recurrence 
144 
103 
0.65 (0.50, 0.84) 
p = 0.0008 
No. patients with event 
Death (OS event) 
No. patients with event 
80 
56 
0.66 (0.47, 0.93) 
p = 0.0182 
AC→D = doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide, followed by docetaxel; DCarbH = docetaxel, carboplatin and 
trastuzumab; CI = confidence interval 
 
In the BCIRG 006 study for the primary endpoint, DFS, the hazard ratio translates into an absolute 
benefit, in terms of 3-year disease-free survival rate estimates of 5.8 percentage points (86.7% versus 
80.9%) in favour of the AC→DH (trastuzumab) arm and 4.6 percentage points (85.5% versus 80.9%) 
in favour of the DCarbH (trastuzumab) arm compared to AC→D. 
 
In study BCIRG 006, 213/1075 patients in the DCarbH (TCH) arm, 221/1074 patients in the AC→DH 
(AC→TH) arm, and 217/1073 in the AC→D (AC→T) arm had a Karnofsky performance status ≤ 90 
(either 80 or 90). No disease-free survival (DFS) benefit was noticed in this subgroup of patients 
(hazard ratio = 1.16, 95% CI [0.73, 1.83] for DCarbH (TCH) versus AC→D (AC→T); hazard ratio 
0.97, 95% CI [0.60, 1.55] for AC→DH (AC→TH) versus AC→D). 
 
In addition a post-hoc exploratory analysis was performed on the data sets from the joint analysis (JA) 
NSABP B-31/NCCTG N9831* and BCIRG006 clinical studies combining DFS events and 
symptomatic cardiac events and summarised in Table 11: 
 
Table 11: Post-Hoc Exploratory Analysis Results from the Joint Analysis NSABP B-31/NCCTG 
N9831* and BCIRG006 Clinical Studies Combining DFS Events and Symptomatic Cardiac 
Events 
AC→PH 
(vs. AC→P) 
(NSABP B-31 and 
NCCTG N9831)* 
AC→DH 
(vs. AC→D) 
(BCIRG 006) 
DCarbH 
(vs. AC→D) 
(BCIRG 006) 
Primary efficacy analysis DFS 
Hazard ratios 
(95 % CI) 
p-value 
0.48 
(0.39, 0.59) 
p< 0.0001 
0.61 
(0.49, 0.77) 
p< 0.0001 
0.67 
(0.54, 0.83) 
p = 0.0003 
Long term follow-up efficacy 
analysis** 
DFS Hazard ratios (95 % CI) 
p-value 
0.61 
(0.54, 0.69) 
p< 0.0001 
0.72 
(0.61, 0.85) 
p< 0.0001 
0.77 
(0.65, 0.90) 
p = 0.0011 
Post-hoc exploratory analysis 
with DFS and symptomatic 
cardiac events 
Long term follow-up** Hazard 
ratios (95% CI) 
0.67 
(0.60, 0.75) 
0.77 
(0.66, 0.90) 
0.77 
(0.66, 0.90) 
A: doxorubicin; C: cyclophosphamide; P: paclitaxel; D: docetaxel; Carb: carboplatin; H: trastuzumab CI = 
confidence interval 
* At the time of the definitive analysis of DFS. Median duration of follow up was 1.8 years in the AC→P arm and 
2.0 years in the AC→PH arm 
** Median duration of long-term follow-up for the Joint Analysis clinical studies was 8.3 years (range: 0.1 to 
12.1) for the AC→PH arm and 7.9 years (range: 0.0 to 12.2) for the AC→P arm; Median duration of long term 
follow-up for the BCIRG 006 study was 10.3 years in both the AC→D arm (range: 0.0 to 12.6) arm and the 

25 
 
DCarbH arm (range: 0.0 to 13.1), and was 10.4 years (range: 0.0 to 12.7) in the AC→DH arm 
 
Early breast cancer (neoadjuvant-adjuvant setting) 
 
So far, no results are available which compare the efficacy of trastuzumab administered with 
chemotherapy in the adjuvant setting with that obtained in the neo-adjuvant/adjuvant setting. 
 
In the neoadjuvant-adjuvant treatment setting, study MO16432, a multicentre randomised trial, was 
designed to investigate the clinical efficacy of concurrent administration of trastuzumab with 
neoadjuvant chemotherapy including both an anthracycline and a taxane, followed by adjuvant 
trastuzumab, up to a total treatment duration of 1 year. The study recruited patients with newly 
diagnosed locally advanced (Stage III) or inflammatory EBC. Patients with HER2+ tumors were 
randomized to receive either neoadjuvant chemotherapy concurrently with neoadjuvant-adjuvant 
trastuzumab or neoadjuvant chemotherapy alone. 
 
In study MO16432, trastuzumab (8 mg/kg loading dose, followed by 6 mg/kg maintenance every three  
weeks) was administered concurrently with 10 cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy as follows: 
 
- 
Doxorubicin 60mg/m2 and paclitaxel 150 mg/m2, administered 3-weekly for 3 cycles, which 
was followed by 
- 
Paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 administered 3-weekly for 4 cycles, which was followed by 
- 
CMF on days 1 and 8 every four weeks for 3 cycles, which was followed after surgery by 
- 
additional cycles of adjuvant trastuzumab (to complete 1 year of treatment) 
 
The efficacy results from Study MO16432 are summarized in Table 12. The median duration of 
follow-up in the trastuzumab arm was 3.8 years. 
 
Table 12: Efficacy Results from MO16432 
Parameter 
Chemo + 
trastuzumab 
(n = 115) 
Chemo only 
(n = 116) 
Event-free survival 
No. patients with event 
46 
59 
Hazard Ratio 
(95% CI) 
0.65 (0.44, 0.96) 
p = 0.0275 
Total pathological complete 
40 % 
20.7 % 
p = 0.0014 
response* (95% CI) 
(31.0, 49.6) 
(13.7, 29.2) 
Overall survival 
No. patients with event 
22 
33 
Hazard Ratio 
(95 % CI) 
0.59 (0.35, 1.02) 
p = 0.0555 
* defined as the absence of any invasive cancer both in the breast and axillary nodes 
 
An absolute benefit of 13 percentage points in favor of the trastuzumab arm was estimated in terms of 
a 3-year event-free survival rate (65% versus 52%). 
 
Metastatic gastric cancer 
 
trastuzumab has been investigated in one randomized, open-label phase III trial, ToGA (BO18255), in 
combination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone. 
 
Chemotherapy was administered as follows: 
 
- 
capecitabine 1000 mg/m2 orally twice daily for 14 days every 3 weeks for 6 cycles (evening of 
day 1 to the morning of day 15 of each cycle) 
or 

26 
 
- 
intravenous 5-fluorouracil – 800 mg/m2/day as a continuous intravenous infusion over 5 days, 
given every 3 weeks for six cycles (days 1 to 5 of each cycle) 
 
Either of which was administered with: 
 
- 
cisplatin – 80 mg/m2 every 3 weeks for six cycles on day 1 of each cycle. 
 
The efficacy results from study BO18225 are summarized in Table 13: 
 
Table 13: Efficacy Results from BO18225 
Parameter 
FP 
N = 290 
FP +H 
N = 294 
HR (95 % CI) 
p-value 
Overall Survival, Median months 
11.1 
13.8 
0.74 (0.60-0.91) 
0.0046 
Progression-Free Survival, 
Median months 
5.5 
6.7 
0.71 (0.59-0.85) 
0.0002 
Time to Disease Progression, 
Median months 
5.6 
7.1 
0.70 (0.58-0.85) 
0.0003 
Overall Response Rate % 
34.5% 
47.3% 
1.70a (1.22, 2.38) 
0.0017 
Duration of Response, Median 
Months 
4.8 
6.9 
0.54 (0.40-0.73) 
< 0.0001 
FP + H: Fluoropyrimidine/cisplatin + trastuzumab FP: Fluoropyrimidine/cisplatin 
a Odds ratio 
 
Patients recruited to the trial who were previously untreated for HER2-positive inoperable locally 
advanced or recurrent and/or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the stomach or gastro-oesophageal 
junction not amenable to curative therapy. The primary endpoint was overall survival, which was 
defined as the time from the date of randomization to the date of death from any cause. At the time of 
the analysis, a total of 349 randomized patients had died: 182 patients (62.8%) in the control arm and 
167 patients (56.8%) in the treatment arm. The majority of the deaths were due to events related to the 
underlying cancer. 
 
Post-hoc subgroup analyses indicate that positive treatment effects are limited to targeting tumors with 
higher levels of HER2 protein (IHC 2+/FISH+ or IHC 3+). The median overall survival for the high 
HER2 expressing group was 11.8 months versus 16 months, HR 0.65 (95% CI 0.51-0.83), and the 
median progression-free survival was 5.5 months versus 7.6 months, HR 0.64 (95% CI 0.51-0.79) for 
FP versus FP + H, respectively. For overall survival, the HR was 0.75 (95% CI 0.51-1.11) in the 
IHC 2+/FISH+ group, and the HR was 0.58 (95% CI 0.41-0.81) in the IHC 3+/FISH+ group. 
 
In an exploratory subgroup analysis performed in the TOGA (BO18255) trial there was no apparent 
benefit on overall survival with the addition of trastuzumab in patients with ECOG PS 2 at baseline 
[HR 0.96 (95% CI 0.51-1.79)], non-measurable [HR 1.78 (95% CI 0.87-3.66)] and locally advanced 
disease [HR 1.20 (95% CI 0.29-4.97)]. 
 
Pediatric population 
 
The European Medicines Agency has waived the obligation to submit the results of studies with the 
reference medicinal product in all subsets of the pediatric population for breast and gastric cancer (see 
section 4.2 for information on pediatric use). 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
The pharmacokinetics of trastuzumab were evaluated in a population pharmacokinetic model analysis 
using pooled data from 1,582 subjects, including patients with HER2 positive MBC, EBC, AGC or 
other tumor types, and healthy volunteers, in 18 Phase I, II, and III trials receiving trastuzumab IV. A 
two-compartment model with parallel linear and non-linear elimination from the central compartment 
described the trastuzumab concentration-time profile. Due to non-linear elimination, total clearance 

27 
 
increased with decreasing concentration. Therefore, no constant value for the half-life of trastuzumab 
can be deduced. The t1/2 decreases with decreasing concentrations within a dosing interval (see Table 
16). MBC and EBC patients had similar PK parameters (e.g., clearance (CL), the central compartment 
volume (Vc)), and population-predicted steady-state exposures (Cmin, Cmax, and AUC). Linear 
clearance was 0.136 L/day for MBC, 0.112 L/day for EBC and 0.176 L/day for AGC. The non-linear 
elimination parameter values were 8.81 mg/day for the maximum elimination rate (Vmax) and 8.92 
µg/mL for the Michaelis-Menten constant (Km) for the MBC, EBC, and AGC patients. The central 
compartment volume was 2.62 L for patients with MBC and EBC and 3.63 L for patients with AGC. In 
the final population PK model, in addition to primary tumor type, body weight, serum aspartate 
aminotransferase, and albumin were identified as statistically significant covariates affecting the 
exposure of trastuzumab. However, the magnitude of the effect of these covariates on trastuzumab 
exposure suggests that these covariates are unlikely to have a clinically meaningful effect on 
trastuzumab concentrations. 
 
The population predicted PK exposure values (median with 5th - 95th Percentiles) and PK parameter 
values at clinically relevant concentrations (Cmax and Cmin) for MBC, EBC, and AGC patients 
treated with the approved q1w and q3w dosing regimens are shown in Table 14 (Cycle 1), Table 15 
(steady- state), and Table 16 (PK parameters). 
 
Table 14: Population Predicted Cycle 1 PK Exposure Values (median with 5th - 95th Percentiles) 
for trastuzumab IV Dosing Regimens in MBC, EBC, and AGC Patients 
Regimen 
Primary tumor type 
N 
Cmin (mcg/mL) Cmax (mcg/mL) 
AUC0-21days 
(mcg.day/mL) 
8 mg/kg + 
6 mg/kg q3w 
MBC 
805 
28.7 
(2.9 - 46.3) 
182 
(134 - 280) 
1376 
(728 - 1998) 
EBC 
390 
30.9 
(18.7 - 45.5) 
176 
(127 - 227) 
1390 
(1039 - 1895) 
AGC 
274 
23.1 
(6.1 - 50.3) 
132 
(84.2 – 225) 
1109 
(588 – 1938) 
4 mg/kg + 
2 mg/kg qw 
MBC 
805 
37.4 
(8.7 - 58.9) 
76.5 
(49.4 - 114) 
1073 
(597 – 1584) 
EBC 
390 
38.9 
(25.3 - 58.8) 
76.0 
(54.7 - 104) 
1074 
(783 - 1502) 
 
Table 15: Population Predicted Steady State PK Exposure Values (median with 5th - 95th 
Percentiles)     for trastuzumab Intravenous Dosing Regimens in MBC, EBC and AGC Patients 
Regimen 
Primary 
tumor 
type 
N 
Cmin,ss* 
(mcg/mL) 
Cmax,ss** 
(mcg/mL) 
AUCss, 0- 
21days 
(mcg.day/mL) 
Time to 
steady-state *** 
(week) 
8 mg/kg + 
6 mg/kg q3w 
MBC 
805 
44.2 
179 
1736 
12 
(1.8 - 85.4) 
(123 - 266) 
(618 - 2756) 
EBC 
390 
53.8 
(28.7 - 85.8) 
184 
(134 - 247) 
1927 
(1332 - 
2771) 
15 
AGC 
274 
32.9 
131 
1338 
9 
(6.1 – 88.9) 
(72.5 -251) 
(557 - 2875) 
4 mg/kg + 
2 mg/kg qw 
MBC 
805 
63.1 
107 
1710 
12 
(11.7 - 107) 
(54.2 - 164) 
(581 - 2715) 
EBC 
390 
72.6 
(46 - 109) 
115 
(82.6 - 160) 
1893 
(1309 - 
2734) 
14 

28 
 
*Cmin,ss – Cmin at steady state 
**Cmax,ss = Cmax at steady state 
*** time to 90% of steady-state 
 
Table 16: Population Predicted PK Parameter Values at Steady State for trastuzumab 
Intravenous Dosing Regimens in MBC, EBC and AGC Patients 
Regimen 
Primary tumor 
type 
N 
Total CL range from 
Cmax,ss to Cmin,ss 
(L/day) 
t1/2 range from Cmax, ss to 
Cmin,ss 
(day) 
8mg/kg + 6mg/kg 
q3w 
MBC 
805 
0.183 - 0.302 
15.1 - 23.3 
EBC 
390 
0.158 - 0.253 
17.5 – 26.6 
AGC 
274 
0.189 - 0.337 
12.6 - 20.6 
4mg/kg + 2mg/kg qw 
MBC 
805 
0.213 - 0.259 
17.2 - 20.4 
EBC 
390 
0.184 - 0.221 
19.7 - 23.2 
 
trastuzumab washout 
 
trastuzumab washout period was assessed following q1w or q3w intravenous administration using the 
population PK model. The results of these simulations indicate that at least 95% of patients will reach 
concentrations that are < 1 mcg/mL (approximately 3% of the population predicted Cmin, ss, or about 
97% washout) by seven months. 
 
Circulating shed HER2 ECD 
 
The exploratory analyses of covariates with information in only a subset of patients suggested that 
patients with greater shed HER2-ECD levels had faster nonlinear clearance (lower Km) (P <  0.001). 
There was a correlation between shed antigen and SGOT/AST levels; part of the impact of shed 
antigen on clearance may have been explained by SGOT/AST levels. 
 
Baseline levels of the shed HER2-ECD observed in MGC patients were comparable to those in MBC 
and EBC patients, and no apparent impact on trastuzumab clearance was observed. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
There was no evidence of acute or multiple dose-related toxicity in studies of up to 6 months or 
reproductive toxicity in teratology, female fertility, or late gestational toxicity/placental transfer 
studies. trastuzumab is not genotoxic. A study of trehalose, a major formulation excipient, did not 
reveal any toxicities. 
 
No long-term animal studies have been performed to establish the carcinogenic potential of 
trastuzumab or to determine its effects on fertility in males. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
L-Histidine 
L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate 
α,α-trehalose dihydrate 
Polysorbate 20 (E 432)** 
 
** This medicine contains 0.6 mg or 1.7mg of polysorbate 20 in each 150 mg /vial or 420 mg/vial  

29 
 
which is equivalent to 0.6 mg/60 kg/7.4 mL or 1.7 mg/60 kg/20. 8 mL respectively Polysorbates may 
cause allergic reactions. 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
This medicinal product must not be mixed or diluted with other medicinal products except those 
mentioned under section 6.6. 
 
Do not dilute with glucose solutions since this causes aggregation of the protein. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
Unopened vial 
 
3 years 
 
Aseptic reconstitution and dilution: 
 
After aseptic reconstitution with sterile water for injection, the chemical and physical stability of the 
reconstituted solution was demonstrated for 48 hours at 2 °C – 8 °C. 
 
After aseptic dilution in polyvinylchloride polyethylene or polypropylene bags containing sodium 
chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution for injection, chemical and physical stability of trastuzumab have 
been                     demonstrated for up to 48 hours at 5 °C ± 3 °C and 30 °C ± 2 °C. 
 
From a microbiological point of view, the reconstituted solution and trastuzumab infusion solution 
should be used immediately. If not used immediately, in-use storage times and conditions prior to use 
are the responsibility of the user and would not normally be longer than 24 hours at 2 °C to 8 °C 
unless reconstitution and dilution have taken place under controlled and validated aseptic conditions. 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2° C – 8 °C). 
Keep the container in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
Do not freeze the reconstituted solution. 
 
For storage conditions of the opened medicinal product, see sections 6.3 and 6.6. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of the container 
 
Dazublys 150 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
One 15 mL clear glass type I vial with butyl rubber stopper laminated with a fluoro-resin film 
containing 150 mg of trastuzumab. 
 
Each carton contains one vial. 
 
Dazublys 420 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
One 50 mL clear glass type I vial with butyl rubber stopper laminated with a fluoro-resin film 
containing 420 mg of trastuzumab. 
 
Each carton contains one vial. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 

30 
 
Dazublys intravenous is provided in sterile, preservative-free, non-pyrogenic, single-use vials. 
 
Appropriate aseptic technique should be used for reconstitution and dilution procedures. Care must be 
taken to ensure the sterility of prepared solutions. Since the medicinal product does not contain any 
anti-microbial preservative or bacteriostatic agents, an aseptic technique must be observed. 
 
Aseptic preparation, handling, and storage: 
 
Aseptic handling must be ensured when preparing the infusion. Preparation should be: 
• 
performed under aseptic conditions by trained personnel in accordance with good practice rules, 
especially with respect to the aseptic preparation of parenteral products. 
• 
prepared in a laminar flow hood or biological safety cabinet using standard precautions for the 
safe handling of intravenous agents. 
• 
followed by adequate storage of the prepared solution for intravenous infusion to ensure 
maintenance of the aseptic conditions. 
 
Dazublys 150 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
Each 150 mg vial of Dazublys is reconstituted with 7.2 mL of sterile water for injection (not supplied). 
Use of other reconstitution solvents should be avoided.  
 
This yields a 7.4 mL solution for single-dose use, containing approximately 21 mg/mL trastuzumab at 
a pH of approximately 6.0. A volume overage of 4 % ensures that the labeled dose of 150 mg can be 
withdrawn from each vial. 
 
Dazublys 420 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
Each 420 mg vial of Dazublys is reconstituted with 20 mL of sterile water for injection (not supplied). 
Use of other reconstitution solvents should be avoided.  
 
This yields a 20.8 mL solution for single-dose use, containing approximately 21 mg/mL trastuzumab 
at a pH of approximately 6.0. A volume overage of 4 % ensures that the labeled dose of 420 mg can be 
withdrawn from each vial. 
 
Dazublys Vial 
Volume of sterile water for injections 
Final concentration 
150 mg Vial 
7.2 mL 
21 mg/mL 
420 mg Vial 
20 mL 
21 mg/mL 
 
Dazublys should be carefully handled during reconstitution. Causing excessive foaming during 
reconstitution or shaking the reconstituted solution may result in problems with the amount of 
trastuzumab that can be withdrawn from the vial. 
 
The reconstituted solution should not be frozen.  
 
Instructions for aseptic reconstitution: 
1) 
Using a sterile syringe, slowly inject appropriate volume (as noted above) of sterile water for 
injection in the vial containing the lyophilized trastuzumab, directing the stream into the lyophilized 
cake. 
 
2) Swirl the vial gently to aid reconstitution. DO NOT SHAKE! 
 
Slight foaming of the product upon reconstitution is not unusual. Allow the vial to stand undisturbed 
for approximately 5 minutes. The reconstituted trastuzumab results in a colorless to pale yellow 
transparent solution and should be essentially free of visible particulates. 
 
Instructions for aseptic dilution of the reconstituted solution 

31 
 
 
Determine the volume of the solution required: 
 
• 
based on a loading dose of 4 mg trastuzumab/kg body weight or a subsequent weekly dose   of 
2 mg trastuzumab/kg body weight: 
 
Volume (mL) = Body weight (kg) x dose (4 mg/kg for loading or 2 mg/kg for maintenance) 
21 (mg/mL, concentration of reconstituted solution) 
 
• 
based on a loading dose of 8 mg trastuzumab/kg body weight or a subsequent 3-weekly dose   of 6 
mg trastuzumab/kg body weight: 
 
Volume (mL) = Body weight (kg) x dose (8 mg/kg for loading or 6 mg/kg for maintenance) 
21 (mg/mL, concentration of reconstituted solution) 
 
The appropriate amount of solution should be withdrawn from the vial using a sterile needle and 
syringe and added to an infusion bag containing 250 mL of 0.9 % sodium chloride solution. Do not 
use with glucose-containing solutions (see section 6.2). The bag should be gently inverted to mix the 
solution in order to avoid foaming. 
 
Parenteral medicinal products should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discoloration 
prior to administration. 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
No incompatibilities between trastuzumab and polyvinylchloride polyethylene or polypropylene bags 
have been observed. Infusion Bags used for administering the trastuzumab finished product should be 
DEHP free. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
CuraTeQ Biologics s.r.o 
Trtinova 260/1, Cakovice, 
19600 Prague  
Czech Republic 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/25/1949/001 
EU/1/25/1949/002 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorization:  
30-June-2025 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the European Medicines 
Agency website: https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 

32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER(S) OF THE BIOLOGICAL 
ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) AND 
MANUFACTURER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH 
RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING 
SUPPLY AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH 
REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE 
USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 

33 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER(S) OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) AND 
MANUFACTURER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer(s) of the biological active substance(s) 
 
CuraTeQ Biologics Private Limited, 
Survey No. 77/78, Indrakaran Village, Kandi Mandal, SangaReddy District 
Hyderabad - 502329,  
India 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer(s) responsible for batch release 
 
APL Swift Services Malta Ltd. HF26, Hal Far Industrial Estate, 
Qasam Industrijali Hal Far,  
Birzebbugia, BBG 3000 
Malta 
 
The printed package leaflet of the medicinal product must state the name and address of the 
manufacturer responsible for the release of the concerned batch. 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal products are subject to restricted medical prescription (see Annex I: Summary of Product 
Characteristics, section 4.2). 
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union 
reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c (7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any 
subsequent updates published on the European medicines web portal. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk Management Plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorization holder (MAH) shall perform the pharmacovigilance activities detailed in 
the Pharmacovigilance Plan, as agreed in the RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the Marketing 
Authorisation and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• At the request of the European Medicines Agency. 
• Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of an 
important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimization) milestone being reached. 
 
 

34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 

35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 
 
 

36 
 
 
 
 
 
Dazublys 150 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion 
 trastuzumab 
 
 
 
Each vial contains 150 mg trastuzumab. After reconstitution, 1 ml concentrate contains 
21 mg of trastuzumab. To be reconstituted with 7.2 mL sterile water for injection. 
 
 
 
L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, L-histidine, polysorbate 20 (E 432), α,α-trehalose dihydrate. 
 
 
 
Powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
1 vial 
 
 
 
For intravenous infusion after reconstitution and dilution,  
Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
 
 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
Store in a refrigerator. 
Do not freeze the reconstituted solution. 
Keep the container in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
CARTON 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 

37 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discard unused portion. 
 
 
 
CuraTeQ Biologics s.r.o 
Trtinova 260/1, Cakovice, 
19600 Prague  
Czech Republic 
 
 
 
EU/1/25/1949/001 
 
 
 
Batch 
 
 
 
Medicinal products subject to medical prescription 
 
 
 
Do not shake after reconstitution. 
For single use only. 
 
 
 
Justification for not including Braille accepted. 
 
 
<2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included> 
 
 
 
PC  
SN  
NN 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 

38 
 
 
 
 
 
Dazublys 150 mg powder for concentrate  
trastuzumab. 
 
 
 
For intravenous use only 
 
 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
VIAL LABEL 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
6. 
OTHER 

39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dazublys 420 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion 
 trastuzumab 
 
 
 
Each vial contains 420 mg trastuzumab. After reconstitution, 1 ml concentrate contains 
21 mg of trastuzumab. To be reconstituted with 20 mL sterile water for injection. 
 
 
 
L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, L-histidine, polysorbate 20 (E 432), α,α-trehalose dihydrate. 
 
 
 
Powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
1 vial 
 
 
 
For intravenous infusion after reconstitution and dilution,  
Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
 
 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
Store in a refrigerator. 
Do not freeze the reconstituted solution. 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
CARTON 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 

40 
 
Keep the container in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
 
 
 
Discard unused portion. 
 
 
 
CuraTeQ Biologics s.r.o 
Trtinova 260/1, Cakovice, 
19600 Prague  
Czech Republic 
 
 
 
EU/1/25/1949/002 
 
 
 
Batch 
 
 
 
Medicinal products subject to medical prescription 
 
 
 
Do not shake after reconstitution. 
For single use only. 
 
 
 
Justification for not including Braille accepted. 
 
 
 
<2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included> 
 
 
 
PC  
SN  
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 

41 
 
NN 
 

42 
 
 
 
 
 
Dazublys 420 mg powder for concentrate  
 
trastuzumab. 
 
 
 
For intravenous use only 
 
 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
VIAL LABEL 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
6. 
OTHER 

43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET

44 
 
 
PACKAGE LEAFLET: INFORMATION FOR THE 
USER 
 
Dazublys 150 mg powder for concentrate for solution for 
infusion 
Dazublys 420 mg powder for concentrate for solution for 
infusion 
 
trastuzumab 
▼This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new safety 
information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 for how 
to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
 
• 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
• 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
• 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
In this leaflet: 
 
1. 
What is Dazublys, and what is it used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you are given Dazublys 
3. 
How Dazublys is given 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store Dazublys 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What is Dazublys, and what is it used for 
 
Dazublys contains the active substance trastuzumab, which is a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal 
antibodies attach to specific proteins or antigens. trastuzumab is designed to bind selectively to an 
antigen called human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). HER2 is found in large amounts on 
the surface of some cancer cells, where it stimulates their growth. When trastuzumab binds to HER2, 
it stops the growth of such cells and causes them to die. 
 
Your doctor may prescribe Dazublys for the treatment of breast and gastric cancer when: 
• 
You have early breast cancer with high levels of a protein called HER2. 
• 
You have metastatic breast cancer (breast cancer that has spread beyond the original tumor) 
with high levels of HER2. trastuzumab may be prescribed in combination with the 
chemotherapy medicine paclitaxel or docetaxel as the first treatment for metastatic breast 
cancer, or it may be prescribed alone if other treatments have proved unsuccessful. It is also 
used in combination with medicines called aromatase inhibitors in patients with high levels of 
HER2 and hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer (cancer that is sensitive to the 
presence of female sex hormones). 
• 
You have metastatic gastric cancer with high levels of HER2 when it is in combination with the 
other cancer medicines, capecitabine or 5-fluorouracil and cisplatin. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you are given Dazublys 
 
 Do not use Dazublys if: 

45 
 
 
• 
you are allergic to trastuzumab, to murine (mouse) proteins, or to any of the other 
ingredients of this medicine (listed in section 6). 
• 
you have severe breathing problems at rest due to your cancer or if you need oxygen treatment. 
 
Warnings and precautions 
 
Your doctor will closely supervise your therapy.  
 
Heart checks 
 
Treatment with Dazublys alone or with a taxane may affect the heart, especially if you have ever used 
an anthracycline (taxanes and anthracyclines are two other kinds of medicine used to treat cancer). 
The effects may be moderate to severe and could cause death. Therefore, your heart function will be 
checked before, during (every three months), and after (up to two to five years) treatment with 
Dazublys. If you develop any signs of heart failure (inadequate pumping of blood by the heart), your 
heart function may be checked more frequently (every six to eight weeks), you may receive treatment 
for heart failure, or you may have to stop Dazublys treatment. 
 
Talk to your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse before you are given Dazublys if: 
 
• 
you have had heart failure, coronary artery disease, heart valve disease (heart murmurs), high 
blood pressure, taking any high blood pressure medicine, or are currently taking any high blood 
pressure medicine. 
 
• 
you have ever had or are currently using a medicine called doxorubicin or epirubicin (medicines 
used to treat cancer). These medicines (or any other anthracyclines) can damage heart muscle 
and increase the risk of heart problems with Dazublys. 
 
• 
you suffer from breathlessness., especially if you are currently using a taxane. Dazublys can 
cause breathing difficulties, especially when it is first given. This could be more serious if you 
are already breathless. Very rarely, patients with severe breathing difficulties before treatment 
have died when they were given Dazublys. 
 
• 
you have ever had any other treatment for cancer. 
 
If you receive Dazublys with any other medicine to treat cancer, such as paclitaxel, docetaxel, an 
aromatase inhibitor, capecitabine, 5-fluorouracil, or cisplatin, you should also read the patient 
information leaflets for these products. 
 
Children and adolescents 
 
Dazublys is not recommended for anyone under the age of 18 years. 
 
Other medicines and Dazublys 
 
Tell your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse if you are taking, have recently taken, or may take any other 
medicines. 
 
It may take up to 7 months for Dazublys to be removed from the body. Therefore, you should tell your 
doctor, pharmacist, or nurse that you have had Dazublys if you start any new medicine within seven 
months after stopping treatment. 
 
Pregnancy 
 
 If you are pregnant, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask 
your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse for advice before taking this medicine. 

46 
 
 You should use effective contraception during treatment with Dazublys and for at 
least seven months after treatment has ended. 
 Your doctor will advise you of the risks and benefits of taking Dazublys during 
pregnancy. In rare cases, a reduction in the amount of (amniotic) fluid that surrounds the 
developing baby within the womb has been observed in pregnant women receiving 
trastuzumab. This condition may be harmful to your baby in the womb and has been 
associated with the lungs not developing fully, resulting in fetal death. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
Do not breastfeed your baby during Dazublys therapy and for seven months after the last dose of 
Dazublys, as this medication may pass to your baby through your breast milk. Ask your doctor or 
pharmacist for advice before taking any medicine. 
 
Driving and using machines 
 
Dazublys may affect your ability to drive a car or operate machines. If, during treatment, you 
experience symptoms such as dizziness, sleepiness, chills, or fever, you should not drive or use 
machines until these symptoms disappear. 
 
Sodium 
 
Dazublys contains less than 1 mmol of sodium (23 mg) per dose, that is to say essentially sodium-free. 
 
Polysorbate 20 
 
This medicine contains 0.6 mg or 1.7 mg of polysorbate 20 in each 150 mg/vial or 420 mg/vial  which 
is equivalent to 0.6 mg/60 kg/7.4 mL or 1.7 mg/60 kg/20.8 mL, respectively. Polysorbates may cause 
allergic reactions. 
 
 
3. 
How Dazublys is given 
 
Before starting the treatment, your doctor will determine the amount of HER2 in your tumor. Only 
patients with a large amount of HER2 will be treated with Dazublys. Dazublys should only be given 
by a doctor or nurse. Your doctor will prescribe a dose and treatment regimen that is right for you. The 
dose of Dazublys depends on your body weight. 
 
The first dose of your treatment is given over 90 minutes, and you will be observed by a health 
professional while it is being given in case you have any side effects. If the first dose is well tolerated, 
the next doses may be given over 30 minutes (see section 2 under “Warnings and precautions”). The 
number of infusions you receive will depend on how you respond to the treatment. Your doctor will 
discuss this with you. 
 
Dazublys is given as an infusion into a vein (intravenous infusion, drip); this intravenous formulation 
is not for subcutaneous use and should be given as an intravenous infusion only.  
 
In order to prevent medication errors, it is important to check the vial labels to ensure that the 
medicine is prepared and given is Dazublys (trastuzumab) and not another trastuzumab-containing 
product (e.g., trastuzumab emtansine or trastuzumab deruxtecan). 
 
For early breast cancer, metastatic breast cancer, and metastatic gastric cancer, Dazublys is given every 
three weeks. Dazublys may also be given once a week for metastatic breast cancer. 
 
If you stop using Dazublys 
 
Do not stop using this medicine without talking to your doctor first. All doses should be taken at the 

47 
 
right time every week or every three weeks (depending on your dosing schedule). This helps your 
medicine work as well as it can. 
 
It may take up to 7 months for Dazublys to be removed from your body. Therefore, your doctor may 
decide to continue to check your heart functions even after you finish treatment. 
 
If you have any further questions about the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, trastuzumab can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them.  
Some of these side effects may be serious and may lead to hospitalization. 
 
During a Dazublys infusion, chills, fever, and other flu-like symptoms may occur. These are very 
common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people).  
Other infusion-related symptoms are feeling sick (nausea), vomiting, pain, increased muscle tension 
and shaking, headache, dizziness, breathing difficulties, high or low blood pressure, heart rhythm 
disturbances (palpitations, heart fluttering, or irregular heartbeat), swelling of the face and lips, rash and 
feeling tired.  
Some of these symptoms can be serious, and some patients have died (see section 2 under “Warnings 
and precautions”). 
 
These effects mainly occur with the first intravenous infusion (“drip” into your vein) and during the 
first few hours after the start of the infusion. They are usually temporary. You will be observed by a 
healthcare professional during the infusion and for at least six hours after the start of the first infusion 
and for two hours after the start of other infusions. If you develop a reaction, they will slow down or 
stop the infusion and may give you treatment to counteract the side effects. The infusion may be 
continued after the symptoms improve. 
 
Occasionally, symptoms start later than six hours after the infusion begins. If this happens to you, 
contact your doctor immediately. Sometimes, symptoms may improve and then get worse later. 
 
Serious side effects 
 
Other side effects can occur at any time during treatment with Dazublys, not just related to an 
infusion.  
 
Tell a doctor or nurse straight away if you notice any of the following side effects: 
• 
Heart problems can sometimes occur during treatment and occasionally after treatment has 
stopped and can be serious. They include weakening of the heart muscle, possibly leading to heart 
failure, inflammation of the lining around the heart, and heart rhythm disturbances. This can lead 
to symptoms such as breathlessness (including breathlessness at night), cough, fluid retention 
(swelling) in the legs or arms, and palpitations (heart fluttering or irregular heartbeat) (see section 
2. Heart checks). 
 
Your doctor will monitor your heart regularly during and after treatment, but you should tell your 
doctor immediately if you notice any of the above symptoms. 
 
• 
Tumour lysis syndrome (a group of metabolic complications occurring after cancer treatment 
characterized by high blood levels of potassium and phosphate and low blood levels of calcium). 
Symptoms may include kidney problems (weakness, shortness of breath, fatigue, and confusion), 
heart problems (fluttering of the heart or a faster or slower heartbeat), seizures, vomiting or 
diarrhea, and tingling in the mouth, hands, or feet. 
 
If you experience any of the above symptoms when your treatment with Dazublys has finished, you 
should see your doctor and tell them that you have previously been treated with Dazublys. 

48 
 
 
Very common side effects of trastuzumab: may affect more than 1 in 10 people 
• 
infections 
• 
diarrhoea 
• 
constipation 
• 
heartburn (dyspepsia) 
• 
fatigue 
• 
skin rashes 
• 
chest pain 
• 
abdominal pain 
• 
joint pain 
• 
low counts of red blood cells and white blood cells (which help fight infection), sometimes with 
fever 
• 
muscle pain 
• 
conjunctivitis 
• 
watery eyes 
• 
nose bleeds 
• 
runny nose 
• 
hair loss 
• 
tremor 
• 
hot flush 
• 
dizziness 
• 
nail disorders 
• 
weight loss 
• 
loss of appetite 
• 
inability to sleep (insomnia) 
• 
altered taste 
• 
low platelet count 
• 
bruising 
• 
numbness or tingling of the fingers and toes, which occasionally may extend to the rest of the 
limb 
• 
redness, swelling, or sores in your mouth and/or throat 
• 
pain, swelling, redness, or tingling of hands and/or feet 
• 
breathlessness 
• 
headache 
• 
cough 
• 
vomiting 
• 
nausea 
 
Common side effects of Trastuzumab: may affect up to 1 in 10 people 
• 
allergic reactions 
• 
dry mouth and skin 
• 
throat infections 
• 
dry eyes 
• 
bladder and skin infections 
• 
sweating 
• 
inflammation of the breast 
• 
feeling weak and unwell 
• 
inflammation of the liver 
• 
anxiety 
• 
kidney disorders 
• 
depression 
• 
increased muscle tone or tension (hypertonia) 
• 
asthma 
• 
infection of the lungs 
• 
pain in the arms and/or legs 
• 
lung disorders 
• 
itchy rash 
• 
back pain 
• 
sleepiness (somnolence) 
• 
neck pain 
• 
haemorrhoids 
• 
bone pain 
• 
itchiness 
• 
acne 
• 
leg cramps 

49 
 
 
Uncommon side effects of trastuzumab: may affect up to 1 in 100 people: 
• 
deafness 
• 
bumpy rash 
• 
wheezing 
• 
inflammation or scarring of the lungs 
 
Rare side effects of trastuzumab: may affect up to 1 in 1000 people 
• 
jaundice 
• 
anaphylactic reactions  
 
Other side effects that have been reported with trastuzumab use: frequency cannot be estimated 
from the available data 
• 
abnormal or impaired blood clotting 
• 
high potassium levels 
• 
swelling or bleeding at the back of the eyes 
• 
shock 
• 
abnormal heart rhythm 
• 
respiratory distress 
• 
respiratory failure 
• 
acute accumulation of fluid in the lungs 
• 
acute narrowing of the airways 
• 
abnormally low oxygen levels in the blood 
• 
difficulty in breathing when lying flat 
• 
liver damage 
• 
swelling of the face, lips and throat 
• 
kidney failure 
• 
abnormally low levels of fluid around the baby in the womb 
• 
failure of the lungs of the baby to develop in the womb 
• 
abnormal development of the kidneys of the baby in the womb 
 
Some of the side effects you experience may be due to your underlying cancer. If you receive 
Dazublys in combination with chemotherapy, some of them may also be due to the chemotherapy. 
 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse. 
 
Reporting of side effects 
 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects, you can provide more information on the safety 
of this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store Dazublys 
 
Dazublys will be stored by the health professionals at the hospital or clinic. 
 
• 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
• 
Do not use this medicine after the expiration date, which is stated on the outer carton and on the 
vial label after EXP. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
• 
The unopened vial should be stored in a refrigerator (2 °C – 8 °C). 
• 
Do not freeze the reconstituted solution. 
• 
Infusion solutions should be used immediately after dilution. If not used immediately, in-use              
storage times and conditions prior to use are the responsibility of the user and would not normally 

50 
 
be longer than 48 hours at 2 °C – 8 °C. 
• 
Keep the container in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
• 
Do not use Dazublys if you notice any particulate matter or discoloration prior to administration. 
• 
Medicines should not be disposed of via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist 
how to dispose of medicines that are no longer required. These measures will help to protect the 
environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information  
What Dazublys contains 
• The active substance is trastuzumab. One vial contains either: 
• 150 mg trastuzumab that has to be dissolved in 7.2 mL of sterile water for injections, or  
420 mg trastuzumab that has to be dissolved in 20 mL of sterile water for injections. The 
resulting solution contains approximately 21 mg/mL trastuzumab 
 
• The other ingredient(s) are L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, L-histidine, α,α-trehalose 
dihydrate, and polysorbate 20 (E 432). 
 
 
What trastuzumab looks like and the contents of the pack 
 
trastuzumab is a powder for concentration solution for intravenous infusion, which is supplied in a 
glass vial with a rubber stopper containing 150 mg or 420 mg of trastuzumab. The powder is a white 
to pale yellow pellet. Each carton contains one vial of powder. 
 
Marketing Authorization Holder 
 
CuraTeQ Biologics s.r.o 
Trtinova 260/1, Cakovice, 
19600 Prague 
Czech Republic 
 
Manufacturer  
 
APL Swift Services Malta Ltd. 
HF26, Hal Far Industrial Estate, 
Qasam Industrijali Hal Far,  
Birzebbugia, BBG 3000 
Malta 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder. 
 
België/Belgique/Belgien 
Aurobindo NV/SA 
Tél/Tel: +32 24753540 
Lietuva 
UAB Orion Pharma  
Tel: +370 5 276 9499 
България 
Curateq Biologics s.r.o. 
Phone: +420220990139 
info@curateqbiologics.eu 
Luxembourg/Luxemburg 
Aurobindo NV/SA 
Tel/Tél: +32 24753540 
Česká republika 
Curateq Biologics s.r.o. 
Phone: +420220990139 
info@curateqbiologics.eu 
Magyarország 
Orion Pharma Kft. 
Tel.: +36 1 239 9095 

51 
 
Danmark 
Orion Pharma A/S 
Tlf.: +45 8614 0000 
Malta 
Curateq Biologics s.r.o. 
Tel: +420220990139 
info@curateqbiologics.eu 
Deutschland 
PUREN Pharma GmbH Co. KG 
Tel: + 49 895589090 
Nederland 
Aurobindo Pharma B.V. 
Tel: +31 35 542 99 33 
Eesti 
Orion Pharma Eesti OÜ 
Tel: +372 66 44 550 
 
Norge 
Orion Pharma AS  
Tlf: +47 4000 42 10 
Ελλάδα 
Curateq Biologics s.r.o. 
Τηλ: +420220990139 
info@curateqbiologics.eu 
Österreich 
Orion Pharma GmbH 
Tel: +49 40 899 6890 
España 
Aurovitas Spain, S.A.U 
Tel: +34 91 630 86 45 
 
Polska 
Aurovitas Pharma Polska  
Sp. z o.o. 
Tel.: +48 22 311 20 00 
France 
ARROW GENERIQUES 
Tél: + 33 4 72 72 60 72 
Portugal 
Generis Farmacutica S. A 
Tel: +351 21 4967120 
Hrvatska 
Curateq Biologics s.r.o. 
Tel: +420220990139 
info@curateqbiologics.eu 
România 
Curateq Biologics s.r.o. 
Tel: +420220990139 
info@curateqbiologics.eu 
Ireland 
Curateq Biologics s.r.o. 
Tel: +420220990139 
info@curateqbiologics.eu 
Slovenija 
Orion Pharma d.o.o. 
Tel: +386 (0) 1 600 8015 
Ísland 
Vistor hf. 
Sími: +354 535 7000 
Slovenská republika 
Curateq Biologics s.r.o. 
Tel: +420220990139 
info@curateqbiologics.eu 
Italia 
Aurobindo Pharma (Italia) S.r.l. 
Tel: +39 02 9639 2601 
Suomi/Finland 
Orion Corporation  
Puh/Tel: +358 10 4261 
Κύπρος 
Curateq Biologics s.r.o. 
Τηλ:: +420220990139 
info@curateqbiologics.eu 
Sverige 
Orion Pharma AB 
Tel: + 46 8 623 6440 
Latvija 
Orion Corporation 
Orion Pharma pārstāvniecība 
Tel: +371 20028332 
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in 04/2026 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency website: 
http://www.ema.europa.eu.This leaflet is available in all EU/EEA languages on the European 
Medicines Agency website. 
 
The following information is intended for medical or healthcare professionals only  
 
Dazublys intravenous is provided in sterile, preservative-free, non-pyrogenic, single use vials. 
In order to prevent medication errors, it is important to check the vial labels to ensure that the 

52 
 
medicine being prepared and given is Dazublys and not another trastuzumab-containing product (e.g. 
trastuzumab emtansine or trastuzumab deruxtecan). 
 
Always keep this medicine in the closed original pack at a temperature of 2 ºC – 8 ºC in a refrigerator. 
 
Appropriate aseptic technique should be used for reconstitution and dilution procedures. Care must be 
taken to ensure the sterility of prepared solutions. Since the medicinal product does not contain any 
anti-microbial preservative or bacteriostatic agents, aseptic technique must be observed. 
 
A vial of Dazublys aseptically reconstituted with sterile water for injections (not supplied) is 
chemically and physically stable for 48 hours at 2 ºC – 8 ºC after reconstitution and must not be frozen. 
 
After aseptic dilution in polyvinylchloride polyethylene or polypropylene bags containing sodium 
chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution for injection, chemical and physical stability of Dazublys has been  
demonstrated for up to 48 hours at 5 °C ± 3 °C and 30 °C ± 2 °C. 
 
From a microbiological point of view, the reconstituted solution and trastuzumab infusion solution 
should be used immediately. If not used immediately, in-use storage times and conditions prior to use 
are the responsibility of the user and would not normally be longer than 24 hours at 2 °C to 8 °C, 
unless reconstitution and dilution have taken place under controlled and validated aseptic conditions. 
 
Aseptic preparation, handling, and storage: 
 
Aseptic handling must be ensured when preparing the infusion. Preparation should be: 
 performed under aseptic conditions by trained personnel in accordance with good practice  rules 
especially with respect to the aseptic preparation of parenteral products. 
 prepared in a laminar flow hood or biological safety cabinet using standard precautions for the safe 
handling of intravenous agents. 
 followed by adequate storage of the prepared solution for intravenous infusion to ensure 
maintenance of the aseptic conditions. 
 
Dazublys 150 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
Each 150 mg vial of Dazublys is reconstituted with 7.2 mL of water for injections (not supplied). Use 
of other  reconstitution solvents should be avoided. This yields a 7.4 mL solution for single-dose use, 
containing approximately 21 mg/mL trastuzumab. A volume overage of 4 % ensures that the labelled 
dose of 150 mg can be withdrawn from each vial. 
 
Dazublys 420 mg powder for concentrate for solution for infusion. 
Each 420 mg vial of Dazublys is reconstituted with 20 mL of water for injections (not supplied). Use 
of other  reconstitution solvents should be avoided. This yields a 20.8 mL solution for single-dose use, 
containing approximately 21 mg/mL trastuzumab. A volume overage of 4 % ensures that the labelled 
dose of 420 mg can be withdrawn from each vial. 
 
Dazublys should be carefully handled during reconstitution. Causing excessive foaming during 
reconstitution or shaking the reconstituted trastuzumab may result in problems with the amount of 
trastuzumab that can be withdrawn from the vial. 
 
Instructions for reconstitution: 
 
1) 
Using a sterile syringe, slowly inject appropriate volume (as noted above)of water for injections 
in the vial containing the  lyophilized Dazublys, directing the stream into the lyophilized cake. 
2) Swirl vial gently to aid reconstitution. DO NOT SHAKE! 
 
Slight foaming of the product upon reconstitution is not unusual. Allow the vial to stand undisturbed 
for approximately 5 minutes. The reconstituted Dazublys results in a colourless to pale yellow 
transparent solution and should be essentially free of visible particulates. 
 

53 
 
Determine the volume of the solution required: 
• 
based on a loading dose of 4 mg trastuzumab/kg body weight, or a subsequent weekly dose  of 
2 mg trastuzumab/kg body weight: 
 
 
Volume (mL) = Body weight (kg) x dose (4 mg/kg for loading or 2 mg/kg for maintenance) 
21 (mg/mL, concentration of reconstituted solution) 
 
• 
based on a loading dose of 8 mg trastuzumab/kg body weight, or a subsequent 3-weekly dose  of 
6 mg trastuzumab/kg body weight: 
 
Volume (mL) = Body weight (kg) x dose (8 mg/kg for loading or 6 mg/kg for maintenance) 
21 (mg/mL, concentration of reconstituted solution) 
 
The appropriate amount of solution should be withdrawn from the vial using a sterile needle and 
syringe and added to a polyvinylchloride polyethylene or polypropylene bags containing 250 mL of 
0.9% sodium chloride solution. Do not use with glucose-containing solutions. The bag should be 
gently inverted to mix the solution to avoid foaming. Parenteral solutions should be inspected visually 
for particulates and discoloration prior to administration. Once the infusion is prepared it should be 
administered immediately. If diluted aseptically, it may be stored for 48 hours at 5 °C ± 3 °C and 
30 °C ± 2 °C. 
