1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I  
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS  
 
 

2 
 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen. 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe. 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
One 0.5 mL pre-filled pen contains 50 mg of golimumab*. 
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
One 0.5 mL pre-filled syringe contains 50 mg of golimumab*. 
 
* 
Human IgG1κ monoclonal antibody produced by a murine hybridoma cell line with 
recombinant DNA technology. 
 
Excipient with known effect 
Each pre-filled pen contains 20.5 mg sorbitol per 50 mg dose. 
Each pre-filled syringe contains 20.5 mg sorbitol per 50 mg dose. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled pen (injection),  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled syringe (injection) 
 
The solution is clear to slightly opalescent, colourless to light yellow. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
Gobivaz, in combination with methotrexate (MTX), is indicated for: 
• 
the treatment of moderate to severe, active rheumatoid arthritis in adults when the response to 
disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug (DMARD) therapy including MTX has been inadequate. 
• 
the treatment of severe, active and progressive rheumatoid arthritis in adults not previously 
treated with MTX. 
 
Golimumab, in combination with MTX, has been shown to reduce the rate of progression of joint 
damage as measured by X-ray and to improve physical function. 
 
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis (pJIA) 
GOBIVAZ in combination with MTX is indicated for the treatment of polyarticular juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis in children 2 years of age and older, who have responded inadequately to previous therapy 
with MTX. 

3 
 
 
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) 
GOBIVAZ, alone or in combination with MTX, is indicated for the treatment of active and 
progressive psoriatic arthritis in adult patients when the response to previous DMARD therapy has 
been inadequate. Golimumab has been shown to reduce the rate of progression of peripheral joint 
damage as measured by X-ray in patients with polyarticular symmetrical subtypes of the disease (see 
section 5.1) and to improve physical function. 
 
Axial spondyloarthritis 
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) 
GOBIVAZ is indicated for the treatment of severe, active ankylosing spondylitis in adults who have 
responded inadequately to conventional therapy. 
 
Non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis (nr-Axial SpA) 
GOBIVAZ is indicated for the treatment of adults with severe, active non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis with objective signs of inflammation as indicated by elevated C-reactive protein 
(CRP) and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evidence, who have had an inadequate response to, 
or are intolerant to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). 
 
Ulcerative colitis (UC) 
GOBIVAZ is indicated for treatment of moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis in adult 
patients who have had an inadequate response to conventional therapy including corticosteroids and 6-
mercaptopurine (6-MP) or azathioprine (AZA), or who are intolerant to or have medical 
contraindications for such therapies. 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Treatment is to be initiated and supervised by qualified physicians experienced in the diagnosis and 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, 
ankylosing spondylitis, non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, or ulcerative colitis. Patients treated 
with GOBIVAZ should be given the Patient Reminder Card. 
 
Posology 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg given once a month, on the same date each month. GOBIVAZ should be given 
concomitantly with MTX. 
 
Psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, or non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg given once a month, on the same date each month. 
 
For all of the above indications, available data suggest that clinical response is usually achieved within 
12 to 14 weeks of treatment (after 3-4 doses). Continued therapy should be reconsidered in patients 
who show no evidence of therapeutic benefit within this time period. 
 
Patients with body weight greater than 100 kg 
For all of the above indications, in patients with RA, PsA, AS, or nr-Axial SpA with a body weight of 
more than 100 kg who do not achieve an adequate clinical response after 3 or 4 doses, increasing the 
dose of golimumab to 100 mg once a month may be considered, taking into account the increased risk 
of certain serious adverse reactions with the 100 mg dose compared with the 50 mg dose 
(see section 4.8). Continued therapy should be reconsidered in patients who show no evidence of 
therapeutic benefit after receiving 3 to 4 additional doses of 100 mg. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
Patients with body weight less than 80 kg 
GOBIVAZ given as an initial dose of 200 mg, followed by 100 mg at week 2. Patients who have an 
adequate response should receive 50 mg at week 6 and every 4 weeks thereafter. Patients who have an 

4 
 
inadequate response may benefit from continuing with 100 mg at week 6 and every 4 weeks thereafter 
(see section 5.1). 
 
Patients with body weight greater than or equal to 80 kg 
GOBIVAZ given as an initial dose of 200 mg, followed by 100 mg at week 2, then 100 mg every 4 
weeks, thereafter (see section 5.1). 
 
During maintenance treatment, corticosteroids may be tapered in accordance with clinical practice 
guidelines. 
 
Available data suggest that clinical response is usually achieved within 12-14 weeks of treatment 
(after 4 doses). Continued therapy should be reconsidered in patients who show no evidence of 
therapeutic benefit within this time period. 
 
Missed dose 
If a patient forgets to inject GOBIVAZ on the planned date, the forgotten dose should be injected as 
soon as the patient remembers. Patients should be instructed not to inject a double dose to make up for 
the forgotten dose. 
 
The next dose should be administered based on the following guidance: 
• 
if the dose is less than 2 weeks late, the patient should inject the forgotten dose and stay on the 
original schedule. 
• 
if the dose is more than 2 weeks late, the patient should inject the forgotten dose and a new 
schedule should be established from the date of this injection. 
 
Special populations 
Elderly (≥ 65 years) 
No dose adjustment is required in the elderly. 
 
Renal and hepatic impairment 
Golimumab has not been studied in these patient populations. No dose recommendations can be made. 
 
Paediatric population 
The safety and efficacy of GOBIVAZ in patients aged less than 18 for indications other than pJIA 
have not been established. 
 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg administered once a month, on the same date each month, for children with a body 
weight of at least 40 kg.  
 
There is no dosage form for GOBIVAZ in pre-filled pen that allows for a 45 mg/0.45 mL available for 
administration to children with polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis weighing less than 40 kg. 
Thus, it is not possible to administer GOBIVAZ to patients that require a 45 mg dose. If an 45 mg/0.45 
mL dose is required, another golimumab product should be used instead.  
 
Available data suggest that clinical response is usually achieved within 12 to 14 weeks of treatment 
(after 3-4 doses). Continued therapy should be reconsidered in children who show no evidence of 
therapeutic benefit within this time period. 
 
Method of administration 
GOBIVAZ is for subcutaneous use. After proper training in subcutaneous injection technique, patients 
may self-inject if their physician determines that this is appropriate, with medical follow-up as 
necessary. Patients should be instructed to inject the full amount of GOBIVAZ according to the 
comprehensive instructions for use provided in the package leaflet. If multiple injections are required, 
the injections should be administered at different sites on the body. 
 
For administration instructions, see section 6.6. 

5 
 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
Active tuberculosis (TB) or other severe infections such as sepsis, and opportunistic infections (see 
section 4.4). 
 
Moderate or severe heart failure (NYHA class III/IV) (see section 4.4). 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the name and the batch number 
of the administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Infections 
Patients must be monitored closely for infections including tuberculosis before, during and after 
treatment with golimumab. Because the elimination of golimumab may take up to 5 months, 
monitoring should be continued throughout this period. Further treatment with golimumab must not be 
given if a patient develops a serious infection or sepsis (see section 4.3). 
 
Golimumab should not be given to patients with a clinically important, active infection. Caution 
should be exercised when considering the use of golimumab in patients with a chronic infection or a 
history of recurrent infection. Patients should be advised of, and avoid exposure to, potential risk 
factors for infection as appropriate. 
 
Patients taking TNF-blockers are more susceptible to serious infections. 
Bacterial (including sepsis and pneumonia), mycobacterial (including TB), invasive fungal and 
opportunistic infections, including fatalities, have been reported in patients receiving golimumab. 
Some of these serious infections have occurred in patients on concomitant immunosuppressive therapy 
that, in addition to their underlying disease, could predispose them to infections. Patients who develop 
a new infection while undergoing treatment with golimumab should be monitored closely and undergo 
a complete diagnostic evaluation. Administration of golimumab should be discontinued if a patient 
develops a new serious infection or sepsis, and appropriate antimicrobial or antifungal therapy should 
be initiated until the infection is controlled. 
 
For patients who have resided in or travelled to regions where invasive fungal infections such as 
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, or blastomycosis are endemic, the benefits and risks of 
golimumab treatment should be carefully considered before initiation of golimumab therapy. In at-risk 
patients treated with golimumab, an invasive fungal infection should be suspected if they develop a 
serious systemic illness. Diagnosis and administration of empiric antifungal therapy in these patients 
should be made in consultation with a physician with expertise in the care of patients with invasive 
fungal infections, if feasible. 
 
Tuberculosis 
There have been reports of tuberculosis in patients receiving golimumab. It should be noted that in the 
majority of these reports, tuberculosis was extrapulmonary presenting as either local or disseminated 
disease. 
 
Before starting treatment with golimumab, all patients must be evaluated for both active and inactive 
(‘latent’) tuberculosis. This evaluation should include a detailed medical history with personal history 
of tuberculosis or possible previous contact with tuberculosis and previous and/or current 
immunosuppressive therapy. Appropriate screening tests, i.e. tuberculin skin or blood test and chest 
X-ray, should be performed in all patients (local recommendations may apply). It is recommended that 
the conduct of these tests should be recorded in the Patient Reminder Card. Prescribers are reminded 

6 
 
of the risk of false negative tuberculin skin test results, especially in patients who are severely ill or 
immunocompromised. 
 
If active tuberculosis is diagnosed, golimumab therapy must not be initiated (see section 4.3). 
 
If latent tuberculosis is suspected, a physician with expertise in the treatment of tuberculosis should be 
consulted. In all situations described below, the benefit/risk balance of golimumab therapy should be 
very carefully considered.  
 
If inactive (‘latent’) tuberculosis is diagnosed, treatment for latent tuberculosis must be started with 
anti-tuberculosis therapy before the initiation of golimumab, and in accordance with local 
recommendations. 
 
In patients who have several or significant risk factors for tuberculosis and have a negative test for 
latent tuberculosis, anti-tuberculosis therapy should be considered before the initiation of golimumab. 
Use of anti-tuberculosis therapy should also be considered before the initiation of golimumab in 
patients with a past history of latent or active tuberculosis in whom an adequate course of treatment 
cannot be confirmed. 
 
Cases of active tuberculosis have occurred in patients treated with golimumab during and after 
treatment for latent tuberculosis. Patients receiving golimumab should be monitored closely for signs 
and symptoms of active tuberculosis, including patients who tested negative for latent tuberculosis, 
patients who are on treatment for latent tuberculosis, or patients who were previously treated for 
tuberculosis infection. 
 
All patients should be informed to seek medical advice if signs/symptoms suggestive of tuberculosis 
(e.g. persistent cough, wasting/weight loss, low-grade fever) appear during or after golimumab 
treatment. 
 
Hepatitis B virus reactivation 
Reactivation of hepatitis B has occurred in patients receiving a TNF-antagonist including golimumab, 
who are chronic carriers of this virus (i.e. surface antigen positive). Some cases have had fatal 
outcome. 
 
Patients should be tested for HBV infection before initiating treatment with golimumab. For patients 
who test positive for HBV infection, consultation with a physician with expertise in the treatment of 
hepatitis B is recommended. 
 
Carriers of HBV who require treatment with golimumab should be closely monitored for signs and 
symptoms of active HBV infection throughout therapy and for several months following termination 
of therapy. Adequate data of treating patients who are carriers of HBV with anti-viral therapy in 
conjunction with TNF-antagonist therapy to prevent HBV reactivation are not available. In patients 
who develop HBV reactivation, golimumab should be stopped and effective anti-viral therapy with 
appropriate supportive treatment should be initiated. 
 
Malignancies and lymphoproliferative disorders 
The potential role of TNF-blocking therapy in the development of malignancies is not known. Based 
on the current knowledge, a possible risk for the development of lymphomas, leukaemia or other 
malignancies in patients treated with a TNF-antagonist cannot be excluded. Caution should be 
exercised when considering TNF-blocking therapy for patients with a history of malignancy or when 
considering continuing treatment in patients who develop malignancy. 
 
Paediatric malignancy 
Malignancies, some fatal, have been reported among children, adolescents and young adults (up to 22 
years of age) treated with TNF-blocking agents (initiation of therapy ≤ 18 years of age) in the post 
marketing setting. Approximately half the cases were lymphomas. The other cases represented a 
variety of different malignancies and included rare malignancies usually associated with 

7 
 
immunosuppression. A risk for the development of malignancies in children and adolescents treated 
with TNF-blockers cannot be excluded. 
 
Lymphoma and leukaemia 
In the controlled portions of clinical trials of all the TNF-blocking agents including golimumab, more 
cases of lymphoma have been observed among patients receiving anti-TNF treatment compared with 
control patients. During the golimumab Phase IIb and Phase III clinical trials in RA, PsA and AS, the 
incidence of lymphoma in golimumab-treated patients was higher than expected in the general 
population. Cases of leukaemia have been reported in patients treated with golimumab. There is an 
increased background risk for lymphoma and leukaemia in rheumatoid arthritis patients with 
long-standing, highly active, inflammatory disease, which complicates risk estimation. 
 
Rare post-marketing cases of hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma (HSTCL) have been reported in patients 
treated with other TNF-blocking agents (see section 4.8). This rare type of T-cell lymphoma has a very 
aggressive disease course and is usually fatal. The majority of cases have occurred in adolescent and 
young adult males with nearly all on concomitant treatment with azathioprine (AZA) or 
6-mercaptopurine (6–MP) for inflammatory bowel disease. The potential risk with the combination of 
AZA or 6-MP and golimumab should be carefully considered. A risk for the development for 
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma in patients treated with TNF-blockers cannot be excluded. 
 
Malignancies other than lymphoma 
In the controlled portions of the golimumab Phase IIb and Phase III clinical trials in RA, PsA, AS, and 
UC, the incidence of non-lymphoma malignancies (excluding non-melanoma skin cancer) was similar 
between the golimumab and the control groups. 
 
Colon dysplasia/carcinoma 
It is not known if golimumab treatment influences the risk for developing dysplasia or colon cancer. 
All patients with ulcerative colitis who are at increased risk for dysplasia or colon carcinoma (for 
example, patients with long-standing ulcerative colitis or primary sclerosing cholangitis), or who had a 
prior history of dysplasia or colon carcinoma should be screened for dysplasia at regular intervals 
before therapy and throughout their disease course. This evaluation should include colonoscopy and 
biopsies per local recommendations. In patients with newly diagnosed dysplasia treated with 
golimumab, the risks and benefits to the individual patient must be carefully reviewed and 
consideration should be given to whether therapy should be continued. 
 
In an exploratory clinical trial evaluating the use of golimumab in patients with severe persistent 
asthma, more malignancies were reported in patients treated with golimumab compared with control 
patients (see section 4.8). The significance of this finding is unknown. 
 
In an exploratory clinical trial evaluating the use of another anti-TNF agent, infliximab, in patients 
with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), more malignancies, mostly in 
the lung or head and neck, were reported in infliximab-treated patients compared with control patients. 
All patients had a history of heavy smoking. Therefore, caution should be exercised when using any 
TNF-antagonist in COPD patients, as well as in patients with an increased risk of malignancy due to 
heavy smoking. 
 
Skin cancers 
Melanoma and Merkel cell carcinoma have been reported in patients treated with TNF-blocking 
agents, including golimumab (see section 4.8). Periodic skin examination is recommended, 
particularly for patients with risk factors for skin cancer. 
 
Congestive heart failure (CHF) 
Cases of worsening congestive heart failure (CHF) and new onset CHF have been reported with TNF 
blockers, including golimumab. Some cases had a fatal outcome. In a clinical trial with another 
TNF-antagonist worsening congestive heart failure and increased mortality due to CHF have been 
observed. Golimumab has not been studied in patients with CHF. Golimumab should be used with 
caution in patients with mild heart failure (NYHA class I/II). Patients should be closely monitored and 

8 
 
golimumab must be discontinued in patients who develop new or worsening symptoms of heart failure 
(see section 4.3). 
 
Neurological events 
Use of TNF-blocking agents, including golimumab, has been associated with cases of new onset or 
exacerbation of clinical symptoms and/or radiographic evidence of central nervous system 
demyelinating disorders, including multiple sclerosis and peripheral demyelinating disorders. In 
patients with pre-existing or recent onset of demyelinating disorders, the benefits and risks of 
anti-TNF treatment should be carefully considered before initiation of golimumab therapy. 
Discontinuation of golimumab should be considered if these disorders develop (see section 4.8). 
 
Surgery 
There is limited safety experience of golimumab treatment in patients who have undergone surgical 
procedures, including arthroplasty. The long half-life should be taken into consideration if a surgical 
procedure is planned. A patient who requires surgery while on golimumab should be closely 
monitored for infections, and appropriate actions should be taken. 
 
Immunosuppression 
The possibility exists for TNF-blocking agents, including golimumab, to affect host defences against 
infections and malignancies since TNF mediates inflammation and modulates cellular immune 
responses. 
 
Autoimmune processes 
The relative deficiency of TNFα caused by anti-TNF therapy may result in the initiation of an 
autoimmune process. If a patient develops symptoms suggestive of a lupus-like syndrome following 
treatment with golimumab and is positive for antibodies against double-stranded DNA, treatment with 
golimumab should be discontinued (see section 4.8). 
 
Haematologic reactions 
There have been reports of pancytopenia, leukopenia, neutropenia, agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia, 
and thrombocytopenia in patients receiving TNF-blockers, including golimumab. All patients should 
be advised to seek immediate medical attention if they develop signs and symptoms suggestive of 
blood dyscrasias (e.g. persistent fever, bruising, bleeding, pallor). Discontinuation of golimumab 
therapy should be considered in patients with confirmed significant haematologic abnormalities. 
 
Concurrent administration of TNF-antagonists and anakinra 
Serious infections and neutropenia were seen in clinical studies with concurrent use of anakinra and 
another TNF-blocking agent, etanercept, with no added clinical benefit. Because of the nature of the 
adverse events seen with this combination therapy, similar toxicities may also result from the 
combination of anakinra and other TNF-blocking agents. The combination of golimumab and anakinra 
is not recommended. 
 
Concurrent administration of TNF-antagonists and abatacept 
In clinical studies concurrent administration of TNF-antagonists and abatacept has been associated 
with an increased risk of infections including serious infections compared to TNF-antagonists alone, 
without increased clinical benefit. The combination of golimumab and abatacept is not recommended. 
 
Concurrent administration with other biological therapeutics 
There is insufficient information regarding the concomitant use of golimumab with other biological 
therapeutics used to treat the same conditions as golimumab. The concomitant use of golimumab with 
these biologics is not recommended because of the possibility of an increased risk of infection, and 
other potential pharmacological interactions. 
 

9 
 
Switching between biological DMARDs 
Care should be taken and patients should continue to be monitored when switching from one biologic 
to another, since overlapping biological activity may further increase the risk for adverse events, 
including infection. 
 
Vaccinations/therapeutic infectious agents 
Patients treated with golimumab may receive concurrent vaccinations, except for live vaccines (see 
sections 4.5 and 4.6). In patients receiving anti-TNF therapy, limited data are available on the response 
to vaccination with live vaccines or on the secondary transmission of infection by live vaccines. Use 
of live vaccines could result in clinical infections, including disseminated infections. 
 
Other uses of therapeutic infectious agents such as live attenuated bacteria (e.g. BCG bladder 
instillation for the treatment of cancer) could result in clinical infections, including disseminated 
infections. It is recommended that therapeutic infectious agents not be given concurrently with 
golimumab. 
 
Allergic reactions 
In post-marketing experience, serious systemic hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylactic 
reaction) have been reported following golimumab administration. Some of these reactions occurred 
after the first administration of golimumab. If an anaphylactic reaction or other serious allergic 
reactions occur, administration of golimumab should be discontinued immediately and appropriate 
therapy initiated. 
 
Special populations 
 
Elderly (≥ 65 years) 
In the Phase III studies in RA, PsA, AS, and UC, no overall differences in adverse events (AEs), 
serious adverse events (SAEs), and serious infections in patients age 65 or older who received 
golimumab were observed compared with younger patients. However, caution should be exercised 
when treating the elderly and particular attention paid with respect to occurrence of infections. There 
were no patients age 45 and over in the nr-Axial SpA study. 
 
Renal and hepatic impairment 
Specific studies of golimumab have not been conducted in patients with renal or hepatic impairment. 
Golimumab should be used with caution in subjects with impaired hepatic function (see section 4.2). 
 
Paediatrics 
Vaccinations 
If possible, it is recommended that prior to initiating golimumab therapy, paediatric patients be 
brought up to date with all immunisations in agreement with current immunisation guidelines (see 
Vaccinations/therapeutic infectious agents above). 
 
Excipients 
GOBIVAZ contains sorbitol . In patients with rare hereditary problems of fructose intolerance, the 
additive effect of concomitantly administered products containing sorbitol (or fructose) and dietary 
intake of sorbitol (or fructose) should be taken into account (see section 2). 
 
Potential for medication errors 
GOBIVAZ is registered in 50 mg and 100 mg strengths for subcutaneous administration. It is 
important that the right strength is used to administer the correct dose as indicated in the posology (see 
section 4.2). Care should be taken to provide the right strength to ensure that patients are not 
underdosed or overdosed. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
No interaction studies have been performed. 
 

10 
 
Concurrent use with other biological therapeutics 
The combination of golimumab with other biological therapeutics used to treat the same conditions as 
golimumab, including anakinra and abatacept is not recommended (see section 4.4). 
 
Live vaccines/therapeutic infectious agents 
Live vaccines should not be given concurrently with golimumab (see sections 4.4 and 4.6). 
 
Therapeutic infectious agents should not be given concurrently with golimumab (see section 4.4). 
 
Methotrexate 
Although concomitant use of MTX results in higher steady-state trough concentrations of golimumab 
in patients with RA, PsA or AS, the data do not suggest the need for dose adjustment of either 
golimumab or MTX (see section 5.2). 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Women of childbearing potential 
Women of childbearing potential must use adequate contraception to prevent pregnancy and continue 
its use for at least 6 months after the last golimumab treatment. 
 
Pregnancy 
There is a moderate amount (approximately 400) of prospectively collected pregnancies exposed to 
golimumab resulting in live birth with known outcomes, including 220 pregnancies exposed during the 
first trimester. In a population-based study from Northern Europe including 131 pregnancies (and 
134 infants), there were 6/134 (4.5%) events of major congenital anomalies following in utero 
exposure to golimumab vs 599/10,823 (5.5%) events for non-biologic systemic therapy compared to 
4.6% in the general population of the study. Confounder-adjusted odds ratios were OR 0.79 (95% CI 
0.35-1.81) for golimumab vs. non-biologic systemic therapy and OR 0.95 (95% CI 0.42-2.16) for 
golimumab vs. the general population, respectively. 
 
Due to its inhibition of TNF, golimumab administered during pregnancy could affect normal immune 
responses in the newborn. Studies in animals do not indicate direct or indirect harmful effects with 
respect to pregnancy, embryonal/foetal development, parturition or postnatal development 
(see section 5.3). The available clinical experience is limited. Golimumab should only be used during 
pregnancy if clearly needed. 
 
Golimumab crosses the placenta. Following treatment with a TNF-blocking monoclonal antibody 
during pregnancy, the antibody has been detected for up to 6 months in the serum of the infant born by 
the treated woman. Consequently, these infants may be at increased risk of infection. Administration 
of live vaccines to infants exposed to golimumab in utero is not recommended for 6 months following 
the mother’s last golimumab injection during pregnancy (see sections 4.4 and 4.5). 
 
Breast-feeding 
It is not known whether golimumab is excreted in human milk or absorbed systemically after 
ingestion. Golimumab was shown to pass over to breast milk in monkeys, and because human 
immunoglobulins are excreted in milk, women must not breast feed during and for at least 6 months 
after golimumab treatment. 
 
Fertility 
No animal fertility studies have been conducted with golimumab. A fertility study in mice, using an 
analogous antibody that selectively inhibits the functional activity of mouse TNFα, showed no 
relevant effects on fertility (see section 5.3). 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 
GOBIVAZ has minor influence on the ability to drive and use machines. Dizziness may however 
occur following administration of GOBIVAZ (see section 4.8). 

11 
 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
In the controlled period of the pivotal trials in RA, PsA, AS, nr-Axial SpA, and UC, upper respiratory 
tract infection was the most common adverse reaction (AR) reported in 12.6% of golimumab-treated 
patients compared with 11.0% of control patients. The most serious ARs that have been reported for 
golimumab include serious infections (including sepsis, pneumonia, TB, invasive fungal and 
opportunistic infections), demyelinating disorders, HBV reactivation, CHF, autoimmune processes 
(lupus-like syndrome), haematologic reactions, serious systemic hypersensitivity (including 
anaphylactic reaction), vasculitis, lymphoma and leukaemia (see section 4.4). 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
ARs observed in clinical studies and reported from world-wide post-marketing use of golimumab are 
listed in Table 1. Within the designated system organ classes, the ARs are listed under headings of 
frequency and using the following convention: very common (≥ 1/10); common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10); 
uncommon (≥ 1/1,000 to < 1/100); rare (≥ 1/10,000 to < 1/1,000); very rare (< 1/10,000); not known 
(cannot be estimated from the available data). Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are 
presented in order of decreasing seriousness. 
 
Table 1  
Tabulated list of ARs 
Infections and infestations 
Very common: 
Common: 
Uncommon: 
Rare: 
Upper respiratory tract infection (nasopharyngitis, 
pharyngitis, laryngitis and rhinitis) 
Bacterial infections (such as cellulitis), lower respiratory tract 
infection (such as pneumonia), viral infections (such as 
influenza and herpes), bronchitis, sinusitis, superficial fungal 
infections, abscess 
Sepsis including septic shock, pyelonephritis 
Tuberculosis, opportunistic infections (such as invasive 
fungal infections [histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, 
pneumocytosis], bacterial, atypical mycobacterial infection 
and protozoal), hepatitis B reactivation, bacterial arthritis, 
infective bursitis 
Neoplasms, benign, malignant and 
unspecified 
Uncommon: 
Rare: 
Not known: 
Neoplasms (such as skin cancer, squamous cell carcinoma 
and melanocytic naevus) 
Lymphoma, leukaemia, melanoma, Merkel cell carcinoma 
Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma*, Kaposi’s sarcoma 
Blood and lymphatic system 
disorders 
Common: 
Uncommon: 
Rare: 
Leukopenia (including neutropenia), anaemia 
Thrombocytopenia, pancytopenia 
Aplastic anaemia, agranulocytosis 
Immune system disorders 
Common: 
Rare: 
Allergic reactions (bronchospasm, hypersensitivity, urticaria), 
autoantibody positive 
Serious systemic hypersensitivity reactions (including 
anaphylactic reaction), vasculitis (systemic), sarcoidosis 
Endocrine disorders 
Uncommon: Thyroid disorder (such as hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism 
and goitre) 
Metabolism and nutrition disorders 
Uncommon: Blood glucose increased, lipids increased 

12 
 
Psychiatric disorders 
Common: Depression, insomnia 
Nervous system disorders 
Common: 
Uncommon: 
Rare: 
Dizziness, headache, paraesthesia 
Balance disorders 
Demyelinating disorders (central and peripheral), dysgeusia 
Eye disorders 
Uncommon: Visual disorders (such as blurred vision and decreased visual 
acuity), conjunctivitis, eye allergy (such as pruritis and 
irritation) 
Cardiac disorders 
Uncommon:
Rare:
Arrhythmia, ischemic coronary artery disorders 
Congestive heart failure (new onset or worsening) 
Vascular disorders 
Common: 
Uncommon:
Rare:
 
Hypertension 
Thrombosis (such as deep venous and aortic), flushing  
Raynaud’s phenomenon 
Respiratory, thoracic and 
mediastinal disorders 
Common:
Uncommon:
Asthma and related symptoms (such as wheezing and 
bronchial  hyperactivity) 
Interstitial lung disease 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Common:
 
 
Uncommon:
Dyspepsia, gastrointestinal and abdominal pain, nausea, 
gastrointestinal inflammatory disorders (such as gastritis and 
colitis), stomatitis 
Constipation, gastro-oesophageal reflux 
disease 
Hepatobiliary disorders 
Common:
 
Uncommon:
 
Alanine aminotransferase increased, aspartate 
aminotransferase increased 
Cholelithiasis, hepatic disorders 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
disorders 
Common: 
Uncommon:
Rare: 
Not known:
 Pruritus, rash, alopecia, dermatitis 
Bullous skin reactions, psoriasis (new onset or worsening of 
pre-existing psoriasis, palmar/plantar and pustular), urticaria 
Lichenoid reactions, skin exfoliation, vasculitis (cutaneous) 
Worsening of symptoms of dermatomyositis 
Musculoskeletal and connective 
tissue disorders 
Rare:
 
 
Lupus-like syndrome 
Renal and urinary disorders 
Rare: Bladder disorders, renal disorders 
Reproductive system and breast 
disorders 
Uncommon:
 
 
Breast disorders, menstrual disorders 
General disorders and 
administration site conditions 
Common:
 
 
 
Pyrexia, asthenia, injection site reaction (such as injection site 
erythema, urticaria, induration, pain, bruising, pruritus, 

13 
 
 
Rare:
irritation and paraesthesia), chest discomfort 
Impaired healing 
Injury, poisoning and procedural 
complications 
Common:
 
 
Bone fractures 
*  Observed with other TNF-blocking agents. 
 
Throughout this section, median duration of follow-up (approximately 4 years) is generally presented 
for all golimumab use. Where golimumab use is described by dose, the median duration of follow-up 
varies (approximately 2 years for 50 mg dose, approximately 3 years for 100 mg dose) as patients may 
have switched between doses. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Infections 
In the controlled period of pivotal trials, upper respiratory tract infection was the most common 
adverse reaction reported in 12.6% of golimumab-treated patients (incidence per 100 subject-years: 
60.8; 95% CI: 55.0, 67.1) compared with 11.0% of control patients (incidence per 100 subject-years: 
54.5; 95% CI: 46.1, 64.0). In controlled and uncontrolled portions of the studies with a median follow-
up of approximately 4 years, the incidence per 100 subject-years of upper respiratory tract infections 
was 34.9 events; 95% CI: 33.8, 36.0 for golimumab treated patients. 
 
In the controlled period of pivotal trials, infections were observed in 23.0% of golimumab-treated 
patients (incidence per 100 subject-years: 132.0; 95% CI: 123.3, 141.1) compared with 20.2% of 
control patients (incidence per 100 subject-years: 122.3; 95% CI: 109.5, 136.2). In controlled and 
uncontrolled portions of the trials with a median follow-up of approximately 4 years, the incidence per 
100 subject-years of infections was 81.1 events; 95% CI: 79.5, 82.8 for golimumab treated patients. 
 
In the controlled period of RA, PsA, AS, and nr-Axial SpA trials, serious infections were observed in 
1.2% of golimumab-treated patients and 1.2% of control-treated patients. The incidence of serious 
infections per 100 subject-years of follow-up in the controlled period of RA, PsA, AS, and nr-Axial 
SpA trials was 7.3; 95% CI: 4.6, 11.1 for the golimumab 100 mg group, 2.9; 95% CI: 1.2, 6.0 for the 
golimumab 50 mg group and 3.6; 95% CI: 1.5, 7.0 for the placebo group. In the controlled period of 
UC trials of golimumab induction, serious infections were observed in 0.8% of golimumab-treated 
patients compared with 1.5% of control-treated patients. Serious infections observed in 
golimumab-treated patients included tuberculosis, bacterial infections including sepsis and pneumonia, 
invasive fungal infections and other opportunistic infections. Some of these infections have been fatal. 
In the controlled and uncontrolled portions of the pivotal trials with a median follow-up of up to 
3 years, there was a greater incidence of serious infections, including opportunistic infections and TB 
in patients receiving golimumab 100 mg compared with patients receiving golimumab 50 mg. The 
incidence per 100 subject-years of all serious infections was 4.1; 95% CI: 3.6, 4.5, in patients 
receiving golimumab 100 mg and 2.5; 95% CI: 2.0, 3.1, in patients receiving golimumab 50 mg. 
 
Malignancies 
Lymphoma 
The incidence of lymphoma in golimumab-treated patients during the pivotal trials was higher than 
expected in the general population. In the controlled and uncontrolled portions of these trials with a 
median follow-up of up to 3 years, a greater incidence of lymphoma was observed in patients 
receiving golimumab 100 mg compared with patients receiving golimumab 50 mg. Lymphoma was 
diagnosed in 11 subjects (1 in the golimumab 50 mg treatment groups and 10 in the golimumab 100 

14 
 
mg treatment groups) with an incidence (95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up of 0.03 (0.00, 
0.15) and 0.13 (0.06, 0.24) events for golimumab 50 mg and 100 mg respectively and 0.00 
(0.00, 0.57) events for the placebo. The majority of lymphomas occurred in study GO-AFTER, which 
enrolled patients previously exposed to anti-TNF agents who had longer disease duration and more 
refractory disease (see section 4.4). 
 
Malignancies other than lymphoma 
In the controlled periods of pivotal trials and through approximately 4 years of follow-up, the 
incidence of non-lymphoma malignancies (excluding non-melanoma skin cancer) was similar between 
the golimumab and the control groups. Through approximately 4 years of follow-up, the incidence of 
non-lymphoma malignancies (excluding non-melanoma skin cancer) was similar to the general 
population. 
 
In the controlled and uncontrolled periods of pivotal trials with a median follow-up of up to 3 years, 
non-melanoma skin cancer was diagnosed in 5 placebo-treated, 10 golimumab 50 mg-treated and 31 
golimumab 100 mg-treated subjects with an incidence (95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up of 
0.36 (0.26, 0.49) for combined golimumab and 0.87 (0.28, 2.04) for placebo. 
 
In the controlled and uncontrolled period of pivotal trials with a median follow-up of up to 3 years, 
malignancies besides melanoma, non-melanoma skin cancer and lymphoma were diagnosed in 5 
placebo-treated, 21 golimumab 50 mg-treated and 34 golimumab 100 mg-treated subjects with an 
incidence (95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up of 0.48 (0.36, 0.62) for combined golimumab 
and 0.87 (0.28, 2.04) for placebo (see section 4.4). 
 
Cases reported in clinical studies in asthma 
In an exploratory clinical study, patients with severe persistent asthma received a golimumab loading 
dose (150% of the assigned treatment dose) subcutaneously at week 0 followed by golimumab 
200 mg, golimumab 100 mg or golimumab 50 mg every 4 weeks subcutaneously through week 52. 
Eight malignancies in the combined golimumab treatment group (n = 230) and none in the placebo 
treatment group (n = 79) were reported. Lymphoma was reported in 1 patient, non-melanoma skin 
cancer in 2 patients, and other malignancies in 5 patients. There was no specific clustering of any type 
of malignancy. 
 
During the placebo-controlled portion of the study, the incidence (95% CI) of all malignancies per 100 
subject-years of follow-up was 3.19 (1.38, 6.28) in the golimumab group. In this study, the incidence 
(95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up in golimumab-treated subjects was 0.40 (0.01, 2.20) for 
lymphoma, 0.79 (0.10, 2.86) for non-melanoma skin cancers, and 1.99 (0.64, 4.63) for other 
malignancies. For placebo subjects, the incidence (95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up of 
these malignancies was 0.00 (0.00, 2.94). The significance of this finding is unknown. 
 
Neurological events 
In the controlled and uncontrolled periods of the pivotal trials with a median follow-up of up to 
3 years, a greater incidence of demyelination was observed in patients receiving golimumab 100 mg 
compared with patients receiving golimumab 50 mg (see section 4.4). 
 
Liver enzyme elevations 
In the controlled period of RA and PsA pivotal trials, mild ALT elevations (> 1 and < 3 x upper limit 
of normal (ULN)) occurred in similar proportions of golimumab and control patients in the RA and 
PsA studies (22.1% to 27.4% of patients); in the AS and nr-Axial SpA studies, more 
golimumab-treated patients (26.9%) than control patients (10.6%) had mild ALT elevations. In the 
controlled and uncontrolled periods of the RA and PsA pivotal trials, with a median follow-up of 
approximately 5 years, the incidence of mild ALT elevations was similar in golimumab-treated and 
control patients in RA and PsA studies. In the controlled period of the UC pivotal trials of golimumab 
induction, mild ALT elevations (> 1 and < 3 x ULN) occurred in similar proportions of 
golimumab-treated and control patients (8.0% to 6.9%, respectively). In controlled and uncontrolled 
periods of the UC pivotal trials with a median follow-up of approximately 2 years, the proportion of 

15 
 
patients with mild ALT elevations was 24.7% in patients receiving golimumab during the maintenance 
portion of the UC study. 
 
In the controlled period of RA and AS pivotal trials, ALT elevations ≥ 5 x ULN were uncommon and 
seen in more golimumab-treated patients (0.4% to 0.9%) than control patients (0.0%). This trend was 
not observed in the PsA population. In the controlled and uncontrolled periods of RA, PsA and AS 
pivotal trials, with a median follow-up of 5 years, the incidence of ALT elevations ≥ 5 x ULN was 
similar in both golimumab-treated and control patients. In general these elevations were asymptomatic 
and the abnormalities decreased or resolved with either continuation or discontinuation of golimumab 
or modification of concomitant medicinal products. No cases were reported in the controlled and 
uncontrolled periods of the nr-Axial SpA study (up to 1 year). In the controlled periods of the pivotal 
UC trials, of golimumab induction, ALT elevations ≥ 5 x ULN occurred in similar proportions of 
golimumab-treated patients compared to placebo-treated patients (0.3% to 1.0%, respectively). In the 
controlled and uncontrolled periods of the pivotal UC trials with a median follow-up of approximately 
2 years, the proportion of patients with ALT elevations ≥ 5 x ULN was 0.8% in patients receiving 
golimumab during the maintenance portion of the UC study. 
 
Within the RA, PsA, AS, and nr-Axial SpA pivotal trials, one patient in an RA trial with pre-existing 
liver abnormalities and confounding medicinal products treated with golimumab developed  
non-infectious fatal hepatitis with jaundice. The role of golimumab as a contributing or aggravation 
factor cannot be excluded. 
 
Injection site reactions 
In the controlled periods of pivotal trials, 5.4% of golimumab-treated patients had injection site 
reactions compared with 2.0% in control patients. The presence of antibodies to golimumab may 
increase the risk of injection site reactions. The majority of the injection site reactions were mild and 
moderate and the most frequent manifestation was injection site erythema. Injection site reactions 
generally did not necessitate discontinuation of the medicinal product. 
 
In controlled Phase IIb and/or III trials in RA, PsA, AS, nr-Axial SpA, severe persistent asthma, and 
Phase II/III trials in UC, no patients treated with golimumab developed anaphylactic reactions. 
 
Autoimmune antibodies 
In the controlled and uncontrolled periods of pivotal trials through 1 year of follow-up, 3.5% of 
golimumab-treated patients and 2.3% of control patients were newly ANA-positive (at titres of 1:160 
or greater). The frequency of anti-dsDNA antibodies at 1 year of follow-up in patients anti-dsDNA 
negative at baseline was 1.1%. 
 
Paediatric population 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis 
The safety of golimumab has been studied in a Phase III study of 173 pJIA patients from 2 to 17 years 
of age. The average follow-up was approximately two years. In this study, the type and frequency of 
adverse events reported were generally similar to those seen in adult RA studies. 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
Single doses up to 10 mg/kg intravenously have been administered in a clinical study without 
dose-limiting toxicity. In case of an overdose, it is recommended that the patient be monitored for any 
signs or symptoms of adverse effects and appropriate symptomatic treatment be instituted 
immediately. 
 

16 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Immunosuppressants, tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) inhibitors, 
ATC code: L04AB06. 
 
GOBIVAZ is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the 
European Medicines Agency https:// https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
Mechanism of action 
Golimumab is a human monoclonal antibody that forms high affinity, stable complexes with both the 
soluble and transmembrane bioactive forms of human TNF-α, which prevents the binding of TNF-α to 
its receptors. 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
The binding of human TNF by golimumab was shown to neutralise TNF-α-induced cell-surface 
expression of the adhesion molecules E-selectin, vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1 and 
intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 by human endothelial cells. In vitro, TNF-induced secretion 
of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8 and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) by 
human endothelial cells was also inhibited by golimumab. 
 
Improvement in C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were observed relative to placebo groups and 
treatment with golimumab resulted in significant reductions from baseline in serum levels of IL-6, 
ICAM-1, matrix-metalloproteinase (MMP)-3 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
compared to control treatment. In addition, levels of TNF-α were reduced in RA and AS patients and 
levels of IL-8 were reduced in PsA patients. These changes were observed at the first assessment 
(week 4) after the initial golimumab administration and were generally maintained through week 24. 
 
Clinical efficacy 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
The efficacy of golimumab was demonstrated in three multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled studies in over 1500 patients ≥ 18 years of age with moderately to severely active 
RA diagnosed according to American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria for at least 3 months 
prior to screening. Patients had at least 4 swollen and 4 tender joints. Golimumab or placebo were 
subcutaneously administered every 4 weeks. 
 
GO-FORWARD evaluated 444 patients who had active RA despite a stable dose of at least 
15 mg/week of MTX and who had not been previously treated with an anti-TNF agent. Patients were 
randomised to receive placebo + MTX, golimumab 50 mg + MTX, golimumab 100 mg + MTX or 
golimumab 100 mg + placebo. Patients receiving placebo + MTX were switched to golimumab 50 mg 
+ MTX after week 24. At week 52, patients entered an open label long-term extension. 
 
GO-AFTER evaluated 445 patients who were previously treated with one or more of the anti-TNF 
agents adalimumab, etanercept, or infliximab. Patients were randomised to receive placebo, 
golimumab 50 mg, or golimumab 100 mg. Patients were allowed to continue concomitant DMARD 
therapy with MTX, sulfasalazine (SSZ), and/or hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) during the study. The 
stated reasons for discontinuation of prior anti TNF therapies were lack of efficacy (58%), intolerance 
(13%), and/or reasons other than safety or efficacy (29%, mostly for financial reasons). 
 
GO-BEFORE evaluated 637 patients with active RA who were MTX-naïve and had not previously 
been treated with an anti-TNF agent. Patients were randomised to receive placebo + MTX, golimumab 
50 mg + MTX, golimumab 100 mg + MTX or golimumab 100 mg + placebo. At week 52, patients 
entered an open label long-term extension in which patients receiving placebo + MTX who had at least 
1 tender or swollen joint were switched to golimumab 50 mg + MTX. 

17 
 
 
In GO-FORWARD, the (co-)primary endpoints were the percentage of patients achieving an ACR 20 
response at week 14 and the improvement from baseline in Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ) 
at week 24. In GO-AFTER, the primary endpoint was the percentage of patients achieving an ACR 20 
response at week 14. In GO-BEFORE, the co-primary endpoints were the percentage of patients 
achieving ACR 50 response at week 24 and the change from baseline in the van der Heijde-modified 
Sharp (vdH-S) score at week 52. In addition to the primary endpoint(s), additional assessments of the 
impact of golimumab treatment on the signs and symptoms of arthritis, radiographic response, 
physical function and health-related quality of life were performed. 
 
In general, no clinically meaningful differences in measures of efficacy were observed between the 
golimumab 50 mg and 100 mg dosing regimens with concomitant MTX, through week 104 in 
GO-FORWARD and GO-BEFORE and through week 24 in GO-AFTER. In each of the RA studies by 
study design, patients in the long-term extension may have switched between the 50 mg and 100 mg 
golimumab doses at the discretion of the study physician. 
 
Signs and symptoms 
Key ACR results for the golimumab 50 mg dose at weeks 14, 24 and 52 for GO-FORWARD, GO-
AFTER and GO-BEFORE are shown in Table 2 and are described below. Responses were observed at 
the first assessment (week 4) after the initial golimumab administration. 
 
In GO-FORWARD, among 89 subjects randomised to golimumab 50 mg + MTX, 48 were still on this 
treatment at week 104. Among those, 40, 33 and 24 patients had ACR 20/50/70 response, respectively 
at week 104. Among patients remaining in the study and treated with Golimumab, similar rates of 
ACR 20/50/70 response was observed from week 104 through week 256. 
 
In GO-AFTER, the percentage of patients achieving an ACR 20 response was greater for patients 
receiving golimumab than for patients receiving placebo regardless of the reason reported for 
discontinuation of one or more prior anti-TNF therapies. 
 
Table 2 
Key efficacy outcomes from the controlled portions of GO-FORWARD, GO-AFTER and GO-
BEFORE. 
GO-FORWARD 
Active RA despite MTX 
GO-AFTER 
Active RA, previously 
treated with one or 
more 
anti-TNF agent(s) 
GO-BEFORE 
Active RA, MTX Naïve 
Placebo 
+ 
MTX 
Golimumab 
50 mg 
+ 
MTX 
 
  Placebo 
   
Golimumab 
50 mg 
Placebo 
+ 
MTX 
Golimumab 
50 mg 
+ 
MTX 
na 
133 
89 
150 
147 
160 
159 
Responders, % of patients 
ACR 20 
Week 14 
33% 
55%* 
18% 
35%* 
NA 
NA 
Week 24 
28% 
60%* 
16% 
31% p = 0.002 
49% 
62% 
Week 52 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
52% 
60% 
ACR 50 
Week 14 
10% 
35%* 
7% 
15% p = 0.021 
NA 
NA 
Week 24 
14% 
37%* 
4% 
16%* 
29% 
40% 
Week 52 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
36% 
42% 
ACR 70 
Week 14 
4% 
14% 
p = 0.008 
2% 
10% 
p = 0.005 
NA 
NA 
Week 24 
5% 
20%* 
2% 
9% p = 0.009 
16% 
24% 

18 
 
Week 52 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
22% 
28% 
a 
n reflects randomised patients; actual number of patients evaluable for each endpoint may vary by timepoint. 
*  p ≤ 0.001 
NA: Not Applicable 
 
In GO-BEFORE the primary analysis in patients with moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis 
(combined golimumab 50 and 100 mg + MTX groups vs MTX alone for ACR50) was not statistically 
significant at week 24 (p = 0.053). At week 52 in the overall population, the percentage of patients in 
the golimumab 50 mg + MTX group who achieved an ACR response was generally higher but not 
significantly different when compared with MTX alone (see Table 2). Additional analyses were 
performed in subsets representative of the indicated population of patients with severe, active and 
progressive RA. A generally greater effect of golimumab 50 mg + MTX versus MTX alone was 
demonstrated in the indicated population compared with the overall population. 
 
In GO-FORWARD and GO-AFTER, clinically meaningful and statistically significant responses in 
Disease Activity Scale (DAS)28 were observed at each prespecified time point, at week 14 and at 
week 24 (p ≤ 0.001). Among patients who remained on the golimumab treatment to which they were 
randomised at study start, DAS28 responses were maintained through week 104. Among patients 
remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, DAS28 responses were similar from week 104 
through week 256. 
 
In GO-BEFORE, major clinical response, defined as the maintenance of an ACR 70 response over a 
continuous 6-month period, was measured. At week 52, 15% of patients in the golimumab 50 mg + 
MTX group achieved a major clinical response compared with 7% of patients in the placebo + MTX 
group (p = 0.018). Among 159 subjects randomised to golimumab 50 mg + MTX, 96 were still on this 
treatment at week 104. Among those, 85, 66 and 53 patients had ACR 20/50/70 response, respectively, 
at week 104. Among patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, similar rates of ACR 
20/50/70 response were observed from week 104 through week 256. 
 
Radiographic response 
In GO-BEFORE the change from baseline in the vdH-S score, a composite score of structural damage 
that radiographically measures the number and size of joint erosions and the degree of joint space 
narrowing in hands/wrists and feet, was used to assess the degree of structural damage. Key results for 
the golimumab 50 mg dose at week 52 are presented in Table 3. 
 
The number of patients with no new erosions or a change from baseline in total vdH-S Score ≤ 0 was 
significantly higher in the golimumab treatment group than in the control group (p = 0.003). The 
radiographic effects observed at week 52 were maintained through week 104. Among patients 
remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, radiographic effects were similar from week 104 
through week 256. 
 
Table 3 
Radiographic mean (SD) changes from baseline in total vdH-S score at week 52 in the overall 
population of GO-BEFORE 
Placebo + MTX 
Golimumab 50 mg + MTX 
na 
160 
159 
Total Score 
Baseline 
19.7 (35.4) 
18.7 (32.4) 
Change from baseline 
1.4 (4.6) 
0.7 (5.2)* 
Erosion Score 
Baseline 
11.3 (18.6) 
10.8 (17.4) 
Change from baseline 
0.7 (2.8) 
0.5 (2.1) 
JSN Score 
Baseline 
8.4 (17.8) 
7.9 (16.1) 
Change from baseline 
0.6 (2.3) 
0.2 (2.0)** 
a 
n reflects randomised patients 

19 
 
* 
p = 0.015 
**  p = 0.044 
 
Physical function and health-related quality of life 
Physical function and disability were assessed as a separate endpoint in GO-FORWARD and GO-
AFTER using the disability index of the HAQ DI. In these studies, golimumab demonstrated clinically 
meaningful and statistically significant improvement in HAQ DI from baseline versus control at week 
24. Among patients who remained on the golimumab treatment to which they were randomised at 
study start, improvement in HAQ DI was maintained through week 104. Among 
patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, improvement in HAQ DI was similar 
from week 104 through week 256. 
 
In GO-FORWARD clinically meaningful and statistically significant improvements were 
demonstrated in health-related quality of life as measured by the physical component score of the SF-
36 in patients treated with golimumab versus placebo at week 24. Among patients who remained on 
the golimumab treatment to which they were randomised at study start, improvement of the SF-36 
physical component was maintained through week 104. Among patients remaining in the study and 
treated with golimumab, improvement of the SF-36 physical component was similar from week 104 
through week 256. In GO-FORWARD and GO-AFTER, statistically significant improvements were 
observed in fatigue as measured by functional assessment of chronic illness therapy-fatigue scale 
(FACIT-F). 
 
Psoriatic arthritis 
The safety and efficacy of golimumab were evaluated in a multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study (GO-REVEAL) in 405 adult patients with active PsA (≥ 3 swollen joints and 
≥ 3 tender joints) despite non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) or DMARD therapy. Patients in 
this study had a diagnosis of PsA for at least 6 months and had at least mild psoriatic disease. Patients 
with each sub-type of psoriatic arthritis were enrolled, including polyarticular arthritis with no 
rheumatoid nodules (43%), asymmetric peripheral arthritis (30%), distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint 
arthritis (15%), spondylitis with peripheral arthritis (11%), and arthritis mutilans (1%). Previous 
treatment with an anti-TNF agent was not allowed. Golimumab or placebo were administered 
subcutaneously every 4 weeks. Patients were randomly assigned to placebo, golimumab 50 mg, or 
golimumab 100 mg. Patients receiving placebo were switched to golimumab 50 mg after week 24. 
Patients entered an open label long-term extension at week 52. Approximately forty-eight percent of 
patients continued on stable doses of methotrexate (≤ 25 mg/week). The co-primary endpoints were 
the percentage of patients achieving ACR 20 response at week 14 and change from baseline in total 
PsA modified vdH-S score at week 24. 
 
In general, no clinically meaningful differences in measures of efficacy were observed between the 
golimumab 50 mg and 100 mg dosing regimens through week 104. By study design, patients in the 
long-term extension may have switched between the 50 mg and 100 mg golimumab doses at the 
discretion of the study physician. 
 
Signs and symptoms 
Key results for the 50 mg dose at weeks 14 and 24 are shown in table 4 and described below. 
 
Table 4 
Key efficacy outcomes from GO-REVEAL 
Placebo 
Golimumab 
50 mg* 
na 
113 
146 
Responders, % of patients 
ACR 20 
Week 14 
9% 
51% 
Week 24 
12% 
52% 
ACR 50 
Week 14 
2% 
30% 

20 
 
Week 24 
4% 
32% 
ACR 70 
Week 14 
1% 
12% 
Week 24 
1% 
19% 
PASIb 75c 
Week 14 
3% 
40% 
Week 24 
1% 
56% 
*  p < 0.05 for all comparisons; 
a 
n reflects randomised patients; actual number of patients evaluable for each endpoint may vary by timepoint 
b 
Psoriasis Area and Severity Index 
c 
Based on the subset of patients with ≥ 3% BSA involvement at baseline, 79 patients (69.9%) in the placebo group 
and 109 (74.3%) in the golimumab 50 mg group. 
 
Responses were observed at the first assessment (week 4) after the initial golimumab administration. 
Similar ACR 20 responses at week 14 were observed in patients with polyarticular arthritis with no 
rheumatoid nodules and asymmetric peripheral arthritis PsA subtypes. The number of patients with 
other PsA subtypes was too small to allow meaningful assessment. Responses observed in the 
golimumab treated groups were similar in patients receiving and not receiving concomitant MTX. 
Among 146 patients randomised to golimumab 50 mg, 70 were still on this treatment at week 104. Of 
these 70 patients, 64, 46 and 31 patients had an ACR 20/50/70 response, respectively. Among patients 
remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, similar rates of ACR 20/50/70 response was 
observed from week 104 through week 256. 
 
Statistically significant responses in DAS28 were also observed at weeks 14 and 24 (p < 0.05). 
 
At week 24 improvements in parameters of peripheral activity characteristic of psoriatic arthritis (e.g. 
number of swollen joints, number of painful/tender joints, dactylitis and enthesitis) were seen in the 
golimumab-treated patients. Golimumab treatment resulted in significant improvement in physical 
function as assessed by HAQ DI, as well as significant improvements in health-related quality of life 
as measured by the physical and mental component summary scores of the SF-36. Among patients 
who remained on the golimumab treatment to which they were randomised at study start, DAS28 and 
HAQ DI responses were maintained through week 104. Among patients remaining in the study and 
treated with golimumab, DAS28 and HAQ DI responses were similar from week 104 through week 
256. 
 
Radiographic response 
Structural damage in both hands and feet was assessed radiographically by the change from baseline in 
the vdH-S score, modified for PsA by addition of hand distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints. 
 
Golimumab 50 mg treatment reduced the rate of progression of peripheral joint damage compared 
with placebo treatment at week 24 as measured by change from baseline in total modified vdH-S 
Score (mean ± SD score was 0.27 ± 1.3 in the placebo group compared with -0.16 ± 1.3 in the 
golimumab group; p = 0.011). Out of 146 patients who were randomised to golimumab 50 mg, 52 
week X-ray data were available for 126 patients, of whom 77% showed no progression compared to 
baseline. At week 104, X-ray data were available for 114 patients, and 77% showed no progression 
from baseline. Among patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, similar rates of 
patients showed no progression from baseline from week 104 through week 256. 
 
Axial spondyloarthritis  
Ankylosing spondylitis 
The safety and efficacy of golimumab were evaluated in a multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study (GO-RAISE) in 356 adult patients with active ankylosing spondylitis 
(defined as a Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index (BASDAI) ≥ 4 and a VAS for total 
back pain of ≥ 4, on a scale of 0 to 10 cm). Patients enrolled in this study had active disease despite 
current or previous NSAID or DMARD therapy and had not previously been treated with anti-TNF 
therapy. Golimumab or placebo were administered subcutaneously every 4 weeks. Patients were 
randomly assigned to placebo, golimumab 50 mg and golimumab 100 mg and were allowed to 

21 
 
continue concomitant DMARD therapy (MTX, SSZ and/or HCQ). The primary endpoint was the 
percentage of patients achieving Ankylosing Spondylitis Assessment Study Group (ASAS) 20 
response at week 14. Placebo-controlled efficacy data were collected and analysed through week 24. 
 
Key results for the 50 mg dose are shown in Table 5 and described below. In general, no clinically 
meaningful differences in measures of efficacy were observed between the golimumab 50 mg and 
100 mg dosing regimens through week 24. By study design, patients in the long-term extension may 
have switched between the 50 mg and 100 mg golimumab doses at the discretion of the study 
physician. 
 
Table 5 
Key efficacy outcomes from GO-RAISE. 
Placebo 
Golimumab 
50 mg* 
na 
78 
138 
Responders, % of patients 
ASAS 20 
Week 14 
22% 
59% 
Week 24 
23% 
56% 
ASAS 40 
Week 14 
15% 
45% 
Week 24 
15% 
44% 
ASAS 5/6 
Week 14 
8% 
50% 
Week 24 
13% 
49% 
*  p ≤ 0.001 for all comparisons 
a 
n reflects randomised patients; actual number of patients evaluable for each endpoint may vary by timepoint 
 
Among patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, the proportion of patients with an 
ASAS 20 and ASAS 40 response were similar from week 24 through week 256. 
 
Statistically significant responses in BASDAI 50, 70 and 90 (p ≤ 0.017) were also seen at weeks 14 
and 24. Improvements in key measures of disease activity were observed at the first assessment (week 
4) after the initial golimumab administration and were maintained through week 24. Among patients 
remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, similar rates of change from baseline in BASDAI 
were observed from week 24 through week 256. Consistent efficacy was seen in patients regardless of 
use of DMARDs (MTX, sulfasalazine and/or hydroxychloroquine), HLA-B27 antigen status or 
baseline CRP levels as assessed by ASAS 20 responses at week 14. 
 
Golimumab treatment resulted in significant improvements in physical function as assessed by 
changes from baseline in BASFI at weeks 14 and 24. Health-related quality of life as measured by the 
physical component score of the SF-36 was also improved significantly at weeks 14 and 24. Among 
patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, improvements in physical function and 
health-related quality of life were similar from week 24 through week 256. 
 
Non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis 
 
GO-AHEAD 
 
The safety and efficacy of golimumab were evaluated in a multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study (GO-AHEAD) in 197 adult patients with severe active nr-Axial SpA (defined 
as those patients meeting the ASAS classification criteria of axial spondyloarthritis but did not meet 
the modified New York criteria for AS). Patients enrolled in this study had active disease (defined as a 
BASDAI ≥ 4 and a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) for total back pain of ≥ 4, each on a scale of 0-10 
cm) despite current or previous NSAID therapy and had not previously been treated with any 
biological agents including anti-TNF therapy. Patients were randomly assigned to placebo or 
golimumab 50 mg administered subcutaneously every 4 weeks. At week 16, patients entered an open 

22 
 
label period in which all patients received golimumab 50 mg administered subcutaneously every 4 
weeks through week 48 with efficacy assessments performed through week 52 and safety follow-up 
through week 60. Approximately 93% of patients who were receiving golimumab at the beginning of 
the open-label extension (week 16) remained on treatment through the end of the study (week 52). 
Analyses were performed on both the All Treated (AT, N = 197) and Objective Signs of Inflammation 
(OSI, N = 158, defined by elevated CRP and/or evidence of sacroiliitis on MRI at baseline) 
populations. 
Placebo-controlled efficacy data were collected and analysed through week 16. The primary endpoint 
was the proportion of patients achieving ASAS 20 response at week 16. Key results are shown in 
Table 6 and described below. 
 
Table 6 
Key efficacy outcomes from GO-AHEAD at week 16 
Improvements in signs and symptoms 
All treated population (AT) 
Objective signs of inflammation 
population (OSI) 
Placebo 
Golimumab 50 mg 
Placebo 
Golimumab 50 mg 
na 
100 
97 
80 
78 
Responders, % of patients 
ASAS 20 
40% 
71%** 
38% 
77%** 
ASAS 40 
23% 
57%** 
23% 
60%** 
ASAS 5/6 
23% 
54%** 
23% 
63%** 
ASAS Partial Remission 
18% 
33%* 
19% 
35%* 
ASDAS-C b < 1.3 
13% 
33%* 
16% 
35%* 
BASDAI 50 
30% 
58%** 
29% 
59%** 
Inhibition of inflammation in sacroiliac (SI) joints as measured by MRI 
Placebo 
Golimumab 50 mg 
Placebo 
Golimumab 50 mg 
nc 
87 
74 
69 
61 
Mean change in 
SPARCCd MRI 
sacroiliac joint score 
-0.9 
-5.3** 
-1.2 
-6.4** 
a 
n reflects randomised and treated patients 
b 
Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Score C-Reactive Protein (AT-Placebo, N = 90; AT-Golimumab 50 mg, 
N = 88; OSI-Placebo, N = 71; OSI-Golimumab 50 mg, N = 71) 
c 
n reflects number of patients with baseline and week 16 MRI data 
d 
SPARCC (Spondyloarthritis Research Consortium of Canada) 
** p < 0.0001 for Golimumab vs placebo comparisons 
*  p < 0.05 for Golimumab vs placebo comparisons 
 
Statistically significant improvements in signs and symptoms of severe active nr-Axial SpA were 
demonstrated in patients treated with golimumab 50 mg compared to placebo at week 16 (Table 6). 
Improvements were observed at the first assessment (week 4) after the initial golimumab 
administration. SPARCC score as measured by MRI showed statistically significant reductions in SI 
joint inflammation at week 16 in patients treated with golimumab 50 mg compared to placebo (Table 
6). Pain as assessed by the Total Back Pain and Nocturnal Back Pain VAS, and disease activity as 
measured by ASDAS-C also showed statistically significant improvement from baseline to week 16 in 
patients treated with golimumab 50 mg compared to placebo (p < 0.0001). 
 
Statistically significant improvements in spinal mobility as assessed by BASMI (Bath Ankylosing 
Spondylitis Metrology Index) and in physical function as assessed by the BASFI were demonstrated in 
golimumab 50 mg-treated patients as compared to placebo-treated patients (p < 0.0001). Patients 
treated with golimumab experienced significantly more improvements in health-related quality of life 
as assessed by ASQoL, EQ-5D, and physical and mental components of SF-36, and experienced 
significantly more improvements in productivity as assessed by greater reductions in overall work 
impairment and in activity impairment as assessed by the WPAI questionnaire than patients receiving 
placebo. 
 

23 
 
For all of the endpoints described above, statistically significant results were also demonstrated in the 
OSI population at week 16. 
 
In both the AT and OSI populations, the improvements in signs and symptoms, spinal mobility, 
physical function, quality of life, and productivity observed at week 16 among patients treated with 
golimumab 50 mg continued in those remaining in the study at week 52. 
 
GO-BACK 
 
The efficacy and safety of continued golimumab treatment (full or reduced dosing frequency) 
compared with treatment withdrawal was assessed in adult patients (18-45 years of age) with active nr-
axSpA who demonstrated sustained remission during 10 months of monthly treatment with 
open-label golimumab (GO-BACK). Eligible patients (who achieved a clinical response by Month 4 
and an inactive disease status (ASDAS < 1.3) at both Months 7 and 10) entering the double-blind 
withdrawal phase were randomised to continued monthly treatment with golimumab (full-treatment 
regimen, N = 63), every 2-month treatment with golimumab (reduced treatment regimen, N = 63) or 
monthly placebo treatment (treatment withdrawal, N = 62) for up to approximately 12 months. 
 
The primary efficacy endpoint was the proportion of patients without a flare of disease activity. 
Patients who experienced a flare, i.e., had an ASDAS collected at 2 consecutive assessments that both 
showed either an absolute score of ≥ 2.1 or post-withdrawal increase of ≥ 1.1 relative to Month 10 
(end of open-label period), reinitiated monthly golimumab in an open-label retreatment phase to 
characterise clinical response. 
 
Clinical response after double-blind treatment withdrawal 
Among the 188 patients with inactive disease who received at least one dose of double-blind 
treatment, a significantly (p < 0.001) greater proportion of patients did not experience a disease flare 
when continuing golimumab with either the full-treatment (84.1%), or reduced treatment (68.3%) 
regimens compared with treatment withdrawal (33.9%) (Table 7). 
 
Table 7 
Analysis of the proportion of participants without a flarea Full analysis set population (Period 2 
– Double-blind) 
Treatment 
n/N 
% 
Difference in % vs Placebo 
Estimate (95% CI)b 
p-Valueb 
GLM SC QMT 
53/63 
84.1 
50.2 (34.1, 63.6) 
< 0.001 
GLM SC Q2MT 
43/63 
68.3 
34.4 (17.0, 49.7) 
< 0.001 
Placebo 
21/62 
33.9 
Full Analysis Set includes all randomised participants who attained inactive disease in period 1 and received at least one 
dose of blinded study treatment. 
a 
Defined as ASDAS at 2 consecutive visits that both show either absolute score ≥ 2.1 or post-withdrawal 
increase of ≥ 1.1 relative to Month 10 (Visit 23). 
b 
Type I error rate over the multiple treatment comparisons (GLM SC QMT vs Placebo and GLM SC Q2MT vs 
Placebo) was controlled using a sequential (step-down) testing procedure. Derived based on the stratified 
Miettinen and Nurminen method with CRP level (> 6 mg/L or ≤ 6 mg/L) as stratification factor. 
Participants who discontinued period 2 prematurely and prior to a ‘flare’ will be counted as having a 
‘flare’. N = Total number of participants; n = number of participants without a flare; GLM = golimumab; 
SC = subcutaneous, QMT = monthly dosing; Q2MT = every other month dosing. 
 
The difference in time-to-first flare between the treatment withdrawal group and either of the 
golimumab Treatment groups is shown in Figure 1 (log-rank p < 0.0001 for each comparison). In the 
placebo group, flares started approximately 2 months after golimumab was withdrawn, with the 
majority of flares occurring within 4 months of treatment withdrawal (Figure 1). 
 

24 
 
Figure 1: 
Kaplan-Meier Analysis of Time-to-First Flare 
 
 
Clinical response to retreatment for a disease flare 
Clinical response was defined as a BASDAI improvement of ≥ 2 or ≥ 50% relative to the mean of the 
2 consecutive BASDAI scores ascribed to the disease flare. Of the 53 participants in the reduced 
dosing or treatment withdrawal regimens who had a confirmed disease flare, 51 (96.2%) attained a 
clinical response to golimumab within the first 3 months of retreatment, although fewer patients 
(71.7%) were able to sustain it for all 3 months. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
The efficacy of golimumab was evaluated in two randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
clinical studies in adult patients. 
 
The induction study (PURSUIT-Induction) evaluated patients with moderately to severely active 
ulcerative colitis (Mayo score 6 to 12; Endoscopy subscore ≥ 2) who had an inadequate response to or 
failed to tolerate conventional therapies, or were corticosteroid dependent. In the dose confirming 
portion of the study, 761 patients were randomised to receive either 400 mg golimumab SC at week 0 
and 200 mg at week 2, 200 mg golimumab SC at week 0 and 100 mg at week 2, or placebo SC at 
weeks 0 and 2. Concomitant stable doses of oral aminosalicylates, corticosteroids, and/or 
immunomodulatory agents were permitted. The efficacy of golimumab through week 6 was assessed 
in this study. 
 
The results of the maintenance study (PURSUIT-Maintenance) were based on evaluation of 
456 patients who achieved clinical response from previous induction with golimumab. Patients were 
randomised to receive golimumab 50 mg, golimumab 100 mg or placebo administered subcutaneously 
every 4 weeks. Concomitant stable doses of oral aminosalicylates, and/or immunomodulatory agents 
were permitted. Corticosteroids were to be tapered at the start of the maintenance study. The efficacy 
of golimumab through week 54 was assessed in this study. Patients who completed the maintenance 
study through week 54 continued treatment in a study-extension, with efficacy evaluated through week 
216. Efficacy evaluation in the study extension was based on changes in corticosteroid use, 

25 
 
Physician’s Global Assessment (PGA) of disease activity, and improvement in quality of life as 
measured by Inflammatory Bowel Disease Questionnaire (IBDQ). 
 
Table 8 
Key efficacy outcomes from PURSUIT - Induction and PURSUIT - Maintenance 
PURSUIT-Induction 
Placebo 
N = 251 
Golimumab 
200/100 mg 
N = 253 
Percentage of patients 
Patients in clinical response at week 6a 
30% 
51%** 
Patients in clinical remission at week 6b 
6% 
18%** 
Patients with mucosal healing at 
week 6c 
29% 
42%* 
PURSUIT-Maintenance 
Placebod 
N = 154 
    Golimumab 
50 mg 
N = 151 
  Golimumab 
100 mg 
N = 151 
Percentage of patients 
Maintenance of response (Patients in 
clinical response through week 54)e 
31% 
47%* 
50%** 
Sustained remission (Patients in clinical 
remission at both week 30 and 
week 54)f 
16% 
23%g 
28%* 
N = number of patients 
** p ≤ 0.001 
*  p ≤ 0.01 
a 
defined as a decrease from baseline in the Mayo score by ≥ 30% and ≥ 3 points, accompanied by a decrease in the 
rectal bleeding subscore of ≥ 1 or a rectal bleeding subscore of 0 or 1. 
b 
Defined as a Mayo score ≤ 2 points, with no individual subscore > 1 
c 
Defined as 0 or 1 on the endoscopy subscore of the Mayo score. 
d 
Golimumab induction only. 
e 
Patients were assessed for UC disease activity by partial Mayo score every 4 weeks (loss of response was confirmed 
by endoscopy). Therefore, a patient who maintained response was in a state of continuous clinical response at each 
evaluation through week 54. 
f 
A patient had to be in remission at both weeks 30 and 54 (without demonstrating a loss of response at any time point 
through week 54) to achieve durable remission. 
g 
In patients weighing less than 80 kg, a greater proportion of patients who received 50 mg maintenance therapy showed 
sustained clinical remission compared with those who received placebo. 
 
More golimumab-treated patients demonstrated sustained mucosal healing (patients with mucosal 
healing at both week 30 and week 54) in the 50 mg group (42%, nominal p < 0.05) and 100 mg group 
(42%, p < 0.005) compared with patients in the placebo group (27%). 
 
Among the 54% of patients (247/456) who were receiving concomitant corticosteroids at the start of 
PURSUIT-Maintenance, the proportion of patients who maintained clinical response through week 54 
and were not receiving concomitant corticosteroids at week 54 was greater in the 50 mg group (38%, 
30/78) and 100 mg group (30%, 25/82) compared with the placebo group (21%, 18/87). The 
proportion of patients who eliminated corticosteroids by week 54 was greater in the 50 mg group 
(41%, 32/78) and 100 mg group (33%, 27/82) compared with the placebo group (22%, 19/87). Among 
patients who entered the study extension, the proportion of subjects who remained corticosteroid free 
was generally maintained through week 216. 
 
Patients who did not achieve clinical response at week 6 in the PURSUIT-Induction studies were 
dosed golimumab 100 mg every 4 weeks in the PURSUIT-Maintenance study. At week 14, 28% of 
these patients achieved response defined by partial Mayo score (decreased by ≥ 3 points compared 
with start of induction). At week 54, the clinical outcomes observed in these patients were similar to 
the clinical outcomes reported for the patients achieving clinical response at week 6. 

26 
 
 
At week 6, golimumab significantly improved quality of life as measured by change from baseline in a 
disease specific measure, IBDQ (inflammatory bowel disease questionnaire). Among patients who 
received golimumab maintenance treatment, the improvement in quality of life as measured by IBDQ 
was maintained through week 54. 
 
Approximately 63% of patients who were receiving golimumab at the beginning of the study 
extension (week 56), remained on treatment through the end of the study (last golimumab 
administration at week 212). 
 
Immunogenicity 
Anti-golimumab antibodies may develop during golimumab treatment. Formation of anti-golimumab 
antibodies may be associated with decreased systemic exposure to golimumab but no apparent 
correlation of antibody development with efficacy has been observed. The presence of antibodies to 
golimumab may increase the risk of injection site reactions (see section 4.8). 
 
Paediatric population 
 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis 
The safety and efficacy of golimumab was evaluated in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, withdrawal study (GO-KIDS) in 173 children (2 to 17 years of age) with active pJIA with 
at least 5 active joints and an inadequate response to MTX. Children with polyarticular course JIA 
(rheumatoid factor positive or negative polyarthritis, extended oligoarthritis, juvenile psoriatic arthritis 
or systemic JIA with no current systemic symptoms) were included in the study. The baseline median 
number of active joints was 12, and median CRP was 0.17 mg/dL. 
 
Part 1 of the study consisted of a 16-week open-label phase in which 173 enrolled children received 
golimumab 30 mg/m2 (maximum 50 mg) subcutaneously every 4 weeks and MTX. The 154 children 
who achieved an ACR Ped 30 response at week 16 entered Part 2 of the study, the randomised 
withdrawal phase, and received golimumab 30 mg/m2 (maximum 50 mg) + MTX or placebo + MTX 
every 4 weeks. After disease flare, children received golimumab 30 mg/m2 (maximum 50 mg) + 
MTX. At week 48, children entered a long-term extension. 
 
Children in this study demonstrated ACR Ped 30, 50, 70, and 90 responses from week 4. 
 
At week 16, 87% of children were ACR Ped 30 responders, and 79%, 66%, and 36% of children were 
ACR Ped 50, ACR Ped 70, and ACR Ped 90 responders, respectively. At week 16, 34% of children 
had inactive disease defined as having the presence of all of the following: no joints with active 
arthritis; no fever, rash, serositis, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, or generalised lymphadenopathy 
attributable to JIA; no active uveitis; normal ESR (< 20 mm/hour) or CRP (< 1.0 mg/dL); physician 
global assessment of disease activity (≤ 5 mm on the VAS); duration of morning stiffness 
< 15 minutes. 
 
At week 16, all ACR Ped components demonstrated clinically relevant improvement from baseline 
(see Table 9). 
 

27 
 
Table 9 
Improvements from baseline in ACR Ped components at week 16a 
Median percent improvement 
Golimumab 30 mg/m2 
nb = 173 
Physicians global assessment of disease (VASc 0-10 cm) 
88% 
Subject/parent global assessment of overall well-being 
(VAS 0-10 cm) 
67% 
Number of active joints 
92% 
Number of joints with limited range of motion 
80% 
Physical function by CHAQd 
50% 
ESR (mm/h)e 
33% 
a 
baseline = week 0 
b 
“n” reflects enrolled patients 
c 
VAS: Visual Analogue Scale 
d 
CHAQ: Child Health Assessment Questionnaire 
e 
ESR (mm/h): erythrocyte sedimentation rate (millimetres per hour) 
 
The primary endpoint, the proportion of children who were ACR Ped 30 responders at week 16 and 
who did not experience a flare between week 16 and week 48, was not achieved. The majority of 
children did not experience a flare between week 16 and week 48 (59% in the golimumab + MTX and 
53% in the placebo + MTX groups, respectively; p = 0.41). 
 
Pre-specified subgroup analyses of the primary endpoint by baseline CRP (≥ 1 mg/dL vs < 1 mg/dL) 
demonstrated higher flare rates in placebo + MTX vs golimumab + MTX treated subjects among 
subjects with baseline CRP ≥ 1 mg/dL (87% vs 40% p = 0.0068). 
 
At week 48, 53% and 55% of children in the golimumab + MTX group and placebo + MTX group, 
respectively, were ACR Ped 30 responders, and 40% and 28% of children in the golimumab + MTX 
group and placebo + MTX group, respectively, achieved inactive disease. 
 
Paediatric population 
The European Medicines Agency has deferred the obligation to submit the results of studies with 
golimumab in one or more subsets of the paediatric population in ulcerative colitis (see section 4.2 for 
information on paediatric use). 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
Absorption 
Following a single subcutaneous administration of golimumab to healthy subjects or patients with RA, 
the median time to reach maximum serum concentrations (Tmax) ranged from 2 to 6 days. A 
subcutaneous injection of 50 mg golimumab to healthy subjects produced a mean  standard deviation 
maximum serum concentration (Cmax) of 3.1  1.4 µg/mL. 
 
Following a single subcutaneous injection of 100 mg, the absorption of golimumab was similar in the 
upper arm, abdomen, and thigh, with a mean absolute bioavailability of 51%. Since golimumab 
exhibited approximately dose proportional PK following a subcutaneous administration, the absolute 
bioavailability of a golimumab 50 mg or 200 mg dose is expected to be similar. 
 
Distribution 
Following a single IV administration, the mean volume of distribution was 115  19 mL/kg. 
 

28 
 
Elimination 
The systemic clearance of golimumab was estimated to be 6.9  2.0 mL/day/kg. Terminal half-life 
value was estimated to be approximately 12  3 days in healthy subjects and similar values were 
observed in patients with RA, PsA, AS, or UC. 
 
When 50 mg golimumab was administered subcutaneously to patients with RA, PsA or AS 
every 4 weeks, serum concentrations reached steady state by week 12. With concomitant use of 
MTX, treatment with 50 mg golimumab subcutaneously every 4 weeks resulted in a mean ( 
standard deviation) steady-state trough serum concentration of approximately 0.6  0.4 µg/mL 
in RA patients with active RA despite MTX therapy, and approximately 0.5  0.4 µg/mL in 
patients with active PsA and approximately 0.8  0.4 µg/mL in patients with AS. Steady-state 
trough mean serum golimumab concentrations in patients with nr-Axial SpA were similar to 
those observed in patients with AS following subcutaneous administration of 50 mg golimumab 
every 4 weeks. 
Patients with RA, PsA or AS who did not receive concomitant MTX had approximately 30% lower 
steady-state trough concentrations of golimumab than those who received golimumab with MTX. In 
a limited number of RA patients treated with subcutaneous golimumab over a 6-month period, 
concomitant use of MTX reduced the apparent clearance of golimumab by approximately 36%. 
However, population pharmacokinetic analysis indicated that concomitant use of NSAIDs, oral 
corticosteroids or sulfasalazine did not influence the apparent clearance of golimumab. 
Following induction doses of 200 mg and 100 mg golimumab at week 0 and 2, respectively, and 
maintenance doses of 50 mg or 100 mg golimumab subcutaneously every 4 weeks thereafter to 
patients with UC, serum golimumab concentrations reached steady state approximately 14 weeks 
after the start of therapy. Treatment with 50 mg or 100 mg golimumab subcutaneous every 4 weeks 
during maintenance resulted in a mean steady-state trough serum concentration of approximately 
0.9 ± 0.5 µg/mL and 1.8 ± 1.1 µg/mL, respectively. 
 
In UC patients treated with 50 mg or 100 mg golimumab subcutaneously every 4 weeks, 
concomitant use of immunomodulators did not have a substantial effect on steady-state trough 
levels of golimumab. 
 
Patients who developed antibodies to golimumab generally had low trough steady-state serum 
concentrations of golimumab (see section 5.1). 
 
Linearity 
Golimumab exhibited approximately dose-proportional pharmacokinetics in patients with RA over the 
dose range of 0.1 to 10.0 mg/kg following a single intravenous dose. Following a single SC dose in 
healthy subjects, approximately dose-proportional pharmacokinetics were also observed over a dose 
range of 50 mg to 400 mg. 
 
Effect of weight on pharmacokinetics 
There was a trend toward higher apparent clearance of golimumab with increasing weight (see section 
4.2). 
 
Paediatric population 
The pharmacokinetics of golimumab were determined in 173 children with pJIA with an age range 
from 2 to 17 years of age. In the pJIA study, children who received golimumab 30 mg/m2 (maximum 
50 mg) subcutaneously every 4 weeks, had median steady-state trough golimumab concentrations 
which were similar across different age groups, and which were also similar to or slightly higher than 
those seen in adult RA patients who received 50 mg golimumab every 4 weeks. 
 
Population pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic modelling and simulation in children with pJIA 
confirmed the relationship between golimumab serum exposures and clinical efficacy and supports 

29 
 
that the dosing regimen of golimumab 50 mg every 4 weeks in children with pJIA of at least 40 kg 
achieves similar exposures to those shown to be efficacious in adults. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
Non-clinical data reveal no special hazard for humans based on conventional studies of safety 
pharmacology, repeated dose toxicity, toxicity to reproduction and development. 
 
No mutagenicity studies, animal fertility studies nor long-term carcinogenic studies have been 
conducted with golimumab. 
 
In a fertility and general reproductive function study in mouse, using an analogous antibody that 
selectively inhibits the functional activity of mouse TNFα, the number of pregnant mice was reduced. 
It is not known whether this finding was due to effects on the males and/or the females. In a 
developmental toxicity study conducted in mice following administration of the same analogous 
antibody, and in cynomolgus monkeys using golimumab, there was no indication of maternal toxicity, 
embryotoxicity or teratogenicity. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
Sorbitol  
L-Histidine 
L-Histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate 
Poloxamer 188 
Water for injections. 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal 
products. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
2 years 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2 °C – 8 °C). 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled pen or pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect it from light. 
GOBIVAZ may be stored at temperatures up to a maximum of 25°C for a single period of up to 30 
days, but not exceeding the original expiry date printed on the carton. The new expiry date must be 
written on the carton (up to 30 days from the date removed from the refrigerator). 
 
Once GOBIVAZ has been stored at room temperature, it should not be returned to refrigerated storage. 
GOBIVAZ must be discarded if not used within the 30 days of room temperature storage. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
0.5 mL solution in a pre-filled syringe (Type 1 glass) with a fixed needle (stainless steel) and a needle 
cover in a pre-filled pen. GOBIVAZ is available in packs containing 1 pre-filled pen and multipacks 
containing 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled pens. 
 

30 
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
0.5 mL solution in a pre-filled syringe (Type 1 glass) with a fixed needle (stainless steel) and a needle 
cover. GOBIVAZ is available in packs containing 1 pre-filled syringe and multipacks containing 3 (3 
packs of 1) pre-filled syringes. 
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
GOBIVAZ is supplied in a single use pre-filled pen or as a single use pre-filled syringe. Each pack is 
provided with instructions for use that fully describe the use of the pen or the syringe. After removing 
the pre-filled pen or the pre-filled syringe from the refrigerator it should be allowed to reach room 
temperature by waiting for 30 minutes, before injecting GOBIVAZ. The pen or the syringe should not 
be shaken. 
 
The solution is clear to slightly opalescent, colourless to light yellow and may contain a few small 
translucent or white particles of protein. This appearance is not unusual for solutions containing 
protein. GOBIVAZ should not be used if the solution is discoloured, cloudy or containing visible 
foreign particles. 
 
Comprehensive instructions for the preparation and administration of GOBIVAZ in a pre-filled pen or 
the pre-filled syringe are given in the package leaflet. 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/25/1988/001 1 pre-filled pen 
EU/1/25/1988/002 3 pre-filled pens 
 
EU/1/25/1988/003 1 pre-filled syringe 
EU/1/25/1988/004 3 pre-filled syringes 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
<{DD/MM/YYYY}> 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu 

31 
 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen. 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe. 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen  
Each 1 mL pre-filled pen contains 100 mg of golimumab*. 
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe  
Each 1 mL pre-filled syringe contains 100 mg of golimumab*. 
 
* 
Human IgG1κ monoclonal antibody produced by a murine hybridoma cell line with 
recombinant DNA technology. 
 
Excipient with known effect 
Each pre-filled pen contains 41 mg sorbitol per 100 mg dose.  
Each pre-filled syringe contains 41 mg sorbitol per 100 mg dose. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled pen (injection),  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled syringe (injection) 
 
The solution is clear to slightly opalescent, colourless to light yellow. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
GOBIVAZ, in combination with methotrexate (MTX), is indicated for: 
• 
the treatment of moderate to severe, active rheumatoid arthritis in adults when the response to 
disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug (DMARD) therapy including MTX has been 
inadequate. 
• 
the treatment of severe, active and progressive rheumatoid arthritis in adults not previously 
treated with MTX. 
 
Golimumab, in combination with MTX, has been shown to reduce the rate of progression of joint 
damage as measured by X-ray and to improve physical function. 
 
For information regarding the polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis indication, please see the 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg SmPC. 
 
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) 

32 
 
GOBIVAZ, alone or in combination with MTX, is indicated for the treatment of active and 
progressive psoriatic arthritis in adult patients when the response to previous DMARD therapy has 
been inadequate. Golimumab has been shown to reduce the rate of progression of peripheral joint 
damage as measured by X-ray in patients with polyarticular symmetrical subtypes of the disease (see 
section 5.1) and to improve physical function. 
 
Axial spondyloarthritis 
Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) 
GOBIVAZ is indicated for the treatment of severe, active ankylosing spondylitis in adults who have 
responded inadequately to conventional therapy. 
 
Non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis (nr-Axial SpA) 
GOBIVAZ is indicated for the treatment of adults with severe, active non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis with objective signs of inflammation as indicated by elevated C-reactive protein 
(CRP) and/or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evidence, who have had an inadequate response to, 
or are intolerant to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). 
 
Ulcerative colitis (UC) 
GOBIVAZ is indicated for treatment of moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis in adult 
patients who have had an inadequate response to conventional therapy including corticosteroids and 
6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) or azathioprine (AZA), or who are intolerant to or have medical 
contraindications for such therapies. 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Treatment is to be initiated and supervised by qualified physicians experienced in the diagnosis and 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis, or ulcerative colitis. Patients treated with GOBIVAZ should be given the Patient 
Reminder Card. 
 
Posology 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg given once a month, on the same date each month.  
GOBIVAZ should be given concomitantly with MTX. 
 
Psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, or non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg given once a month, on the same date each month. 
 
For all of the above indications, available data suggest that clinical response is usually achieved within 
12 to 14 weeks of treatment (after 3-4 doses). Continued therapy should be reconsidered in patients 
who show no evidence of therapeutic benefit within this time period. 
 
Patients with body weight greater than 100 kg 
For all of the above indications, in patients with RA, PsA, AS, or nr-Axial SpA with a body weight of 
more than 100 kg who do not achieve an adequate clinical response after 3 or 4 doses, increasing the 
dose of golimumab to 100 mg once a month may be considered, taking into account the increased risk 
of certain serious adverse reactions with the 100 mg dose compared with the 50 mg dose 
(see section 4.8). Continued therapy should be reconsidered in patients who show no evidence of 
therapeutic benefit after receiving 3 to 4 additional doses of 100 mg. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
Patients with body weight less than 80 kg 
GOBIVAZ given as an initial dose of 200 mg, followed by 100 mg at week 2. Patients who have an 
adequate response should receive 50 mg at week 6 and every 4 weeks thereafter. Patients who have an 
inadequate response may benefit from continuing with 100 mg at week 6 and every 4 weeks thereafter 
(see section 5.1). 

33 
 
 
Patients with body weight greater than or equal to 80 kg 
GOBIVAZ given as an initial dose of 200 mg, followed by 100 mg at week 2, then 100 mg every 4 
weeks, thereafter (see section 5.1). 
 
During maintenance treatment, corticosteroids may be tapered in accordance with clinical practice 
guidelines. 
 
Available data suggest that clinical response is usually achieved within 12-14 weeks of treatment 
(after 4 doses). Continued therapy should be reconsidered in patients who show no evidence of 
therapeutic benefit within this time period. 
 
Missed dose 
If a patient forgets to inject GOBIVAZ on the planned date, the forgotten dose should be injected as 
soon as the patient remembers. Patients should be instructed not to inject a double dose to make up for 
the forgotten dose. 
 
The next dose should be administered based on the following guidance: 
• if the dose is less than 2 weeks late, the patient should inject the forgotten dose and stay on 
the original schedule. 
• if the dose is more than 2 weeks late, the patient should inject the forgotten dose and a 
new schedule should be established from the date of this injection. 
 
Special populations 
Elderly (≥ 65 years) 
No dose adjustment is required in the elderly. 
 
Renal and hepatic impairment 
Golimumab has not been studied in these patient populations. No dose recommendations can be made. 
 
Paediatric population 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg is not recommended in children aged less than 18. 
 
Method of administration 
GOBIVAZ is for subcutaneous use. After proper training in subcutaneous injection technique, patients 
may self-inject if their physician determines that this is appropriate, with medical follow-up as 
necessary. Patients should be instructed to inject the full amount of GOBIVAZ according to the 
comprehensive instructions for use provided in the package leaflet. If multiple injections are required, 
the injections should be administered at different sites on the body. 
 
For administration instructions, see section 6.6. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
Active tuberculosis (TB) or other severe infections such as sepsis, and opportunistic infections (see 
section 4.4). 
 
Moderate or severe heart failure (NYHA class III/IV) (see section 4.4). 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the name and the batch number 
of the administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 

34 
 
Infections 
Patients must be monitored closely for infections including tuberculosis before, during and after 
treatment with golimumab. Because the elimination of golimumab may take up to 5 months, 
monitoring should be continued throughout this period. Further treatment with golimumab must not be 
given if a patient develops a serious infection or sepsis (see section 4.3). 
 
Golimumab should not be given to patients with a clinically important, active infection. Caution 
should be exercised when considering the use of golimumab in patients with a chronic infection or a 
history of recurrent infection. Patients should be advised of, and avoid exposure to, potential risk 
factors for infection as appropriate. 
 
Patients taking TNF-blockers are more susceptible to serious infections. 
Bacterial (including sepsis and pneumonia), mycobacterial (including TB), invasive fungal and 
opportunistic infections, including fatalities, have been reported in patients receiving golimumab. 
Some of these serious infections have occurred in patients on concomitant immunosuppressive therapy 
that, in addition to their underlying disease, could predispose them to infections. Patients who develop 
a new infection while undergoing treatment with golimumab should be monitored closely and undergo 
a complete diagnostic evaluation. Administration of golimumab should be discontinued if a patient 
develops a new serious infection or sepsis, and appropriate antimicrobial or antifungal therapy should 
be initiated until the infection is controlled. 
 
For patients who have resided in or travelled to regions where invasive fungal infections such as 
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, or blastomycosis are endemic, the benefits and risks of 
golimumab treatment should be carefully considered before initiation of golimumab therapy. In at-risk 
patients treated with golimumab, an invasive fungal infection should be suspected if they develop a 
serious systemic illness. Diagnosis and administration of empiric antifungal therapy in these patients 
should be made in consultation with a physician with expertise in the care of patients with invasive 
fungal infections, if feasible. 
 
Tuberculosis 
There have been reports of tuberculosis in patients receiving golimumab. It should be noted that in the 
majority of these reports, tuberculosis was extrapulmonary presenting as either local or disseminated 
disease. 
 
Before starting treatment with golimumab, all patients must be evaluated for both active and inactive 
(‘latent’) tuberculosis. This evaluation should include a detailed medical history with personal history 
of tuberculosis or possible previous contact with tuberculosis and previous and/or current 
immunosuppressive therapy. Appropriate screening tests, i.e. tuberculin skin or blood test and chest 
X-ray, should be performed in all patients (local recommendations may apply). It is recommended that 
the conduct of these tests should be recorded in the Patient Reminder Card. Prescribers are reminded 
of the risk of false negative tuberculin skin test results, especially in patients who are severely ill or 
immunocompromised. 
 
If active tuberculosis is diagnosed, golimumab therapy must not be initiated (see section 4.3). 
 
If latent tuberculosis is suspected, a physician with expertise in the treatment of tuberculosis should be 
consulted. In all situations described below, the benefit/risk balance of golimumab therapy should be 
very carefully considered.  
 
If inactive (‘latent’) tuberculosis is diagnosed, treatment for latent tuberculosis must be started with 
anti-tuberculosis therapy before the initiation of golimumab, and in accordance with local 
recommendations. 
 
In patients who have several or significant risk factors for tuberculosis and have a negative test for 
latent tuberculosis, anti-tuberculosis therapy should be considered before the initiation of golimumab. 
Use of anti-tuberculosis therapy should also be considered before the initiation of golimumab in 

35 
 
patients with a past history of latent or active tuberculosis in whom an adequate course of treatment 
cannot be confirmed. 
 
Cases of active tuberculosis have occurred in patients treated with golimumab during and after 
treatment for latent tuberculosis. Patients receiving golimumab should be monitored closely for signs 
and symptoms of active tuberculosis, including patients who tested negative for latent tuberculosis, 
patients who are on treatment for latent tuberculosis, or patients who were previously treated for 
tuberculosis infection. 
 
All patients should be informed to seek medical advice if signs/symptoms suggestive of tuberculosis 
(e.g. persistent cough, wasting/weight loss, low-grade fever) appear during or after golimumab 
treatment. 
 
Hepatitis B virus reactivation 
Reactivation of hepatitis B has occurred in patients receiving a TNF-antagonist including golimumab, 
who are chronic carriers of this virus (i.e. surface antigen positive). Some cases have had fatal 
outcome. 
 
Patients should be tested for HBV infection before initiating treatment with golimumab. For patients 
who test positive for HBV infection, consultation with a physician with expertise in the treatment of 
hepatitis B is recommended. 
 
Carriers of HBV who require treatment with golimumab should be closely monitored for signs and 
symptoms of active HBV infection throughout therapy and for several months following termination 
of therapy. Adequate data of treating patients who are carriers of HBV with anti-viral therapy in 
conjunction with TNF-antagonist therapy to prevent HBV reactivation are not available. In patients 
who develop HBV reactivation, golimumab should be stopped and effective anti-viral therapy with 
appropriate supportive treatment should be initiated. 
 
Malignancies and lymphoproliferative disorders 
The potential role of TNF-blocking therapy in the development of malignancies is not known. Based 
on the current knowledge, a possible risk for the development of lymphomas, leukaemia or other 
malignancies in patients treated with a TNF-antagonist cannot be excluded. Caution should be 
exercised when considering TNF-blocking therapy for patients with a history of malignancy or when 
considering continuing treatment in patients who develop malignancy. 
 
Paediatric malignancy 
Malignancies, some fatal, have been reported among children, adolescents and young adults (up to 22 
years of age) treated with TNF-blocking agents (initiation of therapy ≤ 18 years of age) in the post 
marketing setting. Approximately half the cases were lymphomas. The other cases represented a 
variety of different malignancies and included rare malignancies usually associated with 
immunosuppression. A risk for the development of malignancies in children and adolescents treated 
with TNF-blockers cannot be excluded. 
 
Lymphoma and leukaemia 
In the controlled portions of clinical trials of all the TNF-blocking agents including golimumab, more 
cases of lymphoma have been observed among patients receiving anti-TNF treatment compared with 
control patients. During the golimumab Phase IIb and Phase III clinical trials in RA, PsA and AS, the 
incidence of lymphoma in golimumab-treated patients was higher than expected in the general 
population. Cases of leukaemia have been reported in patients treated with golimumab. There is an 
increased background risk for lymphoma and leukaemia in rheumatoid arthritis patients with 
long-standing, highly active, inflammatory disease, which complicates risk estimation. 
 
Rare post-marketing cases of hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma (HSTCL) have been reported in patients 
treated with other TNF-blocking agents (see section 4.8). This rare type of T-cell lymphoma has a very 
aggressive disease course and is usually fatal. The majority of cases have occurred in adolescent and 
young adult males with nearly all on concomitant treatment with azathioprine (AZA) or 

36 
 
6-mercaptopurine (6–MP) for inflammatory bowel disease. The potential risk with the combination of 
AZA or 6-MP and golimumab should be carefully considered. A risk for the development for 
hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma in patients treated with TNF-blockers cannot be excluded. 
 
Malignancies other than lymphoma 
In the controlled portions of the golimumab Phase IIb and Phase III clinical trials in RA, PsA, AS, and 
UC, the incidence of non-lymphoma malignancies (excluding non-melanoma skin cancer) was similar 
between the golimumab and the control groups. 
 
Colon dysplasia/carcinoma 
It is not known if golimumab treatment influences the risk for developing dysplasia or colon cancer. 
All patients with ulcerative colitis who are at increased risk for dysplasia or colon carcinoma (for 
example, patients with long-standing ulcerative colitis or primary sclerosing cholangitis), or who had a 
prior history of dysplasia or colon carcinoma should be screened for dysplasia at regular intervals 
before therapy and throughout their disease course. This evaluation should include colonoscopy and 
biopsies per local recommendations. In patients with newly diagnosed dysplasia treated with 
golimumab, the risks and benefits to the individual patient must be carefully reviewed and 
consideration should be given to whether therapy should be continued. 
 
In an exploratory clinical trial evaluating the use of golimumab in patients with severe persistent 
asthma, more malignancies were reported in patients treated with golimumab compared with control 
patients (see section 4.8). The significance of this finding is unknown. 
 
In an exploratory clinical trial evaluating the use of another anti-TNF agent, infliximab, in patients 
with moderate to severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), more malignancies, mostly in 
the lung or head and neck, were reported in infliximab-treated patients compared with control patients. 
All patients had a history of heavy smoking. Therefore, caution should be exercised when using any 
TNF-antagonist in COPD patients, as well as in patients with an increased risk of malignancy due to 
heavy smoking. 
 
Skin cancers 
Melanoma and Merkel cell carcinoma have been reported in patients treated with TNF-blocking 
agents, including golimumab (see section 4.8). Periodic skin examination is recommended, 
particularly for patients with risk factors for skin cancer. 
 
Congestive heart failure (CHF) 
Cases of worsening congestive heart failure (CHF) and new onset CHF have been reported with TNF 
blockers, including golimumab. Some cases had a fatal outcome. In a clinical trial with another 
TNF-antagonist worsening congestive heart failure and increased mortality due to CHF have been 
observed. Golimumab has not been studied in patients with CHF. Golimumab should be used with 
caution in patients with mild heart failure (NYHA class I/II). Patients should be closely monitored and 
golimumab must be discontinued in patients who develop new or worsening symptoms of heart failure 
(see section 4.3). 
 
Neurological events 
Use of TNF-blocking agents, including golimumab, has been associated with cases of new onset or 
exacerbation of clinical symptoms and/or radiographic evidence of central nervous system 
demyelinating disorders, including multiple sclerosis and peripheral demyelinating disorders. In 
patients with pre-existing or recent onset of demyelinating disorders, the benefits and risks of 
anti-TNF treatment should be carefully considered before initiation of golimumab therapy. 
Discontinuation of golimumab should be considered if these disorders develop (see section 4.8). 
 
Surgery 
There is limited safety experience of golimumab treatment in patients who have undergone surgical 
procedures, including arthroplasty. The long half-life should be taken into consideration if a surgical 
procedure is planned. A patient who requires surgery while on golimumab should be closely 
monitored for infections, and appropriate actions should be taken. 

37 
 
 
Immunosuppression 
The possibility exists for TNF-blocking agents, including golimumab, to affect host defences against 
infections and malignancies since TNF mediates inflammation and modulates cellular immune 
responses. 
 
Autoimmune processes 
The relative deficiency of TNF  caused by anti-TNF therapy may result in the initiation of an 
autoimmune process. If a patient develops symptoms suggestive of a lupus-like syndrome following 
treatment with golimumab and is positive for antibodies against double-stranded DNA, treatment with 
golimumab should be discontinued (see section 4.8). 
 
Haematologic reactions 
There have been reports of pancytopenia, leukopenia, neutropenia, agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia, 
and thrombocytopenia in patients receiving TNF-blockers, including golimumab. All patients should 
be advised to seek immediate medical attention if they develop signs and symptoms suggestive of 
blood dyscrasias (e.g. persistent fever, bruising, bleeding, pallor). Discontinuation of golimumab 
therapy should be considered in patients with confirmed significant haematologic abnormalities. 
 
Concurrent administration of TNF-antagonists and anakinra 
Serious infections and neutropenia were seen in clinical studies with concurrent use of anakinra and 
another TNF-blocking agent, etanercept, with no added clinical benefit. Because of the nature of the 
adverse events seen with this combination therapy, similar toxicities may also result from the 
combination of anakinra and other TNF-blocking agents. The combination of golimumab and anakinra 
is not recommended. 
 
Concurrent administration of TNF-antagonists and abatacept 
In clinical studies concurrent administration of TNF-antagonists and abatacept has been associated 
with an increased risk of infections including serious infections compared to TNF-antagonists alone, 
without increased clinical benefit. The combination of golimumab and abatacept is not recommended. 
 
Concurrent administration with other biological therapeutics 
There is insufficient information regarding the concomitant use of golimumab with other biological 
therapeutics used to treat the same conditions as golimumab. The concomitant use of golimumab with 
these biologics is not recommended because of the possibility of an increased risk of infection, and 
other potential pharmacological interactions. 
 
Switching between biological DMARDs 
Care should be taken and patients should continue to be monitored when switching from one biologic 
to another, since overlapping biological activity may further increase the risk for adverse events, 
including infection. 
 
Vaccinations/therapeutic infectious agents 
Patients treated with golimumab may receive concurrent vaccinations, except for live vaccines (see 
sections 4.5 and 4.6). In patients receiving anti-TNF therapy, limited data are available on the response 
to vaccination with live vaccines or on the secondary transmission of infection by live vaccines. Use 
of live vaccines could result in clinical infections, including disseminated infections. 
 
Other uses of therapeutic infectious agents such as live attenuated bacteria (e.g. BCG bladder 
instillation for the treatment of cancer) could result in clinical infections, including disseminated 
infections. It is recommended that therapeutic infectious agents not be given concurrently with 
golimumab. 
 
Allergic reactions 
In post-marketing experience, serious systemic hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylactic 
reaction) have been reported following golimumab administration. Some of these reactions occurred 
after the first administration of golimumab. If an anaphylactic reaction or other serious allergic 

38 
 
reactions occur, administration of golimumab should be discontinued immediately and appropriate 
therapy initiated. 
 
Special populations 
 
Elderly (≥ 65 years) 
In the Phase III studies in RA, PsA, AS, and UC, no overall differences in adverse events (AEs), 
serious adverse events (SAEs), and serious infections in patients age 65 or older who received 
golimumab were observed compared with younger patients. However, caution should be exercised 
when treating the elderly and particular attention paid with respect to occurrence of infections. There 
were no patients age 45 and over in the nr-Axial SpA study. 
 
Renal and hepatic impairment 
Specific studies of golimumab have not been conducted in patients with renal or hepatic impairment. 
Golimumab should be used with caution in subjects with impaired hepatic function (see section 4.2). 
 
Excipients 
GOBIVAZ contains sorbitol. In patients with rare hereditary problems of fructose intolerance, the 
additive effect of concomitantly administered products containing sorbitol (or fructose) and dietary 
intake of sorbitol (or fructose) should be taken into account (see section 2). 
 
Potential for medication errors 
GOBIVAZ is registered in 50 mg and 100 mg strengths for subcutaneous administration. It is 
important that the right strength is used to administer the correct dose as indicated in the posology (see 
section 4.2). Care should be taken to provide the right strength to ensure that patients are not 
underdosed or overdosed. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
No interaction studies have been performed. 
 
Concurrent use with other biological therapeutics 
The combination of golimumab with other biological therapeutics used to treat the same conditions as 
golimumab, including anakinra and abatacept is not recommended (see section 4.4). 
 
Live vaccines/therapeutic infectious agents 
Live vaccines should not be given concurrently with golimumab (see sections 4.4 and 4.6). 
 
Therapeutic infectious agents should not be given concurrently with golimumab (see section 4.4). 
 
Methotrexate 
Although concomitant use of MTX results in higher steady-state trough concentrations of golimumab 
in patients with RA, PsA or AS, the data do not suggest the need for dose adjustment of either 
golimumab or MTX (see section 5.2). 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Women of childbearing potential 
Women of childbearing potential must use adequate contraception to prevent pregnancy and continue 
its use for at least 6 months after the last golimumab treatment. 
 
Pregnancy 
There is a moderate amount (approximately 400) of prospectively collected pregnancies exposed to 
golimumab resulting in live birth with known outcomes, including 220 pregnancies exposed during the 
first trimester. In a population-based study from Northern Europe including 131 pregnancies (and 
134 infants), there were 6/134 (4.5%) events of major congenital anomalies following in utero 
exposure to golimumab vs 599/10,823 (5.5%) events for non-biologic systemic therapy compared to 

39 
 
4.6% in the general population of the study. Confounder-adjusted odds ratios were OR 0.79 (95% CI 
0.35-1.81) for golimumab vs. non-biologic systemic therapy and OR 0.95 (95% CI 0.42-2.16) for 
golimumab vs. the general population, respectively. 
 
Due to its inhibition of TNF, golimumab administered during pregnancy could affect normal immune 
responses in the newborn. Studies in animals do not indicate direct or indirect harmful effects with 
respect to pregnancy, embryonal/foetal development, parturition or postnatal development 
(see section 5.3). The available clinical experience is limited. Golimumab should only be used during 
pregnancy if clearly needed. 
 
Golimumab crosses the placenta. Following treatment with a TNF-blocking monoclonal antibody 
during pregnancy, the antibody has been detected for up to 6 months in the serum of the infant born by 
the treated woman. Consequently, these infants may be at increased risk of infection. Administration 
of live vaccines to infants exposed to golimumab in utero is not recommended for 6 months following 
the mother’s last golimumab injection during pregnancy (see sections 4.4 and 4.5). 
 
Breast-feeding 
It is not known whether golimumab is excreted in human milk or absorbed systemically after 
ingestion. Golimumab was shown to pass over to breast milk in monkeys, and because human 
immunoglobulins are excreted in milk, women must not breast feed during and for at least 6 months 
after golimumab treatment. 
 
Fertility 
No animal fertility studies have been conducted with golimumab. A fertility study in mice, using an 
analogous antibody that selectively inhibits the functional activity of mouse TNFα, showed no 
relevant effects on fertility (see section 5.3). 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 
GOBIVAZ has minor influence on the ability to drive and use machines. Dizziness may however 
occur following administration of GOBIVAZ (see section 4.8). 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
In the controlled period of the pivotal trials in RA, PsA, AS, nr-Axial SpA, and UC, upper respiratory 
tract infection was the most common adverse reaction (AR) reported in 12.6% of golimumab-treated 
patients compared with 11.0% of control patients. The most serious ARs that have been reported for 
golimumab include serious infections (including sepsis, pneumonia, TB, invasive fungal and 
opportunistic infections), demyelinating disorders, HBV reactivation, CHF, autoimmune processes 
(lupus-like syndrome), haematologic reactions, serious systemic hypersensitivity (including 
anaphylactic reaction), vasculitis, lymphoma and leukaemia (see section 4.4). 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
ARs observed in clinical studies and reported from world-wide post-marketing use of golimumab are 
listed in Table 1. Within the designated system organ classes, the ARs are listed under headings of 
frequency and using the following convention: very common (≥ 1/10); common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10); 
uncommon (≥ 1/1,000 to < 1/100); rare (≥ 1/10,000 to < 1/1,000); very rare (< 1/10,000); not known 
(cannot be estimated from the available data). Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are 
presented in order of decreasing seriousness. 
 

40 
 
Table 1  
Tabulated list of ARs 
Infections and infestations 
Very common: 
Common: 
Uncommon: 
Rare: 
Upper respiratory tract infection (nasopharyngitis, 
pharyngitis, laryngitis and rhinitis) 
Bacterial infections (such as cellulitis), lower respiratory tract 
infection (such as pneumonia), viral infections (such as 
influenza and herpes), bronchitis, sinusitis, superficial fungal 
infections, abscess 
Sepsis including septic shock, pyelonephritis 
Tuberculosis, opportunistic infections (such as invasive 
fungal infections [histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, 
pneumocytosis], bacterial, atypical mycobacterial infection 
and protozoal), hepatitis B reactivation, bacterial arthritis, 
infective bursitis 
Neoplasms, benign, malignant and 
unspecified 
Uncommon: 
Rare: 
Not known: 
Neoplasms (such as skin cancer, squamous cell carcinoma 
and melanocytic naevus) 
Lymphoma, leukaemia, melanoma, Merkel cell carcinoma 
Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma*, Kaposi’s sarcoma 
Blood and lymphatic system 
disorders 
Common: 
Uncommon: 
Rare: 
Leukopenia (including neutropenia), anaemia 
Thrombocytopenia, pancytopenia 
Aplastic anaemia, agranulocytosis 
Immune system disorders 
Common: 
Rare: 
Allergic reactions (bronchospasm, hypersensitivity, urticaria), 
autoantibody positive 
Serious systemic hypersensitivity reactions (including 
anaphylactic reaction), vasculitis (systemic), sarcoidosis 
Endocrine disorders 
Uncommon: Thyroid disorder (such as hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism 
and goitre) 
Metabolism and nutrition disorders 
Uncommon: Blood glucose increased, lipids increased 
Psychiatric disorders 
Common: Depression, insomnia 
Nervous system disorders 
Common: 
Uncommon: 
Rare: 
Dizziness, headache, paraesthesia 
Balance disorders 
Demyelinating disorders (central and peripheral), dysgeusia 
Eye disorders 
Uncommon: Visual disorders (such as blurred vision and decreased visual 
acuity), conjunctivitis, eye allergy (such as pruritis and 
irritation) 
Cardiac disorders 
Uncommon:
Rare:
Arrhythmia, ischemic coronary artery disorders 
Congestive heart failure (new onset or worsening) 
Vascular disorders 
Common: 
Uncommon:
Rare:
 
Hypertension 
Thrombosis (such as deep venous and aortic), flushing  
Raynaud’s phenomenon 

41 
 
Respiratory, thoracic and 
mediastinal disorders 
Common:
Uncommon:
Asthma and related symptoms (such as wheezing and 
bronchial hyperactivity) 
Interstitial lung disease 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Common:
 
 
Uncommon:
Dyspepsia, gastrointestinal and abdominal pain, nausea, 
gastrointestinal inflammatory disorders (such as gastritis and 
colitis), stomatitis 
Constipation, gastro-oesophageal reflux 
disease 
Hepatobiliary disorders 
Common:
 
Uncommon:
 
Alanine aminotransferase increased, aspartate 
aminotransferase increased 
Cholelithiasis, hepatic disorders 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
disorders 
Common: 
Uncommon:
Rare: 
Not known:
 Pruritus, rash, alopecia, dermatitis 
Bullous skin reactions, psoriasis (new onset or worsening of 
pre-existing psoriasis, palmar/plantar and pustular), urticaria 
Lichenoid reactions, skin exfoliation, vasculitis (cutaneous) 
Worsening of symptoms of dermatomyositis 
Musculoskeletal and connective 
tissue disorders 
Rare:
 
 
Lupus-like syndrome 
Renal and urinary disorders 
Rare: Bladder disorders, renal disorders 
Reproductive system and breast 
disorders 
Uncommon:
 
 
Breast disorders, menstrual disorders 
General disorders and 
administration site conditions 
Common:
 
 
Rare:
 
 
Pyrexia, asthenia, injection site reaction (such as injection site 
erythema, urticaria, induration, pain, bruising, pruritus, 
irritation and paraesthesia), chest discomfort 
Impaired healing 
Injury, poisoning and procedural 
complications 
Common:
 
 
Bone fractures 
*  Observed with other TNF-blocking agents. 
 
Throughout this section, median duration of follow-up (approximately 4 years) is generally presented 
for all golimumab use. Where golimumab use is described by dose, the median duration of follow-up 
varies (approximately 2 years for 50 mg dose, approximately 3 years for 100 mg dose) as patients may 
have switched between doses. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Infections 
In the controlled period of pivotal trials, upper respiratory tract infection was the most common 
adverse reaction reported in 12.6% of golimumab-treated patients (incidence per 100 subject-years: 
60.8; 95% CI: 55.0, 67.1) compared with 11.0% of control patients (incidence per 100 subject-years: 

42 
 
54.5; 95% CI: 46.1, 64.0). In controlled and uncontrolled portions of the studies with a median follow-
up of approximately 4 years, the incidence per 100 subject-years of upper respiratory tract infections 
was 34.9 events; 95% CI: 33.8, 36.0 for golimumab treated patients. 
 
In the controlled period of pivotal trials, infections were observed in 23.0% of golimumab-treated 
patients (incidence per 100 subject-years: 132.0; 95% CI: 123.3, 141.1) compared with 20.2% of 
control patients (incidence per 100 subject-years: 122.3; 95% CI: 109.5, 136.2). In controlled and 
uncontrolled portions of the trials with a median follow-up of approximately 4 years, the incidence per 
100 subject-years of infections was 81.1 events; 95% CI: 79.5, 82.8 for golimumab treated patients. 
 
In the controlled period of RA, PsA, AS, and nr-Axial SpA trials, serious infections were observed in 
1.2% of golimumab-treated patients and 1.2% of control-treated patients. The incidence of serious 
infections per 100 subject-years of follow-up in the controlled period of RA, PsA, AS, and nr-Axial 
SpA trials was 7.3; 95% CI: 4.6, 11.1 for the golimumab 100 mg group, 2.9; 95% CI: 1.2, 6.0 for the 
golimumab 50 mg group and 3.6; 95% CI: 1.5, 7.0 for the placebo group. In the controlled period of 
UC trials of golimumab induction, serious infections were observed in 0.8% of golimumab-treated 
patients compared with 1.5% of control-treated patients. Serious infections observed in 
golimumab-treated patients included tuberculosis, bacterial infections including sepsis and pneumonia, 
invasive fungal infections and other opportunistic infections. Some of these infections have been fatal. 
In the controlled and uncontrolled portions of the pivotal trials with a median follow-up of up to 
3 years, there was a greater incidence of serious infections, including opportunistic infections and TB 
in patients receiving golimumab 100 mg compared with patients receiving golimumab 50 mg. The 
incidence per 100 subject-years of all serious infections was 4.1; 95% CI: 3.6, 4.5, in patients 
receiving golimumab 100 mg and 2.5; 95% CI: 2.0, 3.1, in patients receiving golimumab 50 mg. 
 
Malignancies 
Lymphoma 
The incidence of lymphoma in golimumab-treated patients during the pivotal trials was higher than 
expected in the general population. In the controlled and uncontrolled portions of these trials with a 
median follow-up of up to 3 years, a greater incidence of lymphoma was observed in patients 
receiving golimumab 100 mg compared with patients receiving golimumab 50 mg. Lymphoma was 
diagnosed in 11 subjects (1 in the golimumab 50 mg treatment groups and 10 in the golimumab 100 
mg treatment groups) with an incidence (95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up of 0.03 (0.00, 
0.15) and 0.13 (0.06, 0.24) events for golimumab 50 mg and 100 mg respectively and 0.00 
(0.00, 0.57) events for the placebo. The majority of lymphomas occurred in study GO-AFTER, which 
enrolled patients previously exposed to anti-TNF agents who had longer disease duration and more 
refractory disease (see section 4.4). 
 
Malignancies other than lymphoma 
In the controlled periods of pivotal trials and through approximately 4 years of follow-up, the 
incidence of non-lymphoma malignancies (excluding non-melanoma skin cancer) was similar between 
the golimumab and the control groups. Through approximately 4 years of follow-up, the incidence of 
non-lymphoma malignancies (excluding non-melanoma skin cancer) was similar to the general 
population. 
 
In the controlled and uncontrolled periods of pivotal trials with a median follow-up of up to 3 years, 
non-melanoma skin cancer was diagnosed in 5 placebo-treated, 10 golimumab 50 mg-treated and 31 
golimumab 100 mg-treated subjects with an incidence (95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up of 
0.36 (0.26, 0.49) for combined golimumab and 0.87 (0.28, 2.04) for placebo. 
 
In the controlled and uncontrolled period of pivotal trials with a median follow-up of up to 3 years, 
malignancies besides melanoma, non-melanoma skin cancer and lymphoma were diagnosed in 5 
placebo-treated, 21 golimumab 50 mg-treated and 34 golimumab 100 mg-treated subjects with an 
incidence (95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up of 0.48 (0.36, 0.62) for combined golimumab 
and 0.87 (0.28, 2.04) for placebo (see section 4.4). 
 

43 
 
Cases reported in clinical studies in asthma 
In an exploratory clinical study, patients with severe persistent asthma received a golimumab loading 
dose (150% of the assigned treatment dose) subcutaneously at week 0 followed by golimumab 
200 mg, golimumab 100 mg or golimumab 50 mg every 4 weeks subcutaneously through week 52. 
Eight malignancies in the combined golimumab treatment group (n = 230) and none in the placebo 
treatment group (n = 79) were reported. Lymphoma was reported in 1 patient, non-melanoma skin 
cancer in 2 patients, and other malignancies in 5 patients. There was no specific clustering of any type 
of malignancy. 
 
During the placebo-controlled portion of the study, the incidence (95% CI) of all malignancies per 100 
subject-years of follow-up was 3.19 (1.38, 6.28) in the golimumab group. In this study, the incidence 
(95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up in golimumab-treated subjects was 0.40 (0.01, 2.20) for 
lymphoma, 0.79 (0.10, 2.86) for non-melanoma skin cancers, and 1.99 (0.64, 4.63) for other 
malignancies. For placebo subjects, the incidence (95% CI) per 100 subject-years of follow-up of 
these malignancies was 0.00 (0.00, 2.94). The significance of this finding is unknown. 
 
Neurological events 
In the controlled and uncontrolled periods of the pivotal trials with a median follow-up of up to 
3 years, a greater incidence of demyelination was observed in patients receiving golimumab 100 mg 
compared with patients receiving golimumab 50 mg (see section 4.4). 
 
Liver enzyme elevations 
In the controlled period of RA and PsA pivotal trials, mild ALT elevations (> 1 and < 3 x upper limit 
of normal (ULN)) occurred in similar proportions of golimumab and control patients in the RA and 
PsA studies (22.1% to 27.4% of patients); in the AS and nr-Axial SpA studies, more 
golimumab-treated patients (26.9%) than control patients (10.6%) had mild ALT elevations. In the 
controlled and uncontrolled periods of the RA and PsA pivotal trials, with a median follow-up of 
approximately 5 years, the incidence of mild ALT elevations was similar in golimumab-treated and 
control patients in RA and PsA studies. In the controlled period of the UC pivotal trials of golimumab 
induction, mild ALT elevations (> 1 and < 3 x ULN) occurred in similar proportions of 
golimumab-treated and control patients (8.0% to 6.9%, respectively). In controlled and uncontrolled 
periods of the UC pivotal trials with a median follow-up of approximately 2 years, the proportion of 
patients with mild ALT elevations was 24.7% in patients receiving golimumab during the maintenance 
portion of the UC study. 
 
In the controlled period of RA and AS pivotal trials, ALT elevations ≥ 5 x ULN were uncommon and 
seen in more golimumab-treated patients (0.4% to 0.9%) than control patients (0.0%). This trend was 
not observed in the PsA population. In the controlled and uncontrolled periods of RA, PsA and AS 
pivotal trials, with a median follow-up of 5 years, the incidence of ALT elevations ≥ 5 x ULN was 
similar in both golimumab-treated and control patients. In general these elevations were asymptomatic 
and the abnormalities decreased or resolved with either continuation or discontinuation of golimumab 
or modification of concomitant medicinal products. No cases were reported in the controlled and 
uncontrolled periods of the nr-Axial SpA study (up to 1 year). In the controlled periods of the pivotal 
UC trials, of golimumab induction, ALT elevations ≥ 5 x ULN occurred in similar proportions of 
golimumab-treated patients compared to placebo-treated patients (0.3% to 1.0%, respectively). In the 
controlled and uncontrolled periods of the pivotal UC trials with a median follow-up of approximately 
2 years, the proportion of patients with ALT elevations ≥ 5 x ULN was 0.8% in patients receiving 
golimumab during the maintenance portion of the UC study. 
 
Within the RA, PsA, AS, and nr-Axial SpA pivotal trials, one patient in an RA trial with pre-existing 
liver abnormalities and confounding medicinal products treated with golimumab developed 
  
non-infectious fatal hepatitis with jaundice. The role of golimumab as a contributing or aggravation 
factor cannot be excluded. 
 

44 
 
Injection site reactions 
In the controlled periods of pivotal trials, 5.4% of golimumab-treated patients had injection site 
reactions compared with 2.0% in control patients. The presence of antibodies to golimumab may 
increase the risk of injection site reactions. The majority of the injection site reactions were mild and 
moderate and the most frequent manifestation was injection site erythema. Injection site reactions 
generally did not necessitate discontinuation of the medicinal product. 
 
In controlled Phase IIb and/or III trials in RA, PsA, AS, nr-Axial SpA, severe persistent asthma, and 
Phase II/III trials in UC, no patients treated with golimumab developed anaphylactic reactions. 
 
Autoimmune antibodies 
In the controlled and uncontrolled periods of pivotal trials through 1 year of follow-up, 3.5% of 
golimumab-treated patients and 2.3% of control patients were newly ANA-positive (at titres of 1:160 
or greater). The frequency of anti-dsDNA antibodies at 1 year of follow-up in patients anti-dsDNA 
negative at baseline was 1.1%. 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
Single doses up to 10 mg/kg intravenously have been administered in a clinical study without 
dose-limiting toxicity. In case of an overdose, it is recommended that the patient be monitored for any 
signs or symptoms of adverse effects and appropriate symptomatic treatment be instituted 
immediately. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Immunosuppressants, tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) inhibitors, 
ATC code: L04AB06. 
 
GOBIVAZ is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the 
European Medicines Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
Mechanism of action 
Golimumab is a human monoclonal antibody that forms high affinity, stable complexes with both the 
soluble and transmembrane bioactive forms of human TNF-α, which prevents the binding of TNF-α to 
its receptors. 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
The binding of human TNF by golimumab was shown to neutralise TNF-α-induced cell-surface 
expression of the adhesion molecules E-selectin, vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1 and 
intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 by human endothelial cells. In vitro, TNF-induced secretion 
of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8 and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) by 
human endothelial cells was also inhibited by golimumab.  
 
Improvement in C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were observed relative to placebo groups and 
treatment with golimumab resulted in significant reductions from baseline in serum levels of IL-6, 
ICAM-1, matrix-metalloproteinase (MMP)-3 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
compared to control treatment. In addition, levels of TNF-α were reduced in RA and AS patients and 

45 
 
levels of IL-8 were reduced in PsA patients. These changes were observed at the first assessment 
(week 4) after the initial golimumab administration and were generally maintained through week 24. 
 
Clinical efficacy 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
The efficacy of golimumab was demonstrated in three multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled studies in over 1500 patients ≥ 18 years of age with moderately to severely active 
RA diagnosed according to American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria for at least 3 months 
prior to screening. Patients had at least 4 swollen and 4 tender joints. Golimumab or placebo were 
subcutaneously administered every 4 weeks. 
 
GO-FORWARD evaluated 444 patients who had active RA despite a stable dose of at least 
15 mg/week of MTX and who had not been previously treated with an anti-TNF agent. Patients were 
randomised to receive placebo + MTX, golimumab 50 mg + MTX, golimumab 100 mg + MTX or 
golimumab 100 mg + placebo. Patients receiving placebo + MTX were switched to golimumab 50 mg 
+ MTX after week 24. At week 52, patients entered an open label long-term extension. 
 
GO-AFTER evaluated 445 patients who were previously treated with one or more of the anti-TNF 
agents adalimumab, etanercept, or infliximab. Patients were randomised to receive placebo, 
golimumab 50 mg, or golimumab 100 mg. Patients were allowed to continue concomitant DMARD 
therapy with MTX, sulfasalazine (SSZ), and/or hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) during the study. The 
stated reasons for discontinuation of prior anti TNF therapies were lack of efficacy (58%), intolerance 
(13%), and/or reasons other than safety or efficacy (29%, mostly for financial reasons). 
 
GO-BEFORE evaluated 637 patients with active RA who were MTX-naïve and had not previously 
been treated with an anti-TNF agent. Patients were randomised to receive placebo + MTX, golimumab 
50 mg + MTX, golimumab 100 mg + MTX or golimumab 100 mg + placebo. At week 52, patients 
entered an open label long-term extension in which patients receiving placebo + MTX who had at least 
1 tender or swollen joint were switched to golimumab 50 mg + MTX. 
 
In GO-FORWARD, the (co-)primary endpoints were the percentage of patients achieving an ACR 20 
response at week 14 and the improvement from baseline in Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ) 
at week 24. In GO-AFTER, the primary endpoint was the percentage of patients achieving an ACR 20 
response at week 14. In GO-BEFORE, the co-primary endpoints were the percentage of patients 
achieving ACR 50 response at week 24 and the change from baseline in the van der Heijde-modified 
Sharp (vdH-S) score at week 52. In addition to the primary endpoint(s), additional assessments of the 
impact of golimumab treatment on the signs and symptoms of arthritis, radiographic response, 
physical function and health-related quality of life were performed. 
 
In general, no clinically meaningful differences in measures of efficacy were observed between the 
golimumab 50 mg and 100 mg dosing regimens with concomitant MTX, through week 104 in GO-
FORWARD and GO-BEFORE and through week 24 in GO-AFTER. In each of the RA studies by 
study design, patients in the long-term extension may have switched between the 50 mg and 100 mg 
golimumab doses at the discretion of the study physician. 
 
Signs and symptoms 
Key ACR results for the golimumab 50 mg dose at weeks 14, 24 and 52 for GO-FORWARD, GO-
AFTER and GO-BEFORE are shown in Table 2 and are described below. Responses were observed at 
the first assessment (week 4) after the initial golimumab administration. 
 
In GO-FORWARD, among 89 subjects randomised to golimumab 50 mg + MTX, 48 were still on this 
treatment at week 104. Among those, 40, 33 and 24 patients had ACR 20/50/70 response, respectively 
at week 104. Among patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, similar rates of ACR 
20/50/70 response was observed from week 104 through week 256. 
 

46 
 
In GO-AFTER, the percentage of patients achieving an ACR 20 response was greater for patients 
receiving golimumab than for patients receiving placebo regardless of the reason reported for 
discontinuation of one or more prior anti-TNF therapies. 
 
Table 2 
Key efficacy outcomes from the controlled portions of GO-FORWARD, GO-AFTER and GO-
BEFORE. 
GO-FORWARD 
Active RA despite MTX 
GO-AFTER 
Active RA, previously 
treated with one or more 
anti-TNF agent(s) 
GO-BEFORE 
Active RA, MTX Naïve 
Placebo 
+ 
MTX 
Golimumab 
50 mg 
+ 
MTX 
Placebo 
Golimumab 
50 mg 
Placebo 
+ 
MTX 
Golimumab 
50 mg 
+ 
MTX 
na 
133 
89 
150 
147 
160 
159 
Responders, % of patients 
ACR 20 
Week 14 
33% 
55%* 
18% 
35%* 
NA 
NA 
Week 24 
28% 
60%* 
16% 
31% p = 0.002 
49% 
62% 
Week 52 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
52% 
60% 
ACR 50 
Week 14 
10% 
35%* 
7% 
15% p = 0.021 
NA 
NA 
Week 24 
14% 
37%* 
4% 
16%* 
29% 
40% 
Week 52 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
36% 
42% 
ACR 70 
Week 14 
4% 
14% 
p = 0.008 
2% 
10% 
p = 0.005 
NA 
NA 
Week 24 
5% 
20%* 
2% 
9% p = 0.009 
16% 
24% 
Week 52 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
22% 
28% 
a 
n reflects randomised patients; actual number of patients evaluable for each endpoint may vary by timepoint. 
*  p ≤ 0.001 
NA: Not Applicable 
 
In GO-BEFORE the primary analysis in patients with moderate to severe rheumatoid arthritis 
(combined golimumab 50 and 100 mg + MTX groups vs MTX alone for ACR50) was not statistically 
significant at week 24 (p = 0.053). At week 52 in the overall population, the percentage of patients in 
the golimumab 50 mg + MTX group who achieved an ACR response was generally higher but not 
significantly different when compared with MTX alone (see Table 2). Additional analyses were 
performed in subsets representative of the indicated population of patients with severe, active and 
progressive RA. A generally greater effect of golimumab 50 mg + MTX versus MTX alone was 
demonstrated in the indicated population compared with the overall population. 
 
In GO-FORWARD and GO-AFTER, clinically meaningful and statistically significant responses in 
Disease Activity Scale (DAS)28 were observed at each prespecified time point, at week 14 and at 
week 24 (p ≤ 0.001). Among patients who remained on the golimumab treatment to which they were 
randomised at study start, DAS28 responses were maintained through week 104. Among patients 
remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, DAS28 responses were similar from week 104 
through week 256. 
 
In GO-BEFORE, major clinical response, defined as the maintenance of an ACR 70 response over a 
continuous 6-month period, was measured. At week 52, 15% of patients in the golimumab 50 mg + 
MTX group achieved a major clinical response compared with 7% of patients in the placebo + MTX 
group (p = 0.018). Among 159 subjects randomised to golimumab 50 mg + MTX, 96 were still on this 
treatment at week 104. Among those, 85, 66 and 53 patients had ACR 20/50/70 response, respectively, 
at week 104. Among patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, similar rates of ACR 
20/50/70 response were observed from week 104 through week 256. 

47 
 
 
Radiographic response 
In GO-BEFORE the change from baseline in the vdH-S score, a composite score of structural damage 
that radiographically measures the number and size of joint erosions and the degree of joint space 
narrowing in hands/wrists and feet, was used to assess the degree of structural damage. Key results for 
the golimumab 50 mg dose at week 52 are presented in Table 3. 
 
The number of patients with no new erosions or a change from baseline in total vdH-S Score ≤ 0 was 
significantly higher in the golimumab treatment group than in the control group (p = 0.003). The 
radiographic effects observed at week 52 were maintained through week 104. Among patients 
remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, radiographic effects were similar from week 104 
through week 256. 
 
Table 3 
Radiographic mean (SD) changes from baseline in total vdH-S score at week 52 in the overall 
population of GO-BEFORE 
Placebo + MTX 
Golimumab 50 mg + MTX 
na 
160 
159 
Total Score 
Baseline 
19.7 (35.4) 
18.7 (32.4) 
Change from baseline 
1.4 (4.6) 
0.7 (5.2)* 
Erosion Score 
Baseline 
11.3 (18.6) 
10.8 (17.4) 
Change from baseline 
0.7 (2.8) 
0.5 (2.1) 
JSN Score 
Baseline 
8.4 (17.8) 
7.9 (16.1) 
Change from baseline 
0.6 (2.3) 
0.2 (2.0)** 
a 
n reflects randomised patients 
* 
p = 0.015 
**  p = 0.044 
 
Physical function and health-related quality of life 
Physical function and disability were assessed as a separate endpoint in GO-FORWARD and GO-
AFTER using the disability index of the HAQ DI. In these studies, golimumab demonstrated clinically 
meaningful and statistically significant improvement in HAQ DI from baseline versus control at week 
24. Among patients who remained on the golimumab treatment to which they were randomised at 
study start, improvement in HAQ DI was maintained through week 104. Among 
patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, improvement in HAQ DI was similar 
from week 104 through week 256. 
 
In GO-FORWARD clinically meaningful and statistically significant improvements were 
demonstrated in health-related quality of life as measured by the physical component score of the SF-
36 in patients treated with golimumab versus placebo at week 24. Among patients who remained on 
the golimumab treatment to which they were randomised at study start, improvement of the SF-36 
physical component was maintained through week 104. Among patients remaining in the study and 
treated with golimumab, improvement of the SF-36 physical component was similar from week 104 
through week 256. In GO-FORWARD and GO-AFTER, statistically significant improvements were 
observed in fatigue as measured by functional assessment of chronic illness therapy-fatigue scale 
(FACIT-F). 
 
Psoriatic arthritis 
The safety and efficacy of golimumab were evaluated in a multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study (GO-REVEAL) in 405 adult patients with active PsA (≥ 3 swollen joints and 
≥ 3 tender joints) despite non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) or DMARD therapy. Patients in 
this study had a diagnosis of PsA for at least 6 months and had at least mild psoriatic disease. Patients 
with each sub-type of psoriatic arthritis were enrolled, including polyarticular arthritis with no 

48 
 
rheumatoid nodules (43%), asymmetric peripheral arthritis (30%), distal interphalangeal (DIP) joint 
arthritis (15%), spondylitis with peripheral arthritis (11%), and arthritis mutilans (1%). Previous 
treatment with an anti-TNF agent was not allowed. golimumab or placebo were administered 
subcutaneously every 4 weeks. Patients were randomly assigned to placebo, golimumab 50 mg, or 
golimumab 100 mg. Patients receiving placebo were switched to golimumab 50 mg after week 24. 
Patients entered an open label long-term extension at week 52. Approximately forty-eight percent of 
patients continued on stable doses of methotrexate (≤ 25 mg/week). The co-primary endpoints were 
the percentage of patients achieving ACR 20 response at week 14 and change from baseline in total 
PsA modified vdH-S score at week 24. 
 
In general, no clinically meaningful differences in measures of efficacy were observed between the 
golimumab 50 mg and 100 mg dosing regimens through week 104. By study design, patients in the 
long-term extension may have switched between the 50 mg and 100 mg golimumab doses at the 
discretion of the study physician. 
 
Signs and symptoms 
Key results for the 50 mg dose at weeks 14 and 24 are shown in table 4 and described below. 
 
Table 4 
Key efficacy outcomes from GO-REVEAL 
Placebo 
Golimumab 50 
mg* 
na 
113 
146 
Responders, % of patients 
ACR 20 
Week 14 
9% 
51% 
Week 24 
12% 
52% 
ACR 50 
Week 14 
2% 
30% 
Week 24 
4% 
32% 
ACR 70 
Week 14 
1% 
12% 
Week 24 
1% 
19% 
PASIb 75c 
Week 14 
3% 
40% 
Week 24 
1% 
56% 
*  p < 0.05 for all comparisons; 
a 
n reflects randomised patients; actual number of patients evaluable for each endpoint may vary by timepoint 
b 
Psoriasis Area and Severity Index 
c 
Based on the subset of patients with ≥ 3% BSA involvement at baseline, 79 patients (69.9%) in the placebo group and 
109 (74.3%) in the golimumab 50 mg group. 
 
Responses were observed at the first assessment (week 4) after the initial golimumab administration. 
Similar ACR 20 responses at week 14 were observed in patients with polyarticular arthritis with no 
rheumatoid nodules and asymmetric peripheral arthritis PsA subtypes. The number of patients with 
other PsA subtypes was too small to allow meaningful assessment. Responses observed in the 
golimumab treated groups were similar in patients receiving and not receiving concomitant MTX. 
Among 146 patients randomised to golimumab 50 mg, 70 were still on this treatment at week 104. Of 
these 70 patients, 64, 46 and 31 patients had an ACR 20/50/70 response, respectively. Among patients 
remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, similar rates of ACR 20/50/70 response was 
observed from week 104 through week 256. 
 
Statistically significant responses in DAS28 were also observed at weeks 14 and 24 (p < 0.05). 
 
At week 24 improvements in parameters of peripheral activity characteristic of psoriatic arthritis (e.g. 
number of swollen joints, number of painful/tender joints, dactylitis and enthesitis) were seen in the 
golimumab-treated patients. Golimumab treatment resulted in significant improvement in physical 

49 
 
function as assessed by HAQ DI, as well as significant improvements in health-related quality of life 
as measured by the physical and mental component summary scores of the SF-36. Among patients 
who remained on the golimumab treatment to which they were randomised at study start, DAS28 and 
HAQ DI responses were maintained through week 104. Among patients remaining in the study and 
treated with golimumab, DAS28 and HAQ DI responses were similar from week 104 through week 
256. 
 
Radiographic response 
Structural damage in both hands and feet was assessed radiographically by the change from baseline in 
the vdH-S score, modified for PsA by addition of hand distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints. 
 
Golimumab 50 mg treatment reduced the rate of progression of peripheral joint damage compared 
with placebo treatment at week 24 as measured by change from baseline in total modified vdH-S 
Score (mean ± SD score was 0.27 ± 1.3 in the placebo group compared with -0.16 ± 1.3 in the 
golimumab group; p = 0.011). Out of 146 patients who were randomised to golimumab 50 mg, 52 
week X-ray data were available for 126 patients, of whom 77% showed no progression compared to 
baseline. At week 104, X-ray data were available for 114 patients, and 77% showed no progression 
from baseline. Among patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, similar rates of 
patients showed no progression from baseline from week 104 through week 256. 
 
Axial spondyloarthritis  
Ankylosing spondylitis 
The safety and efficacy of golimumab were evaluated in a multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study (GO-RAISE) in 356 adult patients with active ankylosing spondylitis 
(defined as a Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index (BASDAI) ≥ 4 and a VAS for total 
back pain of ≥ 4, on a scale of 0 to 10 cm). Patients enrolled in this study had active disease despite 
current or previous NSAID or DMARD therapy and had not previously been treated with anti-TNF 
therapy. Golimumab or placebo were administered subcutaneously every 4 weeks. Patients were 
randomly assigned to placebo, golimumab 50 mg and golimumab 100 mg and were allowed to 
continue concomitant DMARD therapy (MTX, SSZ and/or HCQ). The primary endpoint was the 
percentage of patients achieving Ankylosing Spondylitis Assessment Study Group (ASAS) 20 
response at week 14. Placebo-controlled efficacy data were collected and analysed through week 24. 
 
Key results for the 50 mg dose are shown in Table 5 and described below. In general, no clinically 
meaningful differences in measures of efficacy were observed between the golimumab 50 mg and 100 
mg dosing regimens through week 24. By study design, patients in the long-term extension may have 
switched between the 50 mg and 100 mg golimumab doses at the discretion of the study physician. 
 
Table 5 
Key efficacy outcomes from GO-RAISE. 
Placebo 
Golimumab 
50 mg* 
na 
78 
138 
Responders, % of patients 
ASAS 20 
Week 14 
22% 
59% 
Week 24 
23% 
56% 
ASAS 40 
Week 14 
15% 
45% 
Week 24 
15% 
44% 
ASAS 5/6 
Week 14 
8% 
50% 
Week 24 
13% 
49% 
*  p ≤ 0.001 for all comparisons 
a 
n reflects randomised patients; actual number of patients evaluable for each endpoint may vary by timepoint 
 

50 
 
Among patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, the proportion of patients with an 
ASAS 20 and ASAS 40 response were similar from week 24 through week 256. 
 
Statistically significant responses in BASDAI 50, 70 and 90 (p ≤ 0.017) were also seen at weeks 14 
and 24. Improvements in key measures of disease activity were observed at the first assessment (week 
4) after the initial golimumab administration and were maintained through week 24. Among patients 
remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, similar rates of change from baseline in BASDAI 
were observed from week 24 through week 256. Consistent efficacy was seen in patients regardless of 
use of DMARDs (MTX, sulfasalazine and/or hydroxychloroquine), HLA-B27 antigen status or 
baseline CRP levels as assessed by ASAS 20 responses at week 14. 
 
Golimumab treatment resulted in significant improvements in physical function as assessed by 
changes from baseline in BASFI at weeks 14 and 24. Health-related quality of life as measured by the 
physical component score of the SF-36 was also improved significantly at weeks 14 and 24. Among 
patients remaining in the study and treated with golimumab, improvements in physical function and 
health-related quality of life were similar from week 24 through week 256. 
 
Non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis 
 
GO-AHEAD 
 
The safety and efficacy of golimumab were evaluated in a multi-centre, randomised, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study (GO-AHEAD) in 197 adult patients with severe active nr-Axial SpA (defined 
as those patients meeting the ASAS classification criteria of axial spondyloarthritis but did not meet 
the modified New York criteria for AS). Patients enrolled in this study had active disease (defined as a 
BASDAI ≥ 4 and a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) for total back pain of ≥ 4, each on a scale of 0-10 
cm) despite current or previous NSAID therapy and had not previously been treated with any 
biological agents including anti-TNF therapy. Patients were randomly assigned to placebo or 
golimumab 50 mg administered subcutaneously every 4 weeks. At week 16, patients entered an open 
label period in which all patients received golimumab 50 mg administered subcutaneously every 4 
weeks through week 48 with efficacy assessments performed through week 52 and safety follow-up 
through week 60. Approximately 93% of patients who were receiving golimumab at the beginning of 
the open-label extension (week 16) remained on treatment through the end of the study (week 52). 
Analyses were performed on both the All Treated (AT, N = 197) and Objective Signs of Inflammation 
(OSI, N = 158, defined by elevated CRP and/or evidence of sacroiliitis on MRI at baseline) 
populations. 
Placebo-controlled efficacy data were collected and analysed through week 16. The primary endpoint 
was the proportion of patients achieving ASAS 20 response at week 16. Key results are shown in 
Table 6 and described below. 
 
Table 6 
Key efficacy outcomes from GO-AHEAD at week 16 
Improvements in signs and symptoms 
All treated population (AT) 
Objective signs of inflammation 
population (OSI) 
Placebo 
Golimumab 50 mg 
Placebo 
Golimumab 50 mg 
na 
100 
97 
80 
78 
Responders, % of patients 
ASAS 20 
40% 
71%** 
38% 
77%** 
ASAS 40 
23% 
57%** 
23% 
60%** 
ASAS 5/6 
23% 
54%** 
23% 
63%** 
ASAS Partial Remission 
18% 
33%* 
19% 
35%* 
ASDAS-C b < 1.3 
13% 
33%* 
16% 
35%* 
BASDAI 50 
30% 
58%** 
29% 
59%** 
Inhibition of inflammation in sacroiliac (SI) joints as measured by MRI 
Placebo 
Golimumab 50 mg 
Placebo 
Golimumab 50 mg 

51 
 
nc 
87 
74 
69 
61 
Mean change in 
SPARCCd MRI 
sacroiliac joint score 
-0.9 
-5.3** 
-1.2 
-6.4** 
a 
n reflects randomised and treated patients 
b 
Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Score C-Reactive Protein (AT-Placebo, N = 90; AT-golimumab 50 mg, N 
= 88; OSI-Placebo, N = 71; OSI-golimumab 50 mg, N = 71) 
c 
n reflects number of patients with baseline and week 16 MRI data 
d 
SPARCC (Spondyloarthritis Research Consortium of Canada) 
** p < 0.0001 for golimumab vs placebo comparisons 
*  p < 0.05 for golimumab vs placebo comparisons 
 
Statistically significant improvements in signs and symptoms of severe active nr-Axial SpA were 
demonstrated in patients treated with golimumab 50 mg compared to placebo at week 16 (Table 6). 
Improvements were observed at the first assessment (week 4) after the initial golimumab 
administration. SPARCC score as measured by MRI showed statistically significant reductions in SI 
joint inflammation at week 16 in patients treated with golimumab 50 mg compared to placebo (Table 
6). Pain as assessed by the Total Back Pain and Nocturnal Back Pain VAS, and disease activity as 
measured by ASDAS-C also showed statistically significant improvement from baseline to week 16 in 
patients treated with golimumab 50 mg compared to placebo (p < 0.0001). 
 
Statistically significant improvements in spinal mobility as assessed by BASMI (Bath Ankylosing 
Spondylitis Metrology Index) and in physical function as assessed by the BASFI were demonstrated in 
golimumab 50 mg-treated patients as compared to placebo-treated patients (p < 0.0001). Patients 
treated with golimumab experienced significantly more improvements in health-related quality of life 
as assessed by ASQoL, EQ-5D, and physical and mental components of SF-36, and experienced 
significantly more improvements in productivity as assessed by greater reductions in overall work 
impairment and in activity impairment as assessed by the WPAI questionnaire than patients receiving 
placebo. 
 
For all of the endpoints described above, statistically significant results were also demonstrated in the 
OSI population at week 16. 
 
In both the AT and OSI populations, the improvements in signs and symptoms, spinal mobility, 
physical function, quality of life, and productivity observed at week 16 among patients treated with 
golimumab 50 mg continued in those remaining in the study at week 52. 
 
GO-BACK 
 
The efficacy and safety of continued golimumab treatment (full or reduced dosing frequency) 
compared with treatment withdrawal was assessed in adult patients (18-45 years of age) with active nr-
axSpA who demonstrated sustained remission during 10 months of monthly treatment with 
open-label golimumab (GO-BACK). Eligible patients (who achieved a clinical response by Month 4 
and an inactive disease status (ASDAS < 1.3) at both Months 7 and 10) entering the double-blind 
withdrawal phase were randomised to continued monthly treatment with golimumab (full-treatment 
regimen, N = 63), every 2-month treatment with golimumab (reduced treatment regimen, N = 63) or 
monthly placebo treatment (treatment withdrawal, N = 62) for up to approximately 12 months. 
 
The primary efficacy endpoint was the proportion of patients without a flare of disease activity. 
Patients who experienced a flare, i.e., had an ASDAS collected at 2 consecutive assessments that both 
showed either an absolute score of ≥ 2.1 or post-withdrawal increase of ≥ 1.1 relative to Month 10 
(end of open-label period), reinitiated monthly golimumab in an open-label retreatment phase to 
characterise clinical response. 
 
Clinical response after double-blind treatment withdrawal 
Among the 188 patients with inactive disease who received at least one dose of double-blind 
treatment, a significantly (p < 0.001) greater proportion of patients did not experience a disease flare 

52 
 
when continuing golimumab with either the full-treatment (84.1%), or reduced treatment (68.3%) 
regimens compared with treatment withdrawal (33.9%) (Table 7). 
 
Table 7 
Analysis of the proportion of participants without a flarea Full analysis set population (Period 2 
– Double-blind) 
Treatment 
n/N 
% 
Difference in % vs Placebo 
Estimate (95% CI)b 
p-Valueb 
GLM SC QMT 
53/63 
84.1 
50.2 (34.1, 63.6) 
< 0.001 
GLM SC Q2MT 
43/63 
68.3 
34.4 (17.0, 49.7) 
< 0.001 
Placebo 
21/62 
33.9 
Full Analysis Set includes all randomised participants who attained inactive disease in period 1 and received at least one 
dose of blinded study treatment. 
a 
Defined as ASDAS at 2 consecutive visits that both show either absolute score ≥ 2.1 or post-withdrawal 
increase of ≥ 1.1 relative to Month 10 (Visit 23). 
b 
Type I error rate over the multiple treatment comparisons (GLM SC QMT vs Placebo and GLM SC Q2MT vs 
Placebo) was controlled using a sequential (step-down) testing procedure. Derived based on the stratified Miettinen 
and Nurminen method with CRP level (> 6 mg/L or ≤ 6 mg/L) as stratification factor. 
Participants who discontinued period 2 prematurely and prior to a ‘flare’ will be counted as having a ‘flare’. N 
= Total number of participants; n = number of participants without a flare; GLM = golimumab; 
SC = subcutaneous, QMT = monthly dosing; Q2MT = every other month dosing. 
 
The difference in time-to-first flare between the treatment withdrawal group and either of the 
golimumab Treatment groups is shown in Figure 1 (log-rank p < 0.0001 for each comparison). In the 
placebo group, flares started approximately 2 months after golimumab was withdrawn, with the 
majority of flares occurring within 4 months of treatment withdrawal (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1: 
Kaplan-Meier Analysis of Time-to-First Flare 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
Clinical response to retreatment for a disease flare 
Clinical response was defined as a BASDAI improvement of ≥ 2 or ≥ 50% relative to the mean of the 
2 consecutive BASDAI scores ascribed to the disease flare. Of the 53 participants in the reduced 
dosing or treatment withdrawal regimens who had a confirmed disease flare, 51 (96.2%) attained a 
clinical response to golimumab within the first 3 months of retreatment, although fewer patients 
(71.7%) were able to sustain it for all 3 months. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
The efficacy of golimumab was evaluated in two randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
clinical studies in adult patients. 
 
The induction study (PURSUIT-Induction) evaluated patients with moderately to severely active 
ulcerative colitis (Mayo score 6 to 12; Endoscopy subscore ≥ 2) who had an inadequate response to or 
failed to tolerate conventional therapies, or were corticosteroid dependent. In the dose confirming 
portion of the study, 761 patients were randomised to receive either 400 mg golimumab SC at week 0 
and 200 mg at week 2, 200 mg golimumab SC at week 0 and 100 mg at week 2, or placebo SC at 
weeks 0 and 2. Concomitant stable doses of oral aminosalicylates, corticosteroids, and/or 
immunomodulatory agents were permitted. The efficacy of golimumab through week 6 was assessed 
in this study. 
 
The results of the maintenance study (PURSUIT-Maintenance) were based on evaluation of 
456 patients who achieved clinical response from previous induction with golimumab. Patients were 
randomised to receive golimumab 50 mg, golimumab 100 mg or placebo administered subcutaneously 
every 4 weeks. Concomitant stable doses of oral aminosalicylates, and/or immunomodulatory agents 
were permitted. Corticosteroids were to be tapered at the start of the maintenance study. The efficacy 
of golimumab through week 54 was assessed in this study. Patients who completed the maintenance 
study through week 54 continued treatment in a study extension, with efficacy evaluated through week 
216. Efficacy evaluation in the study extension was based on changes in corticosteroid use, 
Physician’s Global Assessment (PGA) of disease activity, and improvement in quality of life as 
measured by Inflammatory Bowel Disease Questionnaire (IBDQ). 
 
Table 8 
Key efficacy outcomes from PURSUIT - Induction and PURSUIT - Maintenance 
PURSUIT-Induction 
Placebo 
N = 251 
Golimumab 
200/100 mg 
N = 253 
Percentage of patients 
Patients in clinical response at week 6a 
30% 
51%** 
Patients in clinical remission at week 6b 
6% 
18%** 
Patients with mucosal healing at 
week 6c 
29% 
42%* 
PURSUIT-Maintenance 
Placebod 
N = 154 
Golimumab 
50 mg 
N = 151 
Golimumab 
100 mg 
N = 151 
Percentage of patients 
Maintenance of response (Patients in 
clinical response through week 54)e 
31% 
47%* 
50%** 
Sustained remission (Patients in clinical 
remission at both week 30 and 
week 54)f 
16% 
23%g 
28%* 
N = number of patients 
** p ≤ 0.001 
*  p ≤ 0.01 
a 
defined as a decrease from baseline in the Mayo score by ≥ 30% and ≥ 3 points, accompanied by a decrease in 
the rectal bleeding subscore of ≥ 1 or a rectal bleeding subscore of 0 or 1. 

54 
 
b 
Defined as a Mayo score ≤ 2 points, with no individual subscore > 1 
c 
Defined as 0 or 1 on the endoscopy subscore of the Mayo score. 
d 
Golimumab induction only. 
e 
Patients were assessed for UC disease activity by partial Mayo score every 4 weeks (loss of response was 
confirmed by endoscopy). Therefore, a patient who maintained response was in a state of continuous clinical 
response at each evaluation through week 54. 
f 
A patient had to be in remission at both weeks 30 and 54 (without demonstrating a loss of response at any time 
point through week 54) to achieve durable remission. 
g 
In patients weighing less than 80 kg, a greater proportion of patients who received 50 mg maintenance therapy 
showed sustained clinical remission compared with those who received placebo. 
 
More golimumab-treated patients demonstrated sustained mucosal healing (patients with mucosal 
healing at both week 30 and week 54) in the 50 mg group (42%, nominal p < 0.05) and 100 mg group 
(42%, p < 0.005) compared with patients in the placebo group (27%). 
 
Among the 54% of patients (247/456) who were receiving concomitant corticosteroids at the start of 
PURSUIT-Maintenance, the proportion of patients who maintained clinical response through week 54 
and were not receiving concomitant corticosteroids at week 54 was greater in the 50 mg group (38%, 
30/78) and 100 mg group (30%, 25/82) compared with the placebo group (21%, 18/87). The 
proportion of patients who eliminated corticosteroids by week 54 was greater in the 50 mg group 
(41%, 32/78) and 100 mg group (33%, 27/82) compared with the placebo group (22%, 19/87). Among 
patients who entered the study extension, the proportion of subjects who remained corticosteroid free 
was generally maintained through week 216. 
 
Patients who did not achieve clinical response at week 6 in the PURSUIT-Induction studies were 
dosed golimumab 100 mg every 4 weeks in the PURSUIT-Maintenance study. At week 14, 28% of 
these patients achieved response defined by partial Mayo score (decreased by ≥ 3 points compared 
with start of induction). At week 54, the clinical outcomes observed in these patients were similar to 
the clinical outcomes reported for the patients achieving clinical response at week 6. 
 
At week 6, golimumab significantly improved quality of life as measured by change from baseline in a 
disease specific measure, IBDQ (inflammatory bowel disease questionnaire). Among patients who 
received golimumab maintenance treatment, the improvement in quality of life as measured by IBDQ 
was maintained through week 54. 
 
Approximately 63% of patients who were receiving golimumab at the beginning of the study 
extension (week 56), remained on treatment through the end of the study (last golimumab 
administration at week 212). 
 
Immunogenicity 
Anti-golimumab antibodies may develop during golimumab treatment. Formation of anti-golimumab 
antibodies may be associated with decreased systemic exposure to golimumab but no apparent 
correlation of antibody development with efficacy has been observed. The presence of antibodies to 
golimumab may increase the risk of injection site reactions (see section 4.8). 
 
Paediatric population 
The European Medicines Agency has deferred the obligation to submit the results of studies with 
golimumab in one or more subsets of the paediatric population in ulcerative colitis (see section 4.2 for 
information on paediatric use). 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
Absorption 
Following a single subcutaneous administration of golimumab to healthy subjects or patients with RA, 
the median time to reach maximum serum concentrations (Tmax) ranged from 2 to 6 days. A 
subcutaneous injection of 50 mg golimumab to healthy subjects produced a mean  standard deviation 
maximum serum concentration (Cmax) of 3.1  1.4 µg/mL. 
 

55 
 
Following a single subcutaneous injection of 100 mg, the absorption of golimumab was similar in the 
upper arm, abdomen, and thigh, with a mean absolute bioavailability of 51%. Since golimumab 
exhibited approximately dose proportional PK following a subcutaneous administration, the absolute 
bioavailability of a golimumab 50 mg or 200 mg dose is expected to be similar. 
 
Distribution 
Following a single IV administration, the mean volume of distribution was 115  19 mL/kg. 
 
Elimination 
The systemic clearance of golimumab was estimated to be 6.9  2.0 mL/day/kg. Terminal half-life 
value was estimated to be approximately 12  3 days in healthy subjects and similar values were 
observed in patients with RA, PsA, AS, or UC. 
 
When 50 mg golimumab was administered subcutaneously to patients with RA, PsA or AS 
every 4 weeks, serum concentrations reached steady state by week 12. With concomitant use of 
MTX, treatment with 50 mg golimumab subcutaneously every 4 weeks resulted in a mean ( 
standard deviation) steady-state trough serum concentration of approximately 0.6  0.4 µg/mL 
in RA patients with active RA despite MTX therapy, and approximately 0.5  0.4 µg/mL in 
patients with active PsA and approximately 0.8  0.4 µg/mL in patients with AS. Steady-state 
trough mean serum golimumab concentrations in patients with nr-Axial SpA were similar to 
those observed in patients with AS following subcutaneous administration of 50 mg golimumab 
every 4 weeks. 
Patients with RA, PsA or AS who did not receive concomitant MTX had approximately 30% lower 
steady-state trough concentrations of golimumab than those who received golimumab with MTX. In 
a limited number of RA patients treated with subcutaneous golimumab over a 6-month period, 
concomitant use of MTX reduced the apparent clearance of golimumab by approximately 36%. 
However, population pharmacokinetic analysis indicated that concomitant use of NSAIDs, oral 
corticosteroids or sulfasalazine did not influence the apparent clearance of golimumab. 
Following induction doses of 200 mg and 100 mg golimumab at week 0 and 2, respectively, and 
maintenance doses of 50 mg or 100 mg golimumab subcutaneously every 4 weeks thereafter to 
patients with UC, serum golimumab concentrations reached steady state approximately 14 weeks 
after the start of therapy. Treatment with 50 mg or 100 mg golimumab subcutaneous every 4 weeks 
during maintenance resulted in a mean steady-state trough serum concentration of approximately 
0.9 ± 0.5 µg/mL and 1.8 ± 1.1 µg/mL, respectively. 
 
In UC patients treated with 50 mg or 100 mg golimumab subcutaneously every 4 weeks, 
concomitant use of immunomodulators did not have a substantial effect on steady-state trough 
levels of golimumab. 
 
Patients who developed antibodies to golimumab generally had low trough steady-state serum 
concentrations of golimumab (see section 5.1). 
 
Linearity 
 
Golimumab exhibited approximately dose-proportional pharmacokinetics in patients with RA over the 
dose range of 0.1 to 10.0 mg/kg following a single intravenous dose. Following a single SC dose in 
healthy subjects, approximately dose-proportional pharmacokinetics were also observed over a dose 
range of 50 mg to 400 mg. 
 
Effect of weight on pharmacokinetics 
There was a trend toward higher apparent clearance of golimumab with increasing weight (see section 
4.2). 
 

56 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
Non-clinical data reveal no special hazard for humans based on conventional studies of safety 
pharmacology, repeated dose toxicity, toxicity to reproduction and development. 
No mutagenicity studies, animal fertility studies nor long-term carcinogenic studies have been 
conducted with golimumab. 
 
In a fertility and general reproductive function study in mouse, using an analogous antibody that 
selectively inhibits the functional activity of mouse TNFα, the number of pregnant mice was reduced. 
It is not known whether this finding was due to effects on the males and/or the females. In a 
developmental toxicity study conducted in mice following administration of the same analogous 
antibody, and in cynomolgus monkeys using golimumab, there was no indication of maternal toxicity, 
embryotoxicity or teratogenicity. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
Sorbitol  
L-Histidine 
L-Histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate 
Poloxamer 188 
Water for injections. 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal 
products. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
2 years 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2 °C – 8 °C). 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled pen or pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect it from light. 
GOBIVAZ may be stored at temperatures up to a maximum of 25°C for a single period of up to 30 
days, but not exceeding the original expiry date printed on the carton. The new expiry date must be 
written on the carton (up to 30 days from the date removed from the refrigerator). 
 
Once GOBIVAZ has been stored at room temperature, it should not be returned to refrigerated storage. 
GOBIVAZ must be discarded if not used within the 30 days of room temperature storage. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
1 mL solution in a pre-filled syringe (Type 1 glass) with a fixed needle (stainless steel) and a needle 
cover in a pre-filled pen. GOBIVAZ is available in packs containing 1 pre-filled pen and multipacks 
containing 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled pens. 
 

57 
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
1 mL solution in a pre-filled syringe (Type 1 glass) with a fixed needle (stainless steel) and a needle 
cover. GOBIVAZ is available in packs containing 1 pre-filled syringe and multipacks containing 3 (3 
packs of 1) pre-filled syringes. 
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
GOBIVAZ is supplied in a single use pre-filled pen or as a single use pre-filled syringe. Each pack is 
provided with instructions for use that fully describe the use of the pen or the syringe. 
After removing the pre-filled pen or the pre-filled syringe from the refrigerator it should be allowed to 
reach room temperature by waiting for 30 minutes, before injecting GOBIVAZ. The pen or the syringe 
should not be shaken. 
 
The solution is clear to slightly opalescent, colourless to light yellow and may contain a few small 
translucent or white particles of protein. This appearance is not unusual for solutions containing 
protein. GOBIVAZ should not be used if the solution is discoloured, cloudy or containing visible 
foreign particles. 
 
Comprehensive instructions for the preparation and administration of GOBIVAZ in a pre-filled pen or 
the pre-filled syringe are given in the package leaflet. 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/25/1988/005 1 pre-filled pen 
EU/1/25/1988/006 3 pre-filled pens 
 
EU/1/25/1988/007 1 pre-filled syringe 
EU/1/25/1988/008 3 pre-filled syringes 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
Date of first authorisation: 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
<{DD/MM/YYYY}> 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu 
 

58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE 
SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR 
BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO 
THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT 

59 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer of the biological active substance  
 
Alvotech Hf 
Sæmundargata 15-19 
Reykjavik, 102 
Iceland 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release  
 
Alvotech Hf 
Sæmundargata 15-19 
Reykjavik, 102 
Iceland 
 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE  
 
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (see Annex I: Summary of Product 
Characteristics, section 4.2). 
 
 
C.  
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of 
Union reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC 
and any subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT   
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance 
activities and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the 
marketing authorisation and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of 
an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 
 
 
• 
Additional risk minimisation measures  
 
The educational programme consists of a Patient Reminder Card to be held by the patient. The card is 
aimed at both serving as a reminder to record the dates and outcomes of specific tests and to facilitate 
the patient sharing of special information with healthcare professional(s) treating the patient about 
on-going treatment with the product. 

60 
 
 
The Patient Reminder Card shall contain the following key messages: 
• 
A reminder to patients to show the Patient Reminder Card to all treating HCPs, including in 
        conditions of emergency, and a message for HCPs that the patient is using GOBIVAZ. 
• 
A statement that the brand name and batch number should be recorded. 
• 
Provision to record the type, date, and result of TB screenings. 
• 
That treatment with GOBIVAZ may increase the risks of serious infection, opportunistic 
infections, tuberculosis, hepatitis B reactivation and breakthrough infection after administration     
of live vaccines in infants exposed to golimumab in utero; and when to seek attention from a 
HCP. 
• 
Contact details of the prescriber. 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III  
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET  
 
 

62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING  
 
 

63 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
PRE-FILLED PEN CARTON 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
golimumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
One 0.5 mL pre-filled pen contains 50 mg golimumab 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, poloxamer 188, water 
for injections. Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
1 pre-filled pen 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Do not shake 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
Allow the pen to sit at room temperature outside the box for 30 minutes before use. See the package 
leaflet for further information 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
EXP, if stored at room temperature___________________ 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 

64 
 
Store in a refrigerator 
Do not freeze 
Keep the pre-filled pen in the outer carton in order to protect from light 
Can be stored at room temperature (up to 25°C) for a single period up to 30 days, but not exceeding 
the original expiry date 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/25/1988/001 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER<, DONATION AND PRODUCT CODES>  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
<2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included.> 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 
 
 

65 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
CARTON FOR MULTIPACK COMPRISING 3 PACKS OF BLISTER  
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg  
solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
golimumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
One 0.5 mL pre-filled pen contains 50 mg golimumab 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, poloxamer 188, water 
for injections. Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
Multipack: 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled pens 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Do not shake 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
Allow the pen to sit at room temperature outside the box for 30 minutes before use. See the package 
leaflet for further information. 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 
Store in a refrigerator 

66 
 
Do not freeze 
Keep the pre-filled pen in the outer carton in order to protect from light 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/25/1988/002 (3 packs, each containing 1 pre-filled pen)  
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 
 
 
 

67 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
PRE-FILLED PEN LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection 
golimumab 
SC 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Read the package leaflet before use 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER<, DONATION AND PRODUCT CODES>  
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT  
 
0.5 mL 
 
 
6. 
OTHER  
 
 

68 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE CARTON 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
golimumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
One 0.5 mL pre-filled syringe contains 50 mg golimumab 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, poloxamer 188, water 
for injections. Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
1 pre-filled syringe 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Do not shake 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
 
Allow the syringe to sit at room temperature outside the box for 30 minutes before use. See the 
package leaflet for further information. 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
EXP, if stored at room temperature___________________ 
 
 

69 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 
Store in a refrigerator 
Do not freeze 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light 
Can be stored at room temperature (up to 25°C) for a single period up to 30 days, but not exceeding 
the original expiry date 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland  
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
EU/1/25/1988/003 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER<, DONATION AND PRODUCT CODES>  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 
 

70 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
CARTON FOR MULTIPACK COMPRISING 3 PACKS OF BLISTER 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
golimumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
One 0.5 mL pre-filled syringe contains 50 mg golimumab 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, poloxamer 188, water 
for injections. Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
Multipack: 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled syringes 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Do not shake 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
Allow the syringe to sit at room temperature outside the box for 30 minutes before use. See the 
package leaflet for further information. 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 
Store in a refrigerator 

71 
 
Do not freeze 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
 EU/1/25/1988/004 (3 packs, each containing 1 pre-filled syringe)  
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
<2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included.> 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 
 
 
 

72 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg  
injection 
golimumab 
SC 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT  
 
0.5 mL 
 
 
6. 
OTHER  
 
 
 
 

73 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
PRE-FILLED PEN CARTON 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
golimumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
Each 1 mL pre-filled pen contains 100 mg golimumab 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, poloxamer 188, water 
for injections. Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
1 pre-filled pen 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Do not shake 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
Allow the pen to sit at room temperature outside the box for 30 minutes before use. See the package 
leaflet for further information. 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
EXP, if stored at room temperature___________________ 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 

74 
 
Store in a refrigerator 
Do not freeze 
Keep the pre-filled pen in the outer carton in order to protect from light 
Can be stored at room temperature (up to 25°C) for a single period up to 30 days, but not exceeding 
the original expiry date 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/25/1988/005 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
<2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included.> 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 
 
 

75 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
CARTON FOR MULTIPACK COMPRISING 3 PACKS OF BLISTER 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg  
solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
golimumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
One 1 mL pre-filled pen contains 100 mg golimumab 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, poloxamer 188, water 
for injections. Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
Multipack: 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled pens 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Do not shake 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
Allow the pen to sit at room temperature outside the box for 30 minutes before use. See the package 
leaflet for further information. 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 

76 
 
Store in a refrigerator 
Do not freeze 
Keep the pre-filled pen in the outer carton in order to protect from light 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/25/1988/006 (3 packs, each containing 1 pre-filled pen)  
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 
 

77 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
PRE-FILLED PEN LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection 
golimumab 
SC 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Read the package leaflet before use 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT  
 
1 mL 
 
 
6. 
OTHER  
 
 

78 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE CARTON 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
golimumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
One 1 mL pre-filled syringe contains 100 mg golimumab 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, poloxamer 188, water 
for injections. Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
1 pre-filled syringe 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Do not shake 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
Allow the syringe to sit at room temperature outside the box for 30 minutes before use. See the 
package leaflet for further information. 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
EXP, if stored at room temperature___________________ 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 

79 
 
Store in a refrigerator 
Do not freeze 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light 
Can be stored at room temperature (up to 25°C) for a single period up to 30 days, but not exceeding 
the original expiry date 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/25/1988/007  
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 
 
 

80 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
CARTON FOR MULTIPACK COMPRISING 3 PACKS OF BLISTER 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg  
solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
golimumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
One 1 mL pre-filled syringe contains 100 mg golimumab 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, poloxamer 188, water 
for injections. Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
Multipack: 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled syringes 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Do not shake 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
Allow the syringe to sit at room temperature outside the box for 30 minutes before use. See the 
package leaflet for further information. 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 

81 
 
Store in a refrigerator 
Do not freeze 
Keep the pre-filled pen in the outer carton in order to protect from light 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
 EU/1/25/1988/008 (3 packs, each containing 1 pre-filled syringe)  
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
<2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included.> 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 
 
 
 
 

82 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg  
injection 
golimumab 
SC 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT  
 
1 mL 
 
 
6. 
OTHER  
 
 

83 
 
GOBIVAZ Patient Reminder Card 
 
This Patient Reminder Card contains important safety information that you need to be aware of 
before and during treatment with GOBIVAZ. 
 
Show this card to any doctor involved in your treatment. 
 
1. Infections 
 
When you are treated with GOBIVAZ, you might get infections more easily. Infections may progress 
more rapidly and may be more severe. In addition, some previous infections may reappear. 
 
1.1  
Prior to GOBIVAZ treatment: 
• 
    Tell your doctor if you have an infection. You must not be treated with GOBIVAZ if you have 
 
tuberculosis (TB) or any other severe infection. 
• 
    You should be screened for TB. It is very important that you tell your doctor if you have ever 
 
had TB, or if you have been in close contact with someone who has had TB. Ask your doctor
 
to record the type and date of the last screening(s) for TB below: 
Test _______________ Test _______________ 
Date _______________ Date _______________ 
Result _______________ Result _______________ 
• 
   Tell your doctor if you know or suspect you are a carrier of the hepatitis B virus. 
 
1.2  During and after GOBIVAZ treatment: 
• 
Seek medical attention immediately if you develop symptoms of an infection, such as fever, 
tiredness, (persistent) cough, shortness of breath, or flu-like signs, weight loss, night sweats, 
diarrhoea, wounds, dental problems and a burning feeling when urinating. 
 
2. Pregnancy and vaccinations 
 
In case you have received GOBIVAZ while you were pregnant, it is important that you inform your 
baby’s doctor about it before your baby receives any vaccine. Your baby should not receive a ‘live 
vaccine’, such as BCG (used to prevent tuberculosis) within 6 months after your last GOBIVAZ 
injection during pregnancy. 
 
3. Dates of GOBIVAZ treatment 
 
1st administration: _______________________ 
 
Subsequent administrations: ______________________________________________ 
                                              ________________________________________ 
 
It is important that you and your doctor record the brand name and batch number of your medicine. 
 
4. Other information 
 
Patient’s Name: _____________________ 
Doctor’s Name: _____________________ 
Doctor’s Phone: _____________________ 
 
• 
Please make sure you also have a list of all other medicines that you are using with you at any 
visit to a health care professional. 
 
• 
Keep this card with you for 6 months after the last GOBIVAZ dose, since side effects may occur 
a long time after your last dose of GOBIVAZ. 
 
• 
Read the GOBIVAZ package leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine. 

84 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET  

85 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user  
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen  
golimumab 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again.  
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours.  
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, or pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
Your doctor will also give you a Patient Reminder Card, which contains important safety information 
you need to be aware of before and during your treatment with GOBIVAZ. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What GOBIVAZ is and what it is used for  
2. 
What you need to know before you use GOBIVAZ  
3. 
How to use GOBIVAZ  
4. 
Possible side effects  
5. 
How to store GOBIVAZ  
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What GOBIVAZ is and what it is used for 
 
GOBIVAZ contains the active substance called golimumab. 
 
GOBIVAZ belongs to a group of medicines called ‘TNF blockers’. It is used in adults for the 
treatment 
of the following inflammatory diseases: 
• 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
• 
Psoriatic arthritis 
• 
Axial spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis 
• 
Ulcerative colitis 
 
In children 2 years of age and older, GOBIVAZ is used for the treatment of polyarticular juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis. 
 
GOBIVAZ works by blocking the action of a protein called ‘tumour necrosis factor alpha’ (TNF-α). 
This protein is involved in inflammatory processes of the body, and blocking it can reduce the 
inflammation in your body. 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints. If you have active rheumatoid arthritis 
you will first be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you 
may be given GOBIVAZ which you will take in combination with another medicine called 
methotrexate to: 

86 
 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Slow down the damage to your bones and joints. 
• 
Improve your physical function 
 
Psoriatic arthritis 
Psoriatic arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints, usually accompanied by psoriasis, an 
inflammatory disease of the skin. If you have active psoriatic arthritis you will first be given other 
medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you may be given GOBIVAZ to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Slow down the damage to your bones and joints. 
• 
Improve your physical function 
 
Ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis 
Ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis are inflammatory diseases of the 
spine. If you have ankylosing spondylitis or non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, you will first be 
given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you may be given 
GOBIVAZ to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Improve your physical function. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
Ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory disease of the bowel. If you have ulcerative colitis you will first 
be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you will be given 
GOBIVAZ to treat your disease. 
 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis is an inflammatory disease that causes joint pain and swelling 
in children. If you have polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis you will first be given other 
medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you will be given GOBIVAZ in 
combination with methotrexate to treat the disease. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use GOBIVAZ  
 
Do not use GOBIVAZ  
• 
If you are allergic (hypersensitive) to golimumab or any of the other ingredients of this 
medicine (listed in Section 6). 
• 
If you have tuberculosis (TB) or any other severe infection. 
• 
If you have moderate or severe heart failure. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before 
using GOBIVAZ. 
 
Warnings and precautions  
Talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before using GOBIVAZ 
 
Infections 
Tell your doctor straight away if you already have or get any symptoms of infection, during or after 
your treatment with GOBIVAZ. Symptoms of infection include fever, cough, shortness of breath, flu-
like symptoms, diarrhoea, wounds, dental problems or a burning feeling when urinating. 
• 
You may get infections more easily while using GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Infections may progress more rapidly and may be more severe. In addition, some previous 
infections may reappear. 
 
 
Tuberculosis (TB) 
Tell your doctor straight away if symptoms of TB appear during or after your treatment. 

87 
 
Symptoms of TB include persistent cough, weight loss, tiredness, fever or night sweats. 
• 
Cases of TB have been reported in patients treated with GOBIVAZ, in rare occasions 
even in patients who have been treated with medicines for TB. Your doctor will test 
you to see if you have TB. Your doctor will record these tests on your Patient Reminder 
Card. 
• 
It is very important that you tell your doctor if you have ever had TB, or if you have 
been in close contact with someone who has had or has TB. 
• 
If your doctor feels that you are at risk of TB, you may be treated with medicines for 
TB before you begin using GOBIVAZ. 
 
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
• 
Tell your doctor if you are a carrier or if you have or have had HBV before you are 
given GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Tell your doctor if you think you might be at risk of contracting HBV. 
• 
Your doctor should test you for HBV. 
• 
Treatment with TNF blockers such as GOBIVAZ may result in reactivation of HBV in 
patients who carry this virus, which can be life-threatening in some cases. 
 
Invasive fungal infections 
If you have lived in or travelled to an area where infections caused by specific type of fungi that 
can affect the lungs or other parts of the body (called histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, or 
blastomycosis), are common, tell your doctor straight away. Ask your doctor if you don’t know 
if these fungal infections are common in the area in which you have lived or travelled. 
 
Cancer and lymphoma 
Tell your doctor if you have ever been diagnosed with lymphoma (a type of blood cancer) or any other 
cancer before you use GOBIVAZ. 
• 
If you use GOBIVAZ or other TNF blockers, your risk for developing lymphoma or another 
cancer may increase. 
• 
Patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases, who have had the 
disease for a long time, may be at higher than average risk of developing lymphoma. 
• 
There have been cases of cancers, including unusual types, in children and teenage patients 
taking TNF-blocking agents, which sometimes resulted in death. 
• 
On rare occasions, a specific and severe type of lymphoma called hepatosplenic T-cell 
lymphoma has been observed in patients taking other TNF-blockers. Most of these patients 
were adolescent or young adult males. This type of cancer has usually resulted in death. 
Almost all of these patients had also received medicines known as azathioprine or 6-
mercaptopurine. Tell your doctor if you are taking azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine with 
GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Patients with severe persistent asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or are 
heavy smokers may be at increased risk for cancer with GOBIVAZ treatment. If you have 
severe persistent asthma, COPD or are a heavy smoker, you should discuss with your doctor 
whether treatment with a TNF blocker is appropriate for you. 
• 
Some patients treated with golimumab have developed certain kinds of skin cancer. If any 
changes in the appearance of the skin or growths on the skin occur during or after therapy, tell 
your doctor. 
 
Heart failure 
Tell your doctor straight away if you get new or worsening symptoms of heart failure. Symptoms of 
heart failure include shortness of breath or swelling of your feet. 
• 
New and worsening congestive heart failure has been reported with TNF blockers, including 
GOBIVAZ. Some of these patients died. 
• 
If you have mild heart failure and you are being treated with GOBIVAZ, you must be closely 
monitored by your doctor. 
 
Nervous system disease 

88 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you have ever been diagnosed with or develop symptoms of a 
demyelinating disease such as multiple sclerosis. Symptoms may include changes in your vision, 
weakness in your arms or legs or numbness or tingling in any part of your body. Your doctor will 
decide if you should receive GOBIVAZ. 
 
Operations or dental procedures 
• 
Talk to your doctor if you are going to have any operations or dental procedures. 
• 
Tell your surgeon or dentist performing the procedure that you are having treatment with 
GOBIVAZ by showing them your Patient Reminder Card. 
 
Autoimmune disease 
Tell your doctor if you develop symptoms of a disease called lupus. Symptoms include persistent rash, 
fever, joint pain and tiredness. 
• 
On rare occasions, people treated with TNF blockers have developed lupus. 
 
Blood disease  
In some patients the body may fail to produce enough of the blood cells that help your body fight 
infections or help you to stop bleeding. If you develop a fever that does not go away, bruise or bleed 
very easily or look very pale, call your doctor right away. Your doctor may decide to stop treatment. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
GOBIVAZ. 
 
Vaccinations 
Talk to your doctor if you have had, or are due to have a vaccine. 
• 
You should not receive certain (live) vaccines while using GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Certain vaccinations may cause infections. If you received GOBIVAZ while you were 
pregnant, your baby may be at higher risk for getting such an infection for up to approximately 
six months after the last dose you received during pregnancy. It is important that you tell your 
baby's doctors and other health care professionals about your GOBIVAZ use so they can 
decide when your baby should receive any vaccine. 
 
Talk to your child’s doctor regarding vaccinations for your child. If possible, your child should be up 
to date with all vaccinations before using GOBIVAZ. 
 
Therapeutic infectious agents  
Talk to your doctor if you have recently received or are scheduled to receive treatment with a 
therapeutic infectious agent (such as BCG instillation used for the treatment of cancer). 
 
Allergic reactions  
Tell your doctor straight away if you develop symptoms of an allergic reaction after your treatment 
with GOBIVAZ. Symptoms of an allergic reaction may include swelling of the face, lips, mouth or 
throat which may cause difficulty in swallowing or breathing, skin rash, hives, swelling of the hands, 
feet or ankles. 
• 
Some of these reactions may be serious or, rarely, life-threatening. 
• 
Some of these reactions occurred after the first administration of GOBIVAZ 
 
Children 
GOBIVAZ is not recommended for children less than 2 years of age with polyarticular juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis because it has not been studied in this group. 
 
Other medicines and GOBIVAZ 
• 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are using, have recently used or might use any other 
medicines, including any other medicines to treat rheumatoid arthritis, polyarticular juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis, or ulcerative colitis. 

89 
 
• 
You should not take GOBIVAZ with medicines containing the active substance anakinra or 
abatacept. These medicines are used for the treatment of rheumatic diseases. 
• 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any other medicines that affect your immune 
system. 
• 
You should not receive certain (live) vaccines while using GOBIVAZ. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
GOBIVAZ. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding  
Talk to your doctor before using GOBIVAZ if:  
• 
You are pregnant or are planning to become pregnant while using GOBIVAZ. There is limited 
information about the effects of this medicine in pregnant women. If you are being treated 
with GOBIVAZ, you must avoid becoming pregnant by using adequate contraception during 
your treatment and for at least 6 months after the last GOBIVAZ injection. GOBIVAZ should 
only be used during pregnancy if it is clearly necessary for you.  
• 
Before starting breast-feeding, your last treatment with GOBIVAZ must be at least 6 months 
ago.  
You must stop breast-feeding if you are to be given GOBIVAZ.  
• 
If you received GOBIVAZ during your pregnancy, your baby may have a higher risk for 
getting an infection. It is important that you tell your baby’s doctors and other health care 
professionals about your GOBIVAZ use before the baby receives any vaccine (for more 
information see section on vaccination).  
If you are pregnant or breast-feeding, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask 
your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking this medicine.  
 
Driving and using machines  
GOBIVAZ has minor influence on your ability to drive and use tools or machines. Dizziness may 
however occur after you take GOBIVAZ. If this happens, do not drive or use any tools or machines.  
 
GOBIVAZ contains sorbitol  
Sorbitol intolerance 
This medicine contains 20.5 mg sorbitol in each pre-filled pen. 
 
 
3. 
How to use GOBIVAZ 
 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor or pharmacist has told you. Check with your doctor 
or pharmacist if you are not sure. 
 
How much GOBIVAZ is given 
Rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and axial spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis 
and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis: 
• 
The recommended dose is 50 mg (the content of 1 pre-filled pen) given once a month, on the 
same date each month.  
• 
Talk to your doctor before taking your fourth dose. Your doctor will determine if you should 
continue GOBIVAZ treatment. 
o If you weigh more than 100 kg, the dose might be increased to 100 mg (the content of 2 
pre-filled pens) given once a month, on the same date each month. 
 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis in children 2 years of age and older: 
• 
For patients weighing at least 40 kg, the recommended dose is 50 mg given once a month, on 
the same date each month.  
• 
Talk to your doctor before you take the fourth dose. Your doctor will determine if you should 
continue GOBIVAZ treatment. 
 

90 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
• 
The table below shows how you will usually use this medicine. 
 
Initial treatment 
A starting dose of 200 mg (the contents of 4 pre-filled pens) followed by 
100 mg (the contents of 2 pre-filled pens) 2 weeks later. 
Maintenance treatment 
• 
In patients weighing less than 80 kg, 50 mg (the contents of 
1 pre-filled pen) 4 weeks after your last treatment, then 
every 4 weeks thereafter. Your doctor may decide to 
prescribe 100 mg (the contents of 2 pre-filled pens), 
depending on how well GOBIVAZ works for you. 
• 
In patients weighing 80 kg or more, 100 mg (the contents 
of 2 pre-filled pens) 4 weeks after your last treatment, then 
every 4 weeks thereafter. 
 
How GOBIVAZ is given 
• 
GOBIVAZ is given by injection under the skin (subcutaneously). 
• 
At the start, your doctor or nurse may inject GOBIVAZ. However, you and your doctor may 
decide that you may inject GOBIVAZ yourself. In this case you will get training on how to 
inject GOBIVAZ yourself. 
Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about giving yourself an injection. You will find 
detailed “Instructions for Use” at the end of this leaflet. 
 
If you use more GOBIVAZ than you should 
If you have used or been given too much GOBIVAZ (either by injecting too much on a single 
occasion, or by using it too often), talk to your doctor or pharmacist straight away. Always take the 
outer carton and this leaflet with you, even if it is empty. 
 
If you forget to use GOBIVAZ  
If you forget to use GOBIVAZ on your planned date, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you 
remember. 
 
Do not use a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose. 
 
When to inject your next dose: 
• 
If you are less than 2 weeks late, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you remember and stay 
on your original schedule. 
• 
If you are more than 2 weeks late, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you remember and talk 
to your doctor or pharmacist to ask when you need to take the next dose. 
 
If you are not sure what to do, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
If you stop using GOBIVAZ  
If you are considering stopping GOBIVAZ, talk to your doctor or pharmacist first. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Some 
patients may experience serious side effects and may require treatment. The risk of certain side effects 
is greater with the 100 mg dose compared with the 50 mg dose. Side effects may appear up to several 
months after the last injection. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the following serious side effects of GOBIVAZ 
which include: 

91 
 
• 
allergic reactions which may be serious, or rarely, life-threatening (rare). Symptoms of an 
allergic reaction may include swelling of the face, lips, mouth or throat which may cause 
difficulty in swallowing or breathing, skin rash, hives, swelling of the hands, feet or ankles. 
Some of these reactions occurred after the first administration of GOBIVAZ. 
• 
serious infections (including TB, bacterial infections including serious blood infections 
and pneumonia, severe fungal infections and other opportunistic infections) (common). 
Symptoms of an infection can include fever, tiredness, (persistent) cough, shortness of breath, 
flu-like symptoms, weight loss, night sweats, diarrhoea, wounds, dental problems and a 
burning feeling when urinating. 
• 
reactivation of hepatitis B virus if you are a carrier or have had hepatitis B before (rare). 
Symptoms can include yellowing of the skin and eyes, dark brown-coloured urine, right-sided 
abdominal pain, fever, feeling sick, being sick, and feeling very tired. 
• 
nervous system disease such as multiple sclerosis (rare). Symptoms of nervous system 
disease can include changes in your vision, weakness in your arms or legs, numbness or 
tingling in any part of your body. 
• 
cancer of the lymph nodes (lymphoma) (rare). Symptoms of lymphoma can include 
swelling of the lymph nodes, weight loss, or fever. 
• 
heart failure (rare). Symptoms of heart failure can include shortness of breath or swelling of 
your feet. 
• 
signs of immune system disorders called: 
-   lupus (rare). Symptoms can include joint pain or a rash on cheeks or arms that is 
sensitive to the sun. 
-  
sarcoidosis (rare). Symptoms can include a persistent cough, being short of breath, chest 
pain, fever, swelling of your lymph nodes, weight loss, skin rashes, and blurred vision. 
• 
swelling of small blood vessels (vasculitis) (rare). Symptoms can include fever, headache, 
weight loss, night sweats, rash, and nerve problems such as numbness and tingling. 
• 
skin cancer (uncommon). Symptoms of skin cancer can include changes in the appearance of 
your skin or growths on your skin. 
• 
blood disease (common). Symptoms of blood disease can include a fever that does not go 
away, bruising or bleeding very easily or looking very pale. 
• 
blood cancer (leukaemia) (rare). Symptoms of leukaemia can include fever, feeling tired, 
frequent infections, easy bruising, and night sweats. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the above symptoms. 
 
The following additional side effects have been observed with GOBIVAZ  
Very common side effects (may affect more than 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Upper respiratory tract infections, sore throat or hoarseness, runny nose 
 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Abnormal liver tests (increased liver enzymes) found during blood tests done by your doctor 
• 
Feeling dizzy 
• 
Headache 
• 
Feeling numb or having a tingling feeling 
• 
Superficial fungal infections 
• 
Abscess 
• 
Bacterial infections (such as cellulitis) 
• 
Low red blood cell counts 
• 
Low white blood cell counts 
• 
Positive blood lupus test 
• 
Allergic reactions 
• 
Indigestion 
• 
Stomach pain 
• 
Feeling sick (nausea) 
• 
Flu 

92 
 
• 
Bronchitis 
• 
Sinus infection 
• 
Cold sores 
• 
High blood pressure 
• 
Fever 
• 
Asthma, shortness of breath, wheezing 
• 
Stomach and bowel disorders which include inflammation of the stomach lining and colon 
which may cause fever 
• 
Pain and ulcers in the mouth 
• 
Injection site reactions (including redness, hardness, pain, bruising, itching, tingling and 
irritation) 
• 
Hair loss 
• 
Rash and itching of the skin 
• 
Difficulty sleeping 
• 
Depression 
• 
Feeling weak 
• 
Bone fractures 
• 
Chest discomfort 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
• 
Kidney infection 
• 
Cancers, including skin cancer and non-cancerous growths or lumps, including skin moles 
• 
Skin blisters 
• 
Severe infection throughout the body (sepsis), sometimes including low blood pressure (septic 
shock) 
• 
Psoriasis (including on the palms of your hand and/or the soles of your feet and/or in the form 
of skin blisters) 
• 
Low platelet count 
• 
Combined low platelet, red, and white blood cell count 
• 
Thyroid disorders 
• 
Increase in blood sugar levels 
• 
Increase in blood cholesterol levels 
• 
Balance disorders 
• 
Vision disturbances 
• 
Inflamed eye (conjunctivitis) 
• 
Eye allergy 
• 
Sensation of heart beating irregularly 
• 
Narrowing of the blood vessels in the heart 
• 
Blood clots 
• 
Flushing 
• 
Constipation 
• 
Chronic inflammatory condition of the lungs 
• 
Acid reflux 
• 
Gall stones 
• 
Liver disorders 
• 
Breast disorders 
• 
Menstrual disorders 
 
Rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 1,000 people): 
• 
Failure of the bone marrow to produce blood cells 
• 
Severely decreased number of white blood cells 
• 
Infection of the joints or the tissue around them 
• 
Impaired healing 
• 
Inflammation of blood vessels in internal organs 

93 
 
• 
Leukaemia 
• 
Melanoma (a type of skin cancer) 
• 
Merkel cell carcinoma (a type of skin cancer) 
• 
Lichenoid reactions (itchy reddish-purple skin rash and/or threadlike white-grey lines on 
mucous membranes) 
• 
Scaly, peeling skin 
• 
Immune disorders that could affect the lungs, skin and lymph nodes (most commonly 
presenting as sarcoidosis) 
• 
Pain and discolouration in the fingers or toes 
• 
Taste disturbances 
• 
Bladder disorders 
• 
Kidney disorders 
• 
Inflammation of the blood vessels in your skin which results in rash 
 
Side effects of which the frequency is not known: 
• 
A rare blood cancer affecting mostly young people (hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma) 
• 
Kaposi’s sarcoma, a rare cancer related to infection with human herpes virus 8. Kaposi’s 
• 
sarcoma most commonly appears as purple lesions on the skin 
Worsening of a condition called dermatomyositis (seen as a skin rash accompanying muscle 
weakness) 
 
Reporting of side effects  
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store GOBIVAZ 
 
• 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
• 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the label and the carton after 
“EXP”. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
• 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C-8°C). Do not freeze. 
• 
Keep the pre-filled pen in the outer carton in order to protect it from light. 
• 
This medicine can also be stored out of the refrigerator at temperatures up to a maximum of 
25°C for a single period of up to 30 days, but not beyond the original expiry date printed on the 
carton. Write the new expiry date on the carton including day/month/year (no more than 30 days 
after the medicine is removed from the refrigerator). Do not return this medicine to refrigerator 
if it has reached room temperature. Discard this medicine if not used by the new expiry date or 
the expiry date printed on the carton, whichever is earlier. 
• 
Do not use this medicine if you notice that the liquid is not a clear to light yellow colour, 
cloudy, or contains foreign particles. 
• 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your doctor or 
pharmacist how to throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help to 
protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What GOBIVAZ contains  
The active substance is golimumab. One 0.5 mL pre-filled pen contains 50 mg of golimumab. 
The other ingredients are sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, 
poloxamer 188 and water for injections. For more information on sorbitol, see Section 2.  
 
What GOBIVAZ looks like and contents of the pack 

94 
 
GOBIVAZ is supplied as solution for injection in a single-use pre-filled pen. GOBIVAZ is available 
in packs containing 1 pre-filled pen and multipacks containing 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled pens. Not all 
pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
The solution is clear to slightly opalescent (having a pearl-like shine), colourless to light yellow and 
may contain a few small translucent or white particles of protein. Do not use GOBIVAZ if the solution 
is discoloured, cloudy or you can see foreign particles in it. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder  
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
Manufacturer 
Alvotech Hf 
Sæmundargata 15-19 
Reykjavik, 102 
Iceland 
 
This leaflet was last revised in  
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu  
 
<------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------> 
 
 

95 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE  
 
If you would like to self inject GOBIVAZ, you must be trained by a healthcare professional to 
prepare an injection and give it to yourself. If you have not been trained, please contact your 
doctor, nurse or pharmacist to schedule a training session. 
 
In these instructions: 
1. 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled pen 
2. 
Choosing and preparing the injection site 
3. 
Injecting the medicine 
4. 
After the injection 
The diagram below (see figure 1) shows what the pre-filled pen looks like. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 
 
1. 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled pen  
 
• 
Do not shake the pre-filled pen at any time. 
• 
Do not remove the cap from the pre-filled pen until immediately before the injection. 
• 
Do not put the cap of the pre-filled pen back on if removed to avoid bending the needle. 
Check the number of pre-filled pens  
Check the pre-filled pens to make sure 
• 
the number of pre-filled pens and strength is correct 
o 
If your dose is 50 mg, you will get one 50 mg pre-filled pen 
o 
If your dose is 100 mg, you will get two 50 mg pre-filled pens and you will need to 
give yourself two injections. Choose two different sites for these injections (e.g. one 
injection in the right thigh and the other injection in the left thigh) and give the 
injections one right after the other. 
o 
If your dose is 200 mg, you will get four 50 mg pre-filled pens and you will need to 
give yourself four injections. Choose different sites for these injections and give the 
injections one right after the other. 
 
Check expiry date  
• 
Check the expiration date printed or written on the carton. 
• 
Check the expiration date (as indicated as “EXP”) on the pre-filled pen. 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled pen if the expiration date has passed. The printed expiration date 
refers to the last day of the month. Please contact your doctor or pharmacist for assistance. 
Check the blister   
• 
Check the sealed security lid on the blister. 

96 
 
• 
Do not use if the blister is broken. Please contact your doctor or pharmacist. 
Wait 30 minutes to allow pre-filled pen to reach room temperature  
• 
To ensure proper injection, allow the pre-filled pen to sit at room temperature outside the 
box for 30 minutes out of the reach of children. 
• 
Do not warm the pre-filled pen in any other way (for example, do not warm it in a microwave 
or in hot water). 
• 
Do not remove the pre-filled pen’s cap while allowing it to reach room temperature. 
Get the rest of your equipment ready  
• 
While you are waiting you can get the rest of your equipment ready, including an alcohol 
swab, a cotton ball or gauze and a sharps container. 
Check the liquid in the pre-filled pen  
• 
Look through the viewing window to make sure that the liquid in the pre-filled pen is clear 
to slightly opalescent (having a pearl-like shine) and colourless to light yellow. The solution 
can be used if it contains a few small translucent or white particles of protein. 
• 
You will also notice an air bubble, which is normal. 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled pen if the liquid is the wrong colour, cloudy, or contains larger 
particles. If this happens, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
2. 
Choosing and preparing the injection site (see figure 2)  
 
• 
You can inject the medicine into the front of the middle thighs. 
• 
You can use the stomach (abdomen) below the belly button, except for approximately the 5 
cm area directly underneath the belly button. 
• 
Do not inject into areas where the skin is tender, bruised, red, scaly, hard or has scars or 
stretch marks. 
• 
If multiple injections are required for a single administration, the injections should 
be administered at different injection sites. 
 
 
 
       Injectable areas  
Figure 2 
 
 DO NOT inject into the arm to avoid failure of the pre-filled pen and/or unintentional injury.  
 
Wash hands and clean the injection site  
• 
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water. 
• 
Wipe the injection site with an alcohol swab. 
• 
Allow the skin to dry before injecting. Do not fan or blow on the clean area. 
• 
Do not touch this area again before giving the injection. 
 

97 
 
3. 
Injecting the medicine  
• 
The cap should not be removed until you are ready to inject the medicine. 
• 
The medicine should be injected within 5 minutes after the cap has been removed. 
 
Remove the cap (figure 3)  
• 
When you are ready to inject, pull the cap off and throw it away after your injection. 
• 
Do not put the cap back on because it may damage the needle inside the pre-filled pen. 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled pen if it is dropped without the cap in place. If this happens 
please contact your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
Figure 3 
 
 
Prepare to push the pre-filled pen against the skin (see figure 4).  
 
 
Figure 4 
 
• 
Pinch the skin with other hand. Prepare to position the pre-filled pen over the injection site so 
that the orange needle shield points toward the injection site.  
• 
Hold the pen so that you can see the inspection window.  
 
Push to inject (see figure 5).  
 

98 
 
Figure 5 
 
• 
Push the open end of the pre-filled pen against the skin at a 90-degree angle (see Figure 
5).  
• 
Wait for the first “click” that signals the start of injection. You may or may not feel a 
needle prick. 
• 
Start counting to 15 to ensure that all drug gets injected. 
 
Do not lift the pre-filled pen away from your skin. If you pull the pre-filled pen away from your 
skin, you may not get your full dose of medicine.  
Continue to hold until the orange indicator has stopped moving or you hear the second ‘click’ 
(see figure 6). It can take up to 15 seconds for you to hear the second ‘click’ sound (indicating 
that the injection has finished and the needle has gone back into the pre-filled pen). 
 
Figure 6 
 
• 
Note: If you do not hear the second ‘click’, wait 15 seconds from the time you first press 
the pre-filled pen against the skin and then lift the autoinjector from the injection site. 
 
Check the viewing window – an orange indicator confirms proper administration (see figure 7)  
• 
The orange indicator will completely fill in the viewing window.  
• 
Lift the pre-filled pen from the injection site. 
• 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if the orange indicator is not visible in the window or if 
you suspect that you may not have received a complete dose. Do not administer a second 
dose without speaking to your doctor. 
 
Figure 7 
 

99 
 
4. 
After the injection 
Use a cotton ball or gauze  
• 
There may be a small amount of blood or liquid at the injection site. This is normal. 
• 
You can press a cotton ball or gauze over the injection site for 10 seconds. 
• 
You may cover the injection site with a small adhesive bandage, if necessary. 
• 
Do not rub your skin. 
 
 Throw the pre-filled pen away (see figure 8)  
• 
Place your pen in a sharps container straight away. Make sure you dispose of the bin 
as instructed by your doctor or nurse when the container is full. 
If you feel that something has gone wrong with the injection or if you are not sure, talk to your 
doctor or pharmacist. 
 
Figure 8 
 

100 
 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user  
 
GOBIVAZ 50 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe  
golimumab 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again.  
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours.  
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, or pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
Your doctor will also give you a Patient Reminder Card, which contains important safety information 
you need to be aware of before and during your treatment with GOBIVAZ. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What GOBIVAZ is and what it is used for  
2. 
What you need to know before you use GOBIVAZ 
3. 
How to use GOBIVAZ 
4. 
Possible side effects  
5. 
How to store GOBIVAZ 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What GOBIVAZ is and what it is used for 
 
GOBIVAZ contains the active substance called golimumab. 
 
GOBIVAZ belongs to a group of medicines called ‘TNF blockers’. It is used in adults for the 
treatment of the following inflammatory diseases: 
• 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
• 
Psoriatic arthritis 
• 
Axial spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis 
• 
Ulcerative colitis 
 
In children 2 years of age and older, GOBIVAZ is used for the treatment of polyarticular juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis. 
 
GOBIVAZ works by blocking the action of a protein called ‘tumour necrosis factor alpha’ (TNF-α). 
This protein is involved in inflammatory processes of the body, and blocking it can reduce the 
inflammation in your body. 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints. If you have active rheumatoid arthritis 
you will first be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you 
may be given GOBIVAZ which you will take in combination with another medicine called 
methotrexate 

101 
 
to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Slow down the damage to your bones and joints. 
• 
Improve your physical function 
 
Psoriatic arthritis 
Psoriatic arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints, usually accompanied by psoriasis, an 
inflammatory disease of the skin. If you have active psoriatic arthritis you will first be given other 
medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you may be given GOBIVAZ 
to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Slow down the damage to your bones and joints. 
• 
Improve your physical function 
 
Ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis 
Ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis are inflammatory diseases of the 
spine. If you have ankylosing spondylitis or non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, you will first be 
given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you may be given 
GOBIVAZ to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Improve your physical function. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
Ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory disease of the bowel. If you have ulcerative colitis you will first 
be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you will be given 
GOBIVAZ to treat your disease. 
 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis is an inflammatory disease that causes joint pain and swelling 
in children. If you have polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis you will first be given other 
medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you will be given GOBIVAZ in 
combination with methotrexate to treat the disease. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use GOBIVAZ 
 
Do not use GOBIVAZ   
• 
If you are allergic (hypersensitive) to golimumab or any of the other ingredients of this 
medicine (listed in Section 6). 
• 
If you have tuberculosis (TB) or any other severe infection. 
• 
If you have moderate or severe heart failure. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before 
using GOBIVAZ. 
 
Warnings and precautions  
Talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before using GOBIVAZ 
 
Infections 
Tell your doctor straight away if you already have or get any symptoms of infection, during or after 
your treatment with GOBIVAZ. Symptoms of infection include fever, cough, shortness of breath, flu-
like symptoms, diarrhoea, wounds, dental problems or a burning feeling when urinating. 
• 
You may get infections more easily while using GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Infections may progress more rapidly and may be more severe. In addition, some previous 
infections may reappear. 
 

102 
 
 
Tuberculosis (TB) 
Tell your doctor straight away if symptoms of TB appear during or after your treatment. 
Symptoms of TB include persistent cough, weight loss, tiredness, fever or night sweats. 
• 
Cases of TB have been reported in patients treated with GOBIVAZ, in rare occasions 
even in patients who have been treated with medicines for TB. Your doctor will test you 
to see if you have TB. Your doctor will record these tests on your Patient Reminder 
Card. 
• 
It is very important that you tell your doctor if you have ever had TB, or if you have 
been in close contact with someone who has had or has TB. 
• 
If your doctor feels that you are at risk of TB, you may be treated with medicines for 
TB before you begin using GOBIVAZ. 
 
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
• 
Tell your doctor if you are a carrier or if you have or have had HBV before you are 
given GOBIVAZ. 
Tell your doctor if you think you might be at risk of contracting HBV. 
• 
Your doctor should test you for HBV. 
• 
Treatment with TNF blockers such as GOBIVAZ may result in reactivation of HBV in 
• 
patients who carry this virus, which can be life-threatening in some cases. 
 
Invasive fungal infections 
If you have lived in or travelled to an area where infections caused by specific type of fungi that 
can affect the lungs or other parts of the body (called histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, or 
blastomycosis), are common, tell your doctor straight away. Ask your doctor if you don’t know 
if these fungal infections are common in the area in which you have lived or travelled. 
 
Cancer and lymphoma 
Tell your doctor if you have ever been diagnosed with lymphoma (a type of blood cancer) or any other 
cancer before you use GOBIVAZ. 
• 
If you use GOBIVAZ or other TNF blockers, your risk for developing lymphoma or another 
cancer may increase. 
• 
Patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases, who have had the 
disease for a long time, may be at higher than average risk of developing lymphoma. 
• 
There have been cases of cancers, including unusual types, in children and teenage patients 
taking TNF-blocking agents, which sometimes resulted in death. 
• 
On rare occasions, a specific and severe type of lymphoma called hepatosplenic T-cell 
• 
lymphoma has been observed in patients taking other TNF-blockers. Most of these patients 
were adolescent or young adult males. This type of cancer has usually resulted in death. 
Almost all of these patients had also received medicines known as azathioprine or 6-
mercaptopurine. Tell your doctor if you are taking azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine with 
GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Patients with severe persistent asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or are 
heavy smokers may be at increased risk for cancer with GOBIVAZ treatment. If you have 
severe persistent asthma, COPD or are a heavy smoker, you should discuss with your doctor 
whether treatment with a TNF blocker is appropriate for you. 
• 
Some patients treated with golimumab have developed certain kinds of skin cancer. If any 
changes in the appearance of the skin or growths on the skin occur during or after therapy, tell 
your doctor. 
 
Heart failure 
Tell your doctor straight away if you get new or worsening symptoms of heart failure. symptoms of 
heart failure include shortness of breath or swelling of your feet. 
• 
New and worsening congestive heart failure has been reported with TNF blockers, including 
GOBIVAZ. Some of these patients died. 
• 
If you have mild heart failure and you are being treated with GOBIVAZ, you must be closely 
monitored by your doctor. 

103 
 
 
Nervous system disease 
Tell your doctor straight away if you have ever been diagnosed with or develop symptoms of a 
demyelinating disease such as multiple sclerosis. Symptoms may include changes in your vision, 
weakness in your arms or legs or numbness or tingling in any part of your body. Your doctor will 
decide if you should receive GOBIVAZ. 
 
Operations or dental procedures 
• 
Talk to your doctor if you are going to have any operations or dental procedures. 
• 
Tell your surgeon or dentist performing the procedure that you are having treatment with 
GOBIVAZ by showing them your Patient Reminder Card. 
 
Autoimmune disease 
Tell your doctor if you develop symptoms of a disease called lupus. Symptoms include persistent rash, 
fever, joint pain and tiredness. 
• 
On rare occasions, people treated with TNF blockers have developed lupus. 
 
Blood disease  
In some patients the body may fail to produce enough of the blood cells that help your body fight 
infections or help you to stop bleeding. If you develop a fever that does not go away, bruise or bleed 
very easily or look very pale, call your doctor right away. Your doctor may decide to stop treatment. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
GOBIVAZ. 
 
Vaccinations 
Talk to your doctor if you have had, or are due to have a vaccine. 
• 
You should not receive certain (live) vaccines while using GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Certain vaccinations may cause infections. If you received GOBIVAZ while you were 
pregnant, your baby may be at higher risk for getting such an infection for up to approximately 
six months after the last dose you received during pregnancy. It is important that you tell your 
baby's doctors and other health care professionals about your GOBIVAZ use so they can 
decide when your baby should receive any vaccine. 
 
Talk to your child’s doctor regarding vaccinations for your child. If possible, your child should be up 
to date with all vaccinations before using GOBIVAZ. 
 
Therapeutic infectious agents  
Talk to your doctor if you have recently received or are scheduled to receive treatment with a 
therapeutic infectious agent (such as BCG instillation used for the treatment of cancer). 
 
Allergic reactions  
Tell your doctor straight away if you develop symptoms of an allergic reaction after your treatment 
with GOBIVAZ. Symptoms of an allergic reaction may include swelling of the face, lips, mouth or 
throat which may cause difficulty in swallowing or breathing, skin rash, hives, swelling of the hands, 
feet or ankles. 
• 
Some of these reactions may be serious or, rarely, life-threatening. 
• 
Some of these reactions occurred after the first administration of GOBIVAZ 
 
Children 
GOBIVAZ is not recommended for children less than 2 years of age with polyarticular juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis because it has not been studied in this group. 
 
Other medicines and GOBIVAZ 
• 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are using, have recently used or might use any other 
medicines, including any other medicines to treat rheumatoid arthritis, polyarticular juvenile 

104 
 
idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis, or ulcerative colitis. 
• 
You should not take GOBIVAZ with medicines containing the active substance anakinra or 
abatacept. These medicines are used for the treatment of rheumatic diseases. 
• 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any other medicines that affect your immune 
System. 
• 
You should not receive certain (live) vaccines while using GOBIVAZ. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
GOBIVAZ. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding  
Talk to your doctor before using GOBIVAZ if:  
• 
You are pregnant or are planning to become pregnant while using GOBIVAZ. There is limited  
information about the effects of this medicine in pregnant women. If you are being treated 
with GOBIVAZ, you must avoid becoming pregnant by using adequate contraception during 
your treatment and for at least 6 months after the last GOBIVAZ injection. GOBIVAZ should 
only be used during pregnancy if it is clearly necessary for you.  
• 
Before starting breast-feeding, your last treatment with GOBIVAZ must be at least 6 months 
ago. You must stop breast-feeding if you are to be given GOBIVAZ.  
• 
If you received GOBIVAZ during your pregnancy, your baby may have a higher risk for 
getting an infection. It is important that you tell your baby’s doctors and other health care 
professionals about your GOBIVAZ use before the baby receives any vaccine (for more 
information see section on vaccination).  
If you are pregnant or breast-feeding, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask  
your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking this medicine.  
 
Driving and using machines  
GOBIVAZ has minor influence on your ability to drive and use tools or machines. Dizziness may  
however occur after you take GOBIVAZ. If this happens, do not drive or use any tools or machines.  
 
GOBIVAZ contains sorbitol  
Sorbitol intolerance 
This medicine contains 20.5 mg sorbitol in each pre-filled syringe. 
 
 
3. 
How to use GOBIVAZ 
 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor or pharmacist has told you. Check with your doctor 
or pharmacist if you are not sure. 
 
How much GOBIVAZ is given 
Rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and axial spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis 
and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis: 
• 
The recommended dose is 50 mg (the content of 1 pre-filled syringe) given once a month, on 
the same date each month.  
• 
Talk to your doctor before taking your fourth dose. Your doctor will determine if you should 
continue GOBIVAZ treatment. 
o 
If you weigh more than 100 kg, the dose might be increased to 100 mg (the content of 
2 pre-filled syringes) given once a month, on the same date each month. 
 
Polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis in children 2 years of age and older: 
• 
For patients weighing at least 40 kg, the recommended dose is 50 mg given once a month, on 
the same date each month.  
• 
Talk to your doctor before you take the fourth dose. Your doctor will determine if you should 
continue GOBIVAZ treatment. 

105 
 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
• 
The table below shows how you will usually use this medicine. 
 
Initial treatment 
A starting dose of 200 mg (the contents of 4 pre-filled syringes) 
followed by 100 mg (the contents of 2 pre-filled syringes) 2 weeks 
later. 
Maintenance treatment 
• 
In patients weighing less than 80 kg, 50 mg (the contents of 
1 pre-filled syringe) 4 weeks after your last treatment, then 
every 4 weeks thereafter. Your doctor may decide to prescribe 
100 mg (the contents of 2 pre-filled syringes), depending on 
how well GOBIVAZ works for you. 
• 
In patients weighing 80 kg or more, 100 mg (the contents of 
2 pre-filled syringes) 4 weeks after your last treatment, then 
every 4 weeks thereafter. 
 
How GOBIVAZ is given 
• 
GOBIVAZ is given by injection under the skin (subcutaneously). 
• 
At the start, your doctor or nurse may inject GOBIVAZ. However, you and your doctor may 
decide that you may inject GOBIVAZ yourself. In this case you will get training on how to 
inject GOBIVAZ yourself. 
Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about giving yourself an injection. You will find 
detailed “Instructions for Use” at the end of this leaflet. 
 
If you use more GOBIVAZ than you should 
If you have used or been given too much GOBIVAZ (either by injecting too much on a single 
occasion, or by using it too often), talk to your doctor or pharmacist straight away. Always take the 
outer carton and this leaflet with you, even if it is empty. 
 
If you forget to use GOBIVAZ  
If you forget to use GOBIVAZ on your planned date, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you 
remember. 
 
Do not use a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose. 
 
When to inject your next dose: 
• 
If you are less than 2 weeks late, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you remember and stay 
on your original schedule. 
• 
If you are more than 2 weeks late, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you remember and talk 
to your doctor or pharmacist to ask when you need to take the next dose. 
 
If you are not sure what to do, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
If you stop using GOBIVAZ  
If you are considering stopping GOBIVAZ, talk to your doctor or pharmacist first. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Some 
patients may experience serious side effects and may require treatment. The risk of certain side effects 
is greater with the 100 mg dose compared with the 50 mg dose. Side effects may appear up to several 
months after the last injection. 
 

106 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the following serious side effects of GOBIVAZ 
which include: 
• 
allergic reactions which may be serious, or rarely, life-threatening (rare). Symptoms of an 
allergic reaction may include swelling of the face, lips, mouth or throat which may cause 
difficulty in swallowing or breathing, skin rash, hives, swelling of the hands, feet or ankles. 
Some of these reactions occurred after the first administration of GOBIVAZ. 
• 
serious infections (including TB, bacterial infections including serious blood infections 
and pneumonia, severe fungal infections and other opportunistic infections) (common). 
Symptoms of an infection can include fever, tiredness, (persistent) cough, shortness of breath, 
flu-like symptoms, weight loss, night sweats, diarrhoea, wounds, dental problems and a 
burning feeling when urinating. 
• 
reactivation of hepatitis B virus if you are a carrier or have had hepatitis B before (rare). 
Symptoms can include yellowing of the skin and eyes, dark brown-coloured urine, right-sided 
abdominal pain, fever, feeling sick, being sick, and feeling very tired. 
• 
nervous system disease such as multiple sclerosis (rare). Symptoms of nervous system 
disease can include changes in your vision, weakness in your arms or legs, numbness or 
tingling in any part of your body. 
• 
cancer of the lymph nodes (lymphoma) (rare). Symptoms of lymphoma can include 
swelling of the lymph nodes, weight loss, or fever. 
• 
heart failure (rare). Symptoms of heart failure can include shortness of breath or swelling of 
your feet. 
• 
signs of immune system disorders called: 
-   lupus (rare). Symptoms can include joint pain or a rash on cheeks or arms that is 
sensitive to the sun. 
-  
sarcoidosis (rare). Symptoms can include a persistent cough, being short of breath, chest 
pain, fever, swelling of your lymph nodes, weight loss, skin rashes, and blurred vision. 
• 
swelling of small blood vessels (vasculitis) (rare). Symptoms can include fever, headache, 
weight loss, night sweats, rash, and nerve problems such as numbness and tingling. 
• 
skin cancer (uncommon). Symptoms of skin cancer can include changes in the appearance of 
your skin or growths on your skin. 
• 
blood disease (common). Symptoms of blood disease can include a fever that does not go 
away, bruising or bleeding very easily or looking very pale. 
• 
blood cancer (leukaemia) (rare). Symptoms of leukaemia can include fever, feeling tired, 
frequent infections, easy bruising, and night sweats. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the above symptoms. 
 
The following additional side effects have been observed with GOBIVAZ  
Very common side effects (may affect more than 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Upper respiratory tract infections, sore throat or hoarseness, runny nose 
 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Abnormal liver tests (increased liver enzymes) found during blood tests done by your doctor 
• 
Feeling dizzy 
• 
Headache 
• 
Feeling numb or having a tingling feeling 
• 
Superficial fungal infections 
• 
Abscess 
• 
Bacterial infections (such as cellulitis) 
• 
Low red blood cell counts 
• 
Low white blood cell counts 
• 
Positive blood lupus test 
• 
Allergic reactions 
• 
Indigestion 
• 
Stomach pain 

107 
 
• 
Feeling sick (nausea) 
• 
Flu 
• 
Bronchitis 
• 
Sinus infection 
• 
Cold sores 
• 
High blood pressure 
• 
Fever 
• 
Asthma, shortness of breath, wheezing 
• 
Stomach and bowel disorders which include inflammation of the stomach lining and colon 
which may cause fever 
• 
Pain and ulcers in the mouth 
• 
Injection site reactions (including redness, hardness, pain, bruising, itching, tingling and 
irritation) 
• 
Hair loss 
• 
Rash and itching of the skin 
• 
Difficulty sleeping 
• 
Depression 
• 
Feeling weak 
• 
Bone fractures 
• 
Chest discomfort 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
• 
Kidney infection 
• 
Cancers, including skin cancer and non-cancerous growths or lumps, including skin moles 
• 
Skin blisters 
• 
Severe infection throughout the body (sepsis), sometimes including low blood pressure (septic 
shock) 
• 
Psoriasis (including on the palms of your hand and/or the soles of your feet and/or in the form 
of skin blisters) 
• 
Low platelet count 
• 
Combined low platelet, red, and white blood cell count 
• 
Thyroid disorders 
• 
Increase in blood sugar levels 
• 
Increase in blood cholesterol levels 
• 
Balance disorders 
• 
Vision disturbances 
• 
Inflamed eye (conjunctivitis) 
• 
Eye allergy 
• 
Sensation of heart beating irregularly 
• 
Narrowing of the blood vessels in the heart 
• 
Blood clots 
• 
Flushing 
• 
Constipation 
• 
Chronic inflammatory condition of the lungs 
• 
Acid reflux 
• 
Gall stones 
• 
Liver disorders 
• 
Breast disorders 
• 
Menstrual disorders 
 
Rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 1,000 people): 
• 
Failure of the bone marrow to produce blood cells 
• 
Severely decreased number of white blood cells 
• 
Infection of the joints or the tissue around them 

108 
 
• 
Impaired healing 
• 
Inflammation of blood vessels in internal organs 
• 
Leukaemia 
• 
Melanoma (a type of skin cancer) 
• 
Merkel cell carcinoma (a type of skin cancer) 
• 
Lichenoid reactions (itchy reddish-purple skin rash and/or threadlike white-grey lines on 
mucous membranes) 
• 
Scaly, peeling skin 
• 
Immune disorders that could affect the lungs, skin and lymph nodes (most commonly 
presenting as sarcoidosis) 
• 
Pain and discolouration in the fingers or toes 
• 
Taste disturbances 
• 
Bladder disorders 
• 
Kidney disorders 
• 
Inflammation of the blood vessels in your skin which results in rash 
 
Side effects of which the frequency is not known: 
• 
A rare blood cancer affecting mostly young people (hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma) 
• 
Kaposi’s sarcoma, a rare cancer related to infection with human herpes virus 8. Kaposi’s 
sarcoma most commonly appears as purple lesions on the skin 
• 
Worsening of a condition called dermatomyositis (seen as a skin rash accompanying muscle 
weakness) 
 
Reporting of side effects  
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store GOBIVAZ 
 
• 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
• 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the label and the carton after 
“EXP”. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
• 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C-8°C). Do not freeze. 
• 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect it from light. 
• 
This medicine can also be stored out of the refrigerator at temperatures up to a maximum of 
25°C for a single period of up to 30 days, but not beyond the original expiry date printed on the 
carton. Write the new expiry date on the carton including day/month/year (no more than 30 days 
after the medicine is removed from the refrigerator). Do not return this medicine to refrigerator 
if it has reached room temperature. Discard this medicine if not used by the new expiry date or 
the expiry date printed on the carton, whichever is earlier. 
• 
Do not use this medicine if you notice that the liquid is not a clear to light yellow colour, 
cloudy, or contains foreign particles. 
• 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your doctor or 
pharmacist how to throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help to 
protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What GOBIVAZ contains  

109 
 
The active substance is golimumab. One 0.5 mL pre-filled syringe contains 50 mg of golimumab. 
The other ingredients are sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, 
poloxamer 188 and water for injections. For more information on sorbitol, see Section 2.  
 
What GOBIVAZ looks like and contents of the pack 
GOBIVAZ is supplied as solution for injection in a single-use pre-filled syringe. GOBIVAZ is 
available in packs containing 1 pre-filled syringe and multipacks containing 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled 
syringes. Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
The solution is clear to slightly opalescent (having a pearl-like shine), colourless to light yellow and 
may contain a few small translucent or white particles of protein. Do not use GOBIVAZ if the solution 
is discoloured, cloudy or you can see foreign particles in it. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder  
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
Manufacturer 
Alvotech Hf 
Sæmundargata 15-19 
Reykjavik, 102 
Iceland 
 
This leaflet was last revised in  
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu  
 
 

110 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE  
 
If you would like to self inject GOBIVAZ, you must be trained by a healthcare 
professional to prepare an injection and give it to yourself. If you have not been trained, 
please contact your doctor, nurse or pharmacist to schedule a training session. 
 
In these instructions: 
1. 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled syringe 
2. 
Choosing and preparing the injection site 
3. 
Injecting the medicine 
4. 
After the injection 
The diagram below (see figure 1) shows what the pre-filled syringe looks like. 
 
 
Figure 1 
 
1. 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled syringe  
 
Hold the pre-filled syringe by the body of the pre-filled syringe 
• 
Do not hold by the plunger, or needle cover. 
• 
Do not pull back on the plunger at any time. 
• 
Do not shake the pre-filled syringe at any time. 
• 
Do not remove the needle cover from the pre-filled syringe until instructed to do so. 
Check the number of pre-filled syringes  
Check the pre-filled syringes to make sure 
• 
the number of pre-filled syringes and strength is correct 
o 
If your dose is 50 mg, you will get one 50 mg pre-filled syringe 
o 
If your dose is 100 mg, you will get two 50 mg pre-filled syringes and you will 
need to give yourself two injections. Choose two different sites for these 
injections (e.g. one injection in the right thigh and the other injection in the left 
thigh), and give the injections one right after the other. 
o 
If your dose is 200 mg, you will get four 50 mg pre-filled syringes and you 
will need to give yourself four injections. Choose different sites for these 
injections and give the injections one right after the other. 
 
Check expiry date (see figure 2)  
• 
Check the expiration date printed or written on the carton and blister. 
• 
Check the expiration date (as indicated by “EXP”) on the label on the body of the 
pre-filled syringe. 

111 
 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if the expiration date has passed. The printed 
expiration date refers to the last day of the month. Please contact your doctor or 
pharmacist for assistance. 
 
Figure 2 
 
Wait 30 minutes to allow pre-filled syringe to reach room temperature  
• 
To ensure proper injection, allow the pre-filled syringe to sit at room temperature 
outside the box for 30 minutes, out of the reach of children. 
Do not warm the pre-filled syringe in any other way (for example, do not warm it in a 
microwave or in hot water). 
Do not remove the pre-filled syringe’s needle cover while allowing it to reach room temperature. 
Get the rest of your equipment ready  
While you are waiting you can get the rest of your equipment ready, including an alcohol 
swab, a cotton ball or gauze and a sharps container. 
Check the liquid in the pre-filled syringe  
• 
Hold the pre-filled syringe by its body with the covered needle pointing downward. 
• 
Look at the liquid through the viewing window of the pre-filled syringe and make 
sure that it is clear to slightly opalescent (having a pearl-like shine) and colourless to 
light yellow. The solution can be used if it contains a few small translucent or white 
particles of protein. 
• 
If you cannot see the liquid through the viewing window, hold the pre-filled syringe 
by its body and rotate the needle cover to line up the liquid to the viewing window 
(see figure 2). 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if the liquid is the wrong colour, cloudy, or contains larger 
particles. If this happens, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
2. 
Choosing and preparing the injection site (see figure 3)  
 
• 
You usually inject the medicine into the front of the middle thighs. 
• 
You can also use the lower stomach (abdomen) below the belly button, except 
for approximately the 5 cm area directly underneath the belly button. 
• 
Do not inject into areas where the skin is tender, bruised, red, scaly, hard or has scars or stretch 
marks.  
• 
If multiple injections are required for a single administration, the injections should be 
administered at different sites on the body.  
 
 
 

112 
 
 
Figure 3 
 
Injection site selection for caregivers (see figure 4)  
• 
If a caregiver is giving you the injection, they can also use the outer area of the upper arms. 
• 
Again, all sites mentioned can be used regardless of your body type or size. 
 
 
 
Figure 4 
 
Preparing injection site  
• 
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water. 
• 
Wipe the injection site with an alcohol swab. 
• 
Allow the skin to dry before injecting. Do not fan or blow on the clean area. 
Do not touch this area again before giving the injection. 
3. 
Injecting the medicine  
 
The needle cover should not be removed until you are ready to inject the medicine. The 
medicine should be injected within 5 minutes after the needle cover has been removed. 
Do not touch the plunger during needle cover removal. 
 
Remove the needle cover (see figure 5)  
• 
When you are ready to inject, hold the body of the pre-filled syringe with one hand. 
• 
Pull the needle cover straight off and throw it away after your injection. Do not 
touch the plunger while you do this. 
• 
You may notice an air bubble in the pre-filled syringe or a drop of liquid at the 
end of the needle. These are both normal and do not need to be removed. 
• 
Inject the dose promptly after removing the needle cover. 
Do not touch the needle or allow it to touch any surface. 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if it is dropped without the needle cover in place. If this 
happens, please contact your doctor or pharmacist. 
 

113 
 
 
 
Figure 5 
 
Position the pre-filled syringe to inject  
• 
Hold the body of the pre-filled syringe with one hand between the middle and index 
fingers and place the thumb on top of the plunger head and use the other hand to 
gently pinch the area of skin that you previously cleaned. Hold firmly. 
Do not pull back on the plunger at any time. 
 
Inject the medicine  
• 
Place the needle at approximately a 45-degree angle to the pinched skin. In a single 
and swift motion, insert the needle through the skin as far as it will go (see figure 
6). 
 
Figure 6 
 
• 
Release pinch and reposition hand. Use your free hand to grasp the body of 
the prefilled syringe. Place thumb from the opposite hand on the plunger and 
press the plunger all the way down until it stops. (see figure 7). 
 
Figure 7 

114 
 
  
          
• 
Release pressure from plunger, the safety guard will cover the needle and lock into 
place, removing the needle from your skin (see figure 8).  
 
 
Figure 8 
4. 
After the injection  
Use a cotton ball or gauze  
• 
There may be a small amount of blood or liquid at the injection site. This is normal. 
• 
You can press a cotton ball or gauze over the injection site and hold for 10 seconds. 
• 
You may cover the injection site with a small adhesive bandage, if necessary. Do not rub your 
skin. 
Throw the pre-filled syringe away (see figure 10)  
• 
Place your pre-filled syringe in a sharps container straight away. Make sure you 
dispose of the bin as instructed by your doctor or nurse. 
Do not attempt to recap the needle. 
Do not ever re-use a pre-filled syringe, for your safety and health and for the safety of others. 
If you feel that something has gone wrong with the injection or if you are not sure, talk to 
your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
Figure 9 
 
 
 

115 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user  
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen  
golimumab 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again.  
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours.  
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, or pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
Your doctor will also give you a Patient Reminder Card, which contains important safety information 
you need to be aware of before and during your treatment with GOBIVAZ. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What GOBIVAZ is and what it is used for  
2. 
What you need to know before you use GOBIVAZ  
3. 
How to use GOBIVAZ  
4. 
Possible side effects  
5. 
How to store GOBIVAZ  
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What GOBIVAZ is and what it is used for 
 
GOBIVAZ contains the active substance called golimumab. 
 
GOBIVAZ belongs to a group of medicines called ‘TNF blockers’. It is used in adults for the 
treatment of the following inflammatory diseases: 
• 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
• 
Psoriatic arthritis 
• 
Axial spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis 
• 
Ulcerative colitis 
 
GOBIVAZ works by blocking the action of a protein called ‘tumour necrosis factor alpha’ (TNF-α). 
This protein is involved in inflammatory processes of the body, and blocking it can reduce the 
inflammation in your body. 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints. If you have active rheumatoid arthritis 
you will first be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you 
may be given GOBIVAZ which you will take in combination with another medicine called 
methotrexate to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Slow down the damage to your bones and joints. 
• 
Improve your physical function 
 

116 
 
Psoriatic arthritis 
Psoriatic arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints, usually accompanied by psoriasis, an 
inflammatory disease of the skin. If you have active psoriatic arthritis you will first be given other 
medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you may be given GOBIVAZ  
to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Slow down the damage to your bones and joints. 
• 
Improve your physical function 
 
Ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis 
Ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis are inflammatory diseases of the 
spine. If you have ankylosing spondylitis or non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, you will first be 
given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you may be given 
GOBIVAZ to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Improve your physical function. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
Ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory disease of the bowel. If you have ulcerative colitis you will first 
be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you will be given 
GOBIVAZ to treat your disease. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use GOBIVAZ  
 
Do not use GOBIVAZ  
• 
If you are allergic (hypersensitive) to golimumab or any of the other ingredients of this 
medicine (listed in Section 6). 
• 
If you have tuberculosis (TB) or any other severe infection. 
• 
If you have moderate or severe heart failure. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before 
using GOBIVAZ. 
 
Warnings and precautions  
Talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before using GOBIVAZ 
 
Infections 
Tell your doctor straight away if you already have or get any symptoms of infection, during or after 
your treatment with GOBIVAZ. Symptoms of infection include fever, cough, shortness of breath, flu-
like symptoms, diarrhoea, wounds, dental problems or a burning feeling when urinating. 
• 
You may get infections more easily while using GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Infections may progress more rapidly and may be more severe. In addition, some previous 
infections may reappear. 
 
 
Tuberculosis (TB) 
Tell your doctor straight away if symptoms of TB appear during or after your treatment. 
Symptoms of TB include persistent cough, weight loss, tiredness, fever or night sweats. 
• 
Cases of TB have been reported in patients treated with GOBIVAZ, in rare occasions 
even 
in patients who have been treated with medicines for TB. Your doctor will test you to 
see if you have TB. Your doctor will record these tests on your Patient Reminder Card. 
• 
It is very important that you tell your doctor if you have ever had TB, or if you have 
been in close contact with someone who has had or has TB. 
• 
If your doctor feels that you are at risk of TB, you may be treated with medicines for 
TB before you begin using GOBIVAZ. 

117 
 
 
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
• 
Tell your doctor if you are a carrier or if you have or have had HBV before you are 
given GOBIVAZ. 
Tell your doctor if you think you might be at risk of contracting HBV. 
• 
Your doctor should test you for HBV. 
• 
Treatment with TNF blockers such as GOBIVAZ may result in reactivation of HBV in 
patients who carry this virus, which can be life-threatening in some cases. 
 
Invasive fungal infections 
If you have lived in or travelled to an area where infections caused by specific type of fungi that 
can affect the lungs or other parts of the body (called histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, or 
blastomycosis), are common, tell your doctor straight away. Ask your doctor if you don’t know 
if these fungal infections are common in the area in which you have lived or travelled. 
 
Cancer and lymphoma 
Tell your doctor if you have ever been diagnosed with lymphoma (a type of blood cancer) or any other 
cancer before you use GOBIVAZ. 
• 
If you use GOBIVAZ or other TNF blockers, your risk for developing lymphoma or another 
cancer may increase. 
• 
Patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases, who have had the 
disease for a long time, may be at higher than average risk of developing lymphoma. 
• 
There have been cases of cancers, including unusual types, in children and teenage patients 
taking TNF-blocking agents, which sometimes resulted in death. 
• 
On rare occasions, a specific and severe type of lymphoma called hepatosplenic T-cell 
• 
lymphoma has been observed in patients taking other TNF-blockers. Most of these patients 
were adolescent or young adult males. This type of cancer has usually resulted in death. 
Almost all of these patients had also received medicines known as azathioprine or 6-
mercaptopurine. Tell your doctor if you are taking azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine with 
GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Patients with severe persistent asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or are 
heavy smokers may be at increased risk for cancer with GOBIVAZ treatment. If you have 
severe persistent asthma, COPD or are a heavy smoker, you should discuss with your doctor 
whether treatment with a TNF blocker is appropriate for you. 
• 
Some patients treated with golimumab have developed certain kinds of skin cancer. If any 
changes in the appearance of the skin or growths on the skin occur during or after therapy, tell 
your doctor. 
 
Heart failure 
Tell your doctor straight away if you get new or worsening symptoms of heart failure. symptoms of 
heart failure include shortness of breath or swelling of your feet. 
• 
New and worsening congestive heart failure has been reported with TNF blockers, including 
GOBIVAZ. Some of these patients died. 
• 
If you have mild heart failure and you are being treated with GOBIVAZ, you must be closely 
monitored by your doctor. 
 
Nervous system disease 
Tell your doctor straight away if you have ever been diagnosed with or develop symptoms of a 
demyelinating disease such as multiple sclerosis. Symptoms may include changes in your vision, 
weakness in your arms or legs or numbness or tingling in any part of your body. Your doctor will 
decide if you should receive GOBIVAZ. 
 
Operations or dental procedures 
• 
Talk to your doctor if you are going to have any operations or dental procedures. 
• 
Tell your surgeon or dentist performing the procedure that you are having treatment with 
GOBIVAZ by showing them your Patient Reminder Card. 

118 
 
 
Autoimmune disease 
Tell your doctor if you develop symptoms of a disease called lupus. Symptoms include persistent rash, 
fever, joint pain and tiredness. 
• 
On rare occasions, people treated with TNF blockers have developed lupus. 
 
Blood disease  
In some patients the body may fail to produce enough of the blood cells that help your body fight 
infections or help you to stop bleeding. If you develop a fever that does not go away, bruise or bleed 
very easily or look very pale, call your doctor right away. Your doctor may decide to stop treatment. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
GOBIVAZ. 
 
Vaccinations 
Talk to your doctor if you have had, or are due to have a vaccine. 
• 
You should not receive certain (live) vaccines while using GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Certain vaccinations may cause infections. If you received GOBIVAZ while you were 
pregnant, your baby may be at higher risk for getting such an infection for up to approximately 
six months after the last dose you received during pregnancy. It is important that you tell your 
baby's doctors and other health care professionals about your GOBIVAZ use so they can 
decide when your baby should receive any vaccine. 
 
Therapeutic infectious agents  
Talk to your doctor if you have recently received or are scheduled to receive treatment with a 
therapeutic infectious agent (such as BCG instillation used for the treatment of cancer). 
 
Allergic reactions  
Tell your doctor straight away if you develop symptoms of an allergic reaction after your treatment 
with GOBIVAZ. Symptoms of an allergic reaction may include swelling of the face, lips, mouth or 
throat which may cause difficulty in swallowing or breathing, skin rash, hives, swelling of the hands, 
feet or ankles. 
• 
Some of these reactions may be serious or, rarely, life-threatening. 
• 
Some of these reactions occurred after the first administration of GOBIVAZ 
 
Children and adolescents 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg is not recommended for children and adolescents (younger than 18 years). 
 
Other medicines and GOBIVAZ 
• 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are using, have recently used or might use any other 
medicines, including any other medicines to treat rheumatoid arthritis, polyarticular juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis, or ulcerative colitis. 
• 
You should not take GOBIVAZ with medicines containing the active substance anakinra or 
abatacept. These medicines are used for the treatment of rheumatic diseases. 
• 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any other medicines that affect your immune 
System. 
• 
You should not receive certain (live) vaccines while using GOBIVAZ. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
GOBIVAZ. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding  
Talk to your doctor before using GOBIVAZ if:  
• 
You are pregnant or are planning to become pregnant while using GOBIVAZ. There is limited  

119 
 
information about the effects of this medicine in pregnant women. If you are being treated 
with GOBIVAZ, you must avoid becoming pregnant by using adequate contraception during 
your treatment and for at least 6 months after the last GOBIVAZ injection. GOBIVAZ should 
only be used during pregnancy if it is clearly necessary for you.  
• 
Before starting breast-feeding, your last treatment with GOBIVAZ must be at least 6 months 
ago. You must stop breast-feeding if you are to be given GOBIVAZ.  
• 
If you received GOBIVAZ during your pregnancy, your baby may have a higher risk for 
getting an infection. It is important that you tell your baby’s doctors and other health care 
professionals about your GOBIVAZ use before the baby receives any vaccine (for more 
information see section on vaccination).  
If you are pregnant or breast-feeding, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask  
your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking this medicine.  
 
Driving and using machines  
GOBIVAZ has minor influence on your ability to drive and use tools or machines. Dizziness may  
however occur after you take GOBIVAZ. If this happens, do not drive or use any tools or machines.  
 
GOBIVAZ contains sorbitol  
Sorbitol intolerance 
This medicine contains 41 mg sorbitol in each pre-filled pen. 
 
 
3. 
How to use GOBIVAZ 
 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor or pharmacist has told you. Check with your doctor 
or pharmacist if you are not sure. 
 
How much GOBIVAZ is given 
Rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and axial spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis 
and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis: 
• 
The recommended dose is 50 mg given once a month, on the same date each month.  
• 
Talk to your doctor before taking your fourth dose. Your doctor will determine if you should 
continue GOBIVAZ treatment. 
o If you weigh more than 100 kg, the dose might be increased to 100 mg (the content of 
1 pre-filled pen) given once a month, on the same date each month. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
• 
The table below shows how you will usually use this medicine. 
 
Initial treatment 
A starting dose of 200 mg (the contents of 2 pre-filled pens) followed 
by 100 mg (the contents of 1 pre-filled pen) 2 weeks later. 
Maintenance treatment 
• 
In patients weighing less than 80 kg, 50 mg (the 50 mg pre-filled 
pen or pre-filled syringe must be used to administer this dose) 4 
weeks after your last treatment, then every 4 weeks thereafter. 
Your doctor may decide to prescribe 100 mg (the contents of 1 
pre-filled pen), depending on how well GOBIVAZ works for 
you. 
• 
In patients weighing 80 kg or more, 100 mg (the contents of 
1 pre-filled pen) 4 weeks after your last treatment, then every 
4 weeks thereafter. 
 
How GOBIVAZ is given 
• 
GOBIVAZ is given by injection under the skin (subcutaneously). 
• 
At the start, your doctor or nurse may inject GOBIVAZ. However, you and your doctor may 
decide that you may inject GOBIVAZ yourself. In this case you will get training on how to 
inject GOBIVAZ yourself. 

120 
 
Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about giving yourself an injection. You will find 
detailed “Instructions for Use” at the end of this leaflet. 
 
If you use more GOBIVAZ than you should 
If you have used or been given too much GOBIVAZ (either by injecting too much on a single 
occasion, or by using it too often), talk to your doctor or pharmacist straight away. Always take the 
outer carton and this leaflet with you, even if it is empty. 
 
If you forget to use GOBIVAZ  
If you forget to use GOBIVAZ on your planned date, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you 
remember. 
 
Do not use a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose. 
 
When to inject your next dose: 
• 
If you are less than 2 weeks late, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you remember and stay 
on your original schedule. 
• 
If you are more than 2 weeks late, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you remember and talk 
to your doctor or pharmacist to ask when you need to take the next dose. 
 
If you are not sure what to do, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
If you stop using GOBIVAZ  
If you are considering stopping GOBIVAZ, talk to your doctor or pharmacist first. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Some 
patients may experience serious side effects and may require treatment. The risk of certain side effects 
is greater with the 100 mg dose compared with the 50 mg dose. Side effects may appear up to several 
months after the last injection. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the following serious side effects of GOBIVAZ 
which include: 
• 
allergic reactions which may be serious, or rarely, life-threatening (rare). Symptoms of an 
allergic reaction may include swelling of the face, lips, mouth or throat which may cause 
difficulty in swallowing or breathing, skin rash, hives, swelling of the hands, feet or ankles. 
Some of these reactions occurred after the first administration of GOBIVAZ. 
• 
serious infections (including TB, bacterial infections including serious blood infections 
and pneumonia, severe fungal infections and other opportunistic infections) (common). 
Symptoms of an infection can include fever, tiredness, (persistent) cough, shortness of breath, 
flu-like symptoms, weight loss, night sweats, diarrhoea, wounds, dental problems and a 
burning feeling when urinating. 
• 
reactivation of hepatitis B virus if you are a carrier or have had hepatitis B before (rare). 
Symptoms can include yellowing of the skin and eyes, dark brown-coloured urine, right-sided 
abdominal pain, fever, feeling sick, being sick, and feeling very tired. 
• 
nervous system disease such as multiple sclerosis (rare). Symptoms of nervous system 
disease can include changes in your vision, weakness in your arms or legs, numbness or 
tingling in any part of your body. 
• 
cancer of the lymph nodes (lymphoma) (rare). Symptoms of lymphoma can include 
swelling of the lymph nodes, weight loss, or fever. 
• 
heart failure (rare). Symptoms of heart failure can include shortness of breath or swelling of 
your feet. 

121 
 
• 
signs of immune system disorders called: 
-   lupus (rare). Symptoms can include joint pain or a rash on cheeks or arms that is 
sensitive to the sun. 
-  
sarcoidosis (rare). Symptoms can include a persistent cough, being short of breath, chest 
pain, fever, swelling of your lymph nodes, weight loss, skin rashes, and blurred vision. 
• 
swelling of small blood vessels (vasculitis) (rare). Symptoms can include fever, headache, 
weight loss, night sweats, rash, and nerve problems such as numbness and tingling. 
• 
skin cancer (uncommon). Symptoms of skin cancer can include changes in the appearance of 
your skin or growths on your skin. 
• 
blood disease (common). Symptoms of blood disease can include a fever that does not go 
away, bruising or bleeding very easily or looking very pale. 
• 
blood cancer (leukaemia) (rare). Symptoms of leukaemia can include fever, feeling tired, 
frequent infections, easy bruising, and night sweats. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the above symptoms. 
 
The following additional side effects have been observed with GOBIVAZ  
Very common side effects (may affect more than 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Upper respiratory tract infections, sore throat or hoarseness, runny nose 
 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Abnormal liver tests (increased liver enzymes) found during blood tests done by your doctor 
• 
Feeling dizzy 
• 
Headache 
• 
Feeling numb or having a tingling feeling 
• 
Superficial fungal infections 
• 
Abscess 
• 
Bacterial infections (such as cellulitis) 
• 
Low red blood cell counts 
• 
Low white blood cell counts 
• 
Positive blood lupus test 
• 
Allergic reactions 
• 
Indigestion 
• 
Stomach pain 
• 
Feeling sick (nausea) 
• 
Flu 
• 
Bronchitis 
• 
Sinus infection 
• 
Cold sores 
• 
High blood pressure 
• 
Fever 
• 
Asthma, shortness of breath, wheezing 
• 
Stomach and bowel disorders which include inflammation of the stomach lining and colon 
which may cause fever 
• 
Pain and ulcers in the mouth 
• 
Injection site reactions (including redness, hardness, pain, bruising, itching, tingling and 
irritation) 
• 
Hair loss 
• 
Rash and itching of the skin 
• 
Difficulty sleeping 
• 
Depression 
• 
Feeling weak 
• 
Bone fractures 
• 
Chest discomfort 
 

122 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
• 
Kidney infection 
• 
Cancers, including skin cancer and non-cancerous growths or lumps, including skin moles 
• 
Skin blisters 
• 
Severe infection throughout the body (sepsis), sometimes including low blood pressure (septic 
shock) 
• 
Psoriasis (including on the palms of your hand and/or the soles of your feet and/or in the form 
of skin blisters) 
• 
Low platelet count 
• 
Combined low platelet, red, and white blood cell count 
• 
Thyroid disorders 
• 
Increase in blood sugar levels 
• 
Increase in blood cholesterol levels 
• 
Balance disorders 
• 
Vision disturbances 
• 
Inflamed eye (conjunctivitis) 
• 
Eye allergy 
• 
Sensation of heart beating irregularly 
• 
Narrowing of the blood vessels in the heart 
• 
Blood clots 
• 
Flushing 
• 
Constipation 
• 
Chronic inflammatory condition of the lungs 
• 
Acid reflux 
• 
Gall stones 
• 
Liver disorders 
• 
Breast disorders 
• 
Menstrual disorders 
 
Rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 1,000 people): 
• 
Failure of the bone marrow to produce blood cells 
• 
Severely decreased number of white blood cells 
• 
Infection of the joints or the tissue around them 
• 
Impaired healing 
• 
Inflammation of blood vessels in internal organs 
• 
Leukaemia 
• 
Melanoma (a type of skin cancer) 
• 
Merkel cell carcinoma (a type of skin cancer) 
• 
Lichenoid reactions (itchy reddish-purple skin rash and/or threadlike white-grey lines on 
mucous membranes) 
• 
Scaly, peeling skin 
• 
Immune disorders that could affect the lungs, skin and lymph nodes (most commonly 
presenting as sarcoidosis) 
• 
Pain and discolouration in the fingers or toes 
• 
Taste disturbances 
• 
Bladder disorders 
• 
Kidney disorders 
• 
Inflammation of the blood vessels in your skin which results in rash 
 
Side effects of which the frequency is not known: 
• 
A rare blood cancer affecting mostly young people (hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma) 
• 
Kaposi’s sarcoma, a rare cancer related to infection with human herpes virus 8. Kaposi’s 
sarcoma most commonly appears as purple lesions on the skin 
• 
Worsening of a condition called dermatomyositis (seen as a skin rash accompanying muscle 

123 
 
weakness) 
 
Reporting of side effects  
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store GOBIVAZ 
 
• 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
• 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the label and the carton after 
“EXP”. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
• 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C-8°C). Do not freeze. 
• 
Keep the pre-filled pen in the outer carton in order to protect it from light. 
• 
This medicine can also be stored out of the refrigerator at temperatures up to a maximum of 
25°C for a single period of up to 30 days, but not beyond the original expiry date printed on the 
carton. Write the new expiry date on the carton including day/month/year (no more than 30 days 
after the medicine is removed from the refrigerator). Do not return this medicine to refrigerator 
if it has reached room temperature. Discard this medicine if not used by the new expiry date or 
the expiry date printed on the carton, whichever is earlier. 
• 
Do not use this medicine if you notice that the liquid is not a clear to light yellow colour, 
cloudy, or contains foreign particles. 
• 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your doctor or 
pharmacist how to throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help to 
protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What GOBIVAZ contains  
The active substance is golimumab. One 1 mL pre-filled pen contains 100 mg of golimumab. 
The other ingredients are sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, 
poloxamer 188 and water for injections. For more information on sorbitol, see Section 2.  
 
What GOBIVAZ looks like and contents of the pack 
GOBIVAZ is supplied as solution for injection in a single-use pre-filled pen. GOBIVAZ is available 
in packs containing 1 pre-filled pen and multipacks containing 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled pens. Not all 
pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
The solution is clear to slightly opalescent (having a pearl-like shine), colourless to light yellow and 
may contain a few small translucent or white particles of protein. Do not use GOBIVAZ if the solution 
is discoloured, cloudy or you can see foreign particles in it. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder  
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
Manufacturer 
Alvotech Hf 
Sæmundargata 15-19 
Reykjavik, 102 

124 
 
Iceland 
 
This leaflet was last revised in  
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu  
 
<------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------> 
 
 

125 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE  
 
If you would like to self inject GOBIVAZ, you must be trained by a healthcare professional to 
prepare an injection and give it to yourself. If you have not been trained, please contact your 
doctor, nurse or pharmacist to schedule a training session. 
 
In these instructions: 
1. 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled pen 
2. 
Choosing and preparing the injection site 
3. 
Injecting the medicine 
4. 
After the injection 
The diagram below (see figure 1) shows what the pre-filled pen looks like. 
 
 
Figure 1 
 
1. 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled pen  
 
• 
Do not shake the pre-filled pen at any time. 
• 
Do not remove the cap from the pre-filled pen until immediately before the injection. 
• 
Do not put the cap of the pre-filled pen back on if removed to avoid bending the needle. 
Check the number of pre-filled pens  
Check the pre-filled pens to make sure 
• 
the number of pre-filled pens and strength is correct 
o 
If your dose is 100 mg, you will get one 100m mg pre-filled pen. 
o 
If your dose is 200 mg, you will get two 100 mg pre-filled pens and you will need to 
give yourself two injections. Choose different sites for these injections and give the 
injections one right after the other. 
 
Check expiry date  
• 
Check the expiration date printed or written on the carton. 
• 
Check the expiration date (as indicated as “EXP”) on the pre-filled pen. 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled pen if the expiration date has passed. The printed expiration date 
refers to the last day of the month. Please contact your doctor or pharmacist for assistance. 
Check the blister   
• 
Check the sealed security lid on the blister. 
• 
Do not use if the blister is broken. Please contact your doctor or pharmacist. 
Wait 30 minutes to allow pre-filled pen to reach room temperature  
• 
To ensure proper injection, allow the pre-filled pen to sit at room temperature outside the 
box for 30 minutes out of the reach of children. 

126 
 
• 
Do not warm the pre-filled pen in any other way (for example, do not warm it in a microwave 
or in hot water). 
• 
Do not remove the pre-filled pen’s cap while allowing it to reach room temperature. 
Get the rest of your equipment ready  
• 
While you are waiting you can get the rest of your equipment ready, including an alcohol 
swab, a cotton ball or gauze and a sharps container. 
Check the liquid in the pre-filled pen  
• 
Look through the viewing window to make sure that the liquid in the pre-filled pen is clear 
to slightly opalescent (having a pearl-like shine) and colourless to light yellow. The solution 
can be used if it contains a few small translucent or white particles of protein. 
• 
You will also notice an air bubble, which is normal. 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled pen if the liquid is the wrong colour, cloudy, or contains larger 
particles. If this happens, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. 
2. 
Choosing and preparing the injection site (see figure 2)  
 
• 
You can inject the medicine into the front of the middle thighs. 
• 
You can use the stomach (abdomen) below the belly button, except for approximately the 5 
cm area directly underneath the belly button. 
• 
Do not inject into areas where the skin is tender, bruised, red, scaly, hard or has scars or 
stretch marks. 
• 
If multiple injections are required for a single administration, the injections should 
be administered at different injection sites. 
 
 
 
      Injectable areas  
Figure 2 
 DO NOT inject into the arm to avoid failure of the pre-filled pen and/or unintentional injury.  
 
Wash hands and clean the injection site  
 
• 
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water. 
• 
Wipe the injection site with an alcohol swab. 
• 
Allow the skin to dry before injecting. Do not fan or blow on the clean area. 
• 
Do not touch this area again before giving the injection. 
3. 
Injecting the medicine  
• 
The cap should not be removed until you are ready to inject the medicine. 
• 
The medicine should be injected within 5 minutes after the cap has been removed. 
 

127 
 
Remove the cap (figure 3)  
• 
When you are ready to inject, pull the cap off and throw it away after your injection. 
• 
Do not put the cap back on because it may damage the needle inside the pre-filled pen. 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled pen if it is dropped without the cap in place. If this happens 
please contact your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
 
Figure 3 
 
Prepare to push the pre-filled pen against the skin (see figure 4).  
 
Figure 4 
 
• 
Pinch the skin with other hand. Prepare to position the pre-filled pen over the injection site so 
that the orange needle shield points toward the injection site.  
• 
Hold the pen so that you can see the inspection window.  
 
Push to inject (see figure 5)  
 
Figure 5 
 
• 
Push the open end of the pre-filled pen against the skin at a 90-degree angle.  
• 
Wait for the first “click” that signals the start of injection. You may or may not feel a 
needle prick. 

128 
 
• 
Start counting to 15 to ensure that all drug gets injected. 
 Do not lift the pre-filled pen away from your skin. If you pull the pre-filled pen away from your 
skin, you may not get your full dose of medicine.  
Continue to hold until the orange indicator has stopped moving or you hear the second ‘click’ (see 
figure 6). It can take up to 15 seconds for you to hear the second ‘click’ sound (indicating that 
the injection has finished and the needle has gone back into the pre-filled pen). 
 
Figure 6 
 
• 
Note: If you do not hear the second ‘click’, wait 15 seconds from the time you first press 
the pre-filled pen and then lift the autoinjector from the injection site. 
 
Check the viewing window – an orange indicator confirms proper administration (see figure 7)  
• 
The orange indicator will completely fill in the viewing window.  
• 
Lift the pre-filled pen from the injection site. 
• 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist if the orange indicator is not visible in the window or if 
you suspect that you may not have received a complete dose. Do not administer a second 
dose without speaking to your doctor. 
 
Figure 7 
4. 
After the injection  
Use a cotton ball or gauze  
• 
There may be a small amount of blood or liquid at the injection site. This is normal. 
• 
You can press a cotton ball or gauze over the injection site for 10 seconds. 
• 
You may cover the injection site with a small adhesive bandage, if necessary. 
• 
Do not rub your skin. 
 
Throw the pre-filled pen away (see figure 8)  
• 
Place your pen in a sharps container straight away. Make sure you dispose of the bin 

129 
 
as instructed by your doctor or nurse when the container is full. 
If you feel that something has gone wrong with the injection or if you are not sure, talk to your 
doctor or pharmacist. 
 
Figure 8 
 
 

130 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user  
 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe  
golimumab 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again.  
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours.  
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, or pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
Your doctor will also give you a Patient Reminder Card, which contains important safety information 
you need to be aware of before and during your treatment with GOBIVAZ. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What GOBIVAZ is and what it is used for  
2. 
What you need to know before you use GOBIVAZ 
3. 
How to use GOBIVAZ 
4. 
Possible side effects  
5. 
How to store GOBIVAZ 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What GOBIVAZ is and what it is used for 
 
GOBIVAZ contains the active substance called golimumab. 
 
GOBIVAZ belongs to a group of medicines called ‘TNF blockers’. It is used in adults for the 
treatment of the following inflammatory diseases: 
• 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
• 
Psoriatic arthritis 
• 
Axial spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis 
• 
Ulcerative colitis 
 
GOBIVAZ works by blocking the action of a protein called ‘tumour necrosis factor alpha’ (TNF-α). 
This protein is involved in inflammatory processes of the body, and blocking it can reduce the 
inflammation in your body. 
 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints. If you have active rheumatoid arthritis 
you will first be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you 
may be given GOBIVAZ which you will take in combination with another medicine called 
methotrexate to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Slow down the damage to your bones and joints. 
• 
Improve your physical function 
 

131 
 
Psoriatic arthritis 
Psoriatic arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints, usually accompanied by psoriasis, an 
inflammatory disease of the skin. If you have active psoriatic arthritis you will first be given other 
medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you may be given GOBIVAZ 
to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Slow down the damage to your bones and joints. 
• 
Improve your physical function 
 
Ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis 
Ankylosing spondylitis and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis are inflammatory diseases of the 
spine. If you have ankylosing spondylitis or non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis, you will first be 
given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you may be given 
GOBIVAZ to: 
• 
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
• 
Improve your physical function. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
Ulcerative colitis is an inflammatory disease of the bowel. If you have ulcerative colitis you will first 
be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, you will be given 
GOBIVAZ to treat your disease. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use GOBIVAZ 
 
Do not use GOBIVAZ   
• 
If you are allergic (hypersensitive) to golimumab or any of the other ingredients of this 
medicine (listed in Section 6). 
• 
If you have tuberculosis (TB) or any other severe infection. 
• 
If you have moderate or severe heart failure. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before 
using GOBIVAZ. 
 
Warnings and precautions  
Talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before using GOBIVAZ 
 
Infections 
Tell your doctor straight away if you already have or get any symptoms of infection, during or after 
your treatment with GOBIVAZ. Symptoms of infection include fever, cough, shortness of breath, flu-
like symptoms, diarrhoea, wounds, dental problems or a burning feeling when urinating. 
• 
You may get infections more easily while using GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Infections may progress more rapidly and may be more severe. In addition, some previous 
infections may reappear. 
 
 
Tuberculosis (TB) 
Tell your doctor straight away if symptoms of TB appear during or after your treatment. 
Symptoms of TB include persistent cough, weight loss, tiredness, fever or night sweats. 
Cases of TB have been reported in patients treated with GOBIVAZ, in rare occasions 
even in patients who have been treated with medicines for TB. Your doctor will test you 
to see if you have TB. Your doctor will record these tests on your Patient Reminder 
Card. 
• 
It is very important that you tell your doctor if you have ever had TB, or if you have 
been in close contact with someone who has had or has TB. 
• 
If your doctor feels that you are at risk of TB, you may be treated with medicines for 
TB before you begin using GOBIVAZ. 

132 
 
 
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
• 
Tell your doctor if you are a carrier or if you have or have had HBV before you are 
given GOBIVAZ. 
Tell your doctor if you think you might be at risk of contracting HBV. 
• 
Your doctor should test you for HBV. 
• 
Treatment with TNF blockers such as GOBIVAZ may result in reactivation of HBV in 
• 
patients who carry this virus, which can be life-threatening in some cases. 
 
Invasive fungal infections 
If you have lived in or travelled to an area where infections caused by specific type of fungi that 
can affect the lungs or other parts of the body (called histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, or 
blastomycosis), are common, tell your doctor straight away. Ask your doctor if you don’t know 
if these fungal infections are common in the area in which you have lived or travelled. 
 
Cancer and lymphoma 
Tell your doctor if you have ever been diagnosed with lymphoma (a type of blood cancer) or any other 
cancer before you use GOBIVAZ. 
• 
If you use GOBIVAZ or other TNF blockers, your risk for developing lymphoma or another 
cancer may increase. 
• 
Patients with severe rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases, who have had the 
disease for a long time, may be at higher than average risk of developing lymphoma. 
• 
There have been cases of cancers, including unusual types, in children and teenage patients 
taking TNF-blocking agents, which sometimes resulted in death. 
• 
On rare occasions, a specific and severe type of lymphoma called hepatosplenic T-cell 
lymphoma has been observed in patients taking other TNF-blockers. Most of these patients 
were adolescent or young adult males. This type of cancer has usually resulted in death. 
Almost all of these patients had also received medicines known as azathioprine or 6-
mercaptopurine. Tell your doctor if you are taking azathioprine or 6-mercaptopurine with 
GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Patients with severe persistent asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or are 
heavy smokers may be at increased risk for cancer with GOBIVAZ treatment. If you have 
severe persistent asthma, COPD or are a heavy smoker, you should discuss with your doctor 
whether treatment with a TNF blocker is appropriate for you. 
• 
Some patients treated with golimumab have developed certain kinds of skin cancer. If any 
changes in the appearance of the skin or growths on the skin occur during or after therapy, tell 
your doctor. 
 
Heart failure 
Tell your doctor straight away if you get new or worsening symptoms of heart failure. symptoms of 
heart failure include shortness of breath or swelling of your feet. 
• 
New and worsening congestive heart failure has been reported with TNF blockers, including 
GOBIVAZ. Some of these patients died. 
• 
If you have mild heart failure and you are being treated with GOBIVAZ, you must be closely 
monitored by your doctor. 
 
Nervous system disease 
Tell your doctor straight away if you have ever been diagnosed with or develop symptoms of a 
demyelinating disease such as multiple sclerosis. Symptoms may include changes in your vision, 
weakness in your arms or legs or numbness or tingling in any part of your body. Your doctor will 
decide if you should receive GOBIVAZ. 
 
Operations or dental procedures 
• 
Talk to your doctor if you are going to have any operations or dental procedures. 
• 
Tell your surgeon or dentist performing the procedure that you are having treatment with 
GOBIVAZ by showing them your Patient Reminder Card. 

133 
 
 
Autoimmune disease 
Tell your doctor if you develop symptoms of a disease called lupus. Symptoms include persistent rash, 
fever, joint pain and tiredness. 
• 
On rare occasions, people treated with TNF blockers have developed lupus. 
 
Blood disease  
In some patients the body may fail to produce enough of the blood cells that help your body fight 
infections or help you to stop bleeding. If you develop a fever that does not go away, bruise or bleed 
very easily or look very pale, call your doctor right away. Your doctor may decide to stop treatment. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
GOBIVAZ. 
 
Vaccinations 
Talk to your doctor if you have had, or are due to have a vaccine. 
• 
You should not receive certain (live) vaccines while using GOBIVAZ. 
• 
Certain vaccinations may cause infections. If you received GOBIVAZ while you were 
pregnant, your baby may be at higher risk for getting such an infection for up to approximately 
six months after the last dose you received during pregnancy. It is important that you tell your 
baby's doctors and other health care professionals about your GOBIVAZ use so they can 
decide when your baby should receive any vaccine. 
 
Therapeutic infectious agents  
Talk to your doctor if you have recently received or are scheduled to receive treatment with a 
therapeutic infectious agent (such as BCG instillation used for the treatment of cancer). 
 
Allergic reactions  
Tell your doctor straight away if you develop symptoms of an allergic reaction after your treatment 
with GOBIVAZ. Symptoms of an allergic reaction may include swelling of the face, lips, mouth or 
throat which may cause difficulty in swallowing or breathing, skin rash, hives, swelling of the hands, 
feet or ankles. 
• 
Some of these reactions may be serious or, rarely, life-threatening. 
• 
Some of these reactions occurred after the first administration of GOBIVAZ 
 
Children and adolescents 
GOBIVAZ 100 mg is not recommended for children and adolescents (younger than 18 years). 
 
Other medicines and GOBIVAZ 
• 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are using, have recently used or might use any other 
medicines, including any other medicines to treat rheumatoid arthritis, polyarticular juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, non-radiographic axial 
spondyloarthritis, or ulcerative colitis. 
• 
You should not take GOBIVAZ with medicines containing the active substance anakinra or 
abatacept. These medicines are used for the treatment of rheumatic diseases. 
• 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking any other medicines that affect your immune 
System. You should not receive certain (live) vaccines while using GOBIVAZ. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
GOBIVAZ. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding  
Talk to your doctor before using GOBIVAZ if:  
• 
You are pregnant or are planning to become pregnant while using GOBIVAZ. There is limited  
information about the effects of this medicine in pregnant women. If you are being treated 
with GOBIVAZ, you must avoid becoming pregnant by using adequate contraception during 

134 
 
your treatment and for at least 6 months after the last GOBIVAZ injection. GOBIVAZ should 
only be used during pregnancy if it is clearly necessary for you.  
• 
Before starting breast-feeding, your last treatment with GOBIVAZ must be at least 6 months 
ago. You must stop breast-feeding if you are to be given GOBIVAZ.  
• 
If you received GOBIVAZ during your pregnancy, your baby may have a higher risk for 
getting an infection. It is important that you tell your baby’s doctors and other health care 
professionals about your GOBIVAZ use before the baby receives any vaccine (for more 
information see section on vaccination).  
If you are pregnant or breast-feeding, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask  
your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking this medicine.  
 
Driving and using machines  
GOBIVAZ has minor influence on your ability to drive and use tools or machines. Dizziness may  
however occur after you take GOBIVAZ. If this happens, do not drive or use any tools or machines.  
 
GOBIVAZ contains sorbitol  
Sorbitol intolerance 
This medicine contains 41 mg sorbitol in each pre-filled syringe 
 
 
3. 
How to use GOBIVAZ 
 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor or pharmacist has told you. Check with your doctor 
or pharmacist if you are not sure. 
 
How much GOBIVAZ is given 
Rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and axial spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis 
and non-radiographic axial spondyloarthritis: 
• 
The recommended dose is 50 mg given once a month, on the same date each month.  
• 
Talk to your doctor before taking your fourth dose. Your doctor will determine if you should 
continue GOBIVAZ treatment. 
o If you weigh more than 100 kg, the dose might be increased to 100 mg (the content of 
1 pre-filled syringe) given once a month, on the same date each month. 
 
Ulcerative colitis 
• 
The table below shows how you will usually use this medicine. 
 
Initial treatment 
A starting dose of 200 mg (the contents of 2 pre-filled syringes) 
followed by 100 mg (the contents of 1 pre-filled syringe) 2 weeks later. 
Maintenance treatment 
• 
In patients weighing less than 80 kg, 50 mg (the 50 mg pre-filled 
pen or pre-filled syringe must be used to administer this dose) 4 
weeks after your last treatment, then every 4 weeks thereafter. 
Your doctor may decide to prescribe 100 mg (the contents of 1 
pre-filled syringe), depending on how well GOBIVAZ works for 
you. 
• 
In patients weighing 80 kg or more, 100 mg (the contents of 
1 pre-filled syringe) 4 weeks after your last treatment, then 
every 4 weeks thereafter. 
 
How GOBIVAZ is given 
• 
GOBIVAZ is given by injection under the skin (subcutaneously). 
• 
At the start, your doctor or nurse may inject GOBIVAZ. However, you and your doctor may 
decide that you may inject GOBIVAZ yourself. In this case you will get training on how to 
inject GOBIVAZ yourself. 
Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about giving yourself an injection. You will find 
detailed “Instructions for Use” at the end of this leaflet. 

135 
 
 
If you use more GOBIVAZ than you should 
If you have used or been given too much GOBIVAZ (either by injecting too much on a single 
occasion, or by using it too often), talk to your doctor or pharmacist straight away. Always take the 
outer carton and this leaflet with you, even if it is empty. 
 
If you forget to use GOBIVAZ  
If you forget to use GOBIVAZ on your planned date, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you 
remember. 
 
Do not use a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose. 
 
When to inject your next dose: 
• 
If you are less than 2 weeks late, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you remember and stay 
on your original schedule. 
• 
If you are more than 2 weeks late, inject the forgotten dose as soon as you remember and talk 
to your doctor or pharmacist to ask when you need to take the next dose. 
 
If you are not sure what to do, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
If you stop using GOBIVAZ  
If you are considering stopping GOBIVAZ, talk to your doctor or pharmacist first. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. Some 
patients may experience serious side effects and may require treatment. The risk of certain side effects 
is greater with the 100 mg dose compared with the 50 mg dose. Side effects may appear up to several 
months after the last injection. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the following serious side effects of GOBIVAZ 
which include: 
• 
allergic reactions which may be serious, or rarely, life-threatening (rare). Symptoms of an 
allergic reaction may include swelling of the face, lips, mouth or throat which may cause 
difficulty in swallowing or breathing, skin rash, hives, swelling of the hands, feet or ankles. 
Some of these reactions occurred after the first administration of GOBIVAZ. 
• 
serious infections (including TB, bacterial infections including serious blood infections 
and pneumonia, severe fungal infections and other opportunistic infections) (common). 
Symptoms of an infection can include fever, tiredness, (persistent) cough, shortness of breath, 
flu-like symptoms, weight loss, night sweats, diarrhoea, wounds, dental problems and a 
burning feeling when urinating. 
• 
reactivation of hepatitis B virus if you are a carrier or have had hepatitis B before (rare). 
Symptoms can include yellowing of the skin and eyes, dark brown-coloured urine, right-sided 
abdominal pain, fever, feeling sick, being sick, and feeling very tired. 
• 
nervous system disease such as multiple sclerosis (rare). Symptoms of nervous system 
disease can include changes in your vision, weakness in your arms or legs, numbness or 
tingling in any part of your body. 
• 
cancer of the lymph nodes (lymphoma) (rare). Symptoms of lymphoma can include 
swelling of the lymph nodes, weight loss, or fever. 
• 
heart failure (rare). Symptoms of heart failure can include shortness of breath or swelling of 
your feet. 
• 
signs of immune system disorders called: 
-   lupus (rare). Symptoms can include joint pain or a rash on cheeks or arms that is 

136 
 
sensitive to the sun. 
-  
sarcoidosis (rare). Symptoms can include a persistent cough, being short of breath, chest 
pain, fever, swelling of your lymph nodes, weight loss, skin rashes, and blurred vision. 
• 
swelling of small blood vessels (vasculitis) (rare). Symptoms can include fever, headache, 
weight loss, night sweats, rash, and nerve problems such as numbness and tingling. 
• 
skin cancer (uncommon). Symptoms of skin cancer can include changes in the appearance of 
your skin or growths on your skin. 
• 
blood disease (common). Symptoms of blood disease can include a fever that does not go 
away, bruising or bleeding very easily or looking very pale. 
• 
blood cancer (leukaemia) (rare). Symptoms of leukaemia can include fever, feeling tired, 
frequent infections, easy bruising, and night sweats. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the above symptoms. 
 
The following additional side effects have been observed with GOBIVAZ  
Very common side effects (may affect more than 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Upper respiratory tract infections, sore throat or hoarseness, runny nose 
 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
• 
Abnormal liver tests (increased liver enzymes) found during blood tests done by your doctor 
• 
Feeling dizzy 
• 
Headache 
• 
Feeling numb or having a tingling feeling 
• 
Superficial fungal infections 
• 
Abscess 
• 
Bacterial infections (such as cellulitis) 
• 
Low red blood cell counts 
• 
Low white blood cell counts 
• 
Positive blood lupus test 
• 
Allergic reactions 
• 
Indigestion 
• 
Stomach pain 
• 
Feeling sick (nausea) 
• 
Flu 
• 
Bronchitis 
• 
Sinus infection 
• 
Cold sores 
• 
High blood pressure 
• 
Fever 
• 
Asthma, shortness of breath, wheezing 
• 
Stomach and bowel disorders which include inflammation of the stomach lining and colon 
which may cause fever 
• 
Pain and ulcers in the mouth 
• 
Injection site reactions (including redness, hardness, pain, bruising, itching, tingling and 
irritation) 
• 
Hair loss 
• 
Rash and itching of the skin 
• 
Difficulty sleeping 
• 
Depression 
• 
Feeling weak 
• 
Bone fractures 
• 
Chest discomfort 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
• 
Kidney infection 

137 
 
• 
Cancers, including skin cancer and non-cancerous growths or lumps, including skin moles 
• 
Skin blisters 
• 
Severe infection throughout the body (sepsis), sometimes including low blood pressure (septic 
shock) 
• 
Psoriasis (including on the palms of your hand and/or the soles of your feet and/or in the form 
of skin blisters) 
• 
Low platelet count 
• 
Combined low platelet, red, and white blood cell count 
• 
Thyroid disorders 
• 
Increase in blood sugar levels 
• 
Increase in blood cholesterol levels 
• 
Balance disorders 
• 
Vision disturbances 
• 
Inflamed eye (conjunctivitis) 
• 
Eye allergy 
• 
Sensation of heart beating irregularly 
• 
Narrowing of the blood vessels in the heart 
• 
Blood clots 
• 
Flushing 
• 
Constipation 
• 
Chronic inflammatory condition of the lungs 
• 
Acid reflux 
• 
Gall stones 
• 
Liver disorders 
• 
Breast disorders 
• 
Menstrual disorders 
 
Rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 1,000 people): 
• 
Failure of the bone marrow to produce blood cells 
• 
Severely decreased number of white blood cells 
• 
Infection of the joints or the tissue around them 
• 
Impaired healing 
• 
Inflammation of blood vessels in internal organs 
• 
Leukaemia 
• 
Melanoma (a type of skin cancer) 
• 
Merkel cell carcinoma (a type of skin cancer) 
• 
Lichenoid reactions (itchy reddish-purple skin rash and/or threadlike white-grey lines on 
mucous membranes) 
• 
Scaly, peeling skin 
• 
Immune disorders that could affect the lungs, skin and lymph nodes (most commonly 
presenting as sarcoidosis) 
• 
Pain and discolouration in the fingers or toes 
• 
Taste disturbances 
• 
Bladder disorders 
• 
Kidney disorders 
• 
Inflammation of the blood vessels in your skin which results in rash 
 
Side effects of which the frequency is not known: 
• 
A rare blood cancer affecting mostly young people (hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma) 
• 
Kaposi’s sarcoma, a rare cancer related to infection with human herpes virus 8. Kaposi’s 
sarcoma most commonly appears as purple lesions on the skin 
• 
Worsening of a condition called dermatomyositis (seen as a skin rash accompanying muscle 
weakness) 
 

138 
 
Reporting of side effects  
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store GOBIVAZ 
 
• 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
• 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the label and the carton after 
“EXP”. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
• 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C-8°C). Do not freeze. 
• 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect it from light. 
• 
This medicine can also be stored out of the refrigerator at temperatures up to a maximum of 
25°C for a single period of up to 30 days, but not beyond the original expiry date printed on the 
carton. Write the new expiry date on the carton including day/month/year (no more than 30 days 
after the medicine is removed from the refrigerator). Do not return this medicine to refrigerator 
if it has reached room temperature. Discard this medicine if not used by the new expiry date or 
the expiry date printed on the carton, whichever is earlier. 
• 
Do not use this medicine if you notice that the liquid is not a clear to light yellow colour, 
cloudy, or contains foreign particles. 
• 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your doctor or 
pharmacist how to throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help to 
protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What GOBIVAZ contains  
The active substance is golimumab. One 1 mL pre-filled syringe contains 100 mg of golimumab. 
The other ingredients are sorbitol, L-histidine, L-histidine monohydrochloride monohydrate, 
poloxamer 188 and water for injections. For more information on sorbitol, see Section 2.  
 
What GOBIVAZ looks like and contents of the pack 
GOBIVAZ is supplied as solution for injection in a single-use pre-filled syringe. GOBIVAZ is 
available in packs containing 1 pre-filled syringe and multipacks containing 3 (3 packs of 1) pre-filled 
syringes. Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
The solution is clear to slightly opalescent (having a pearl-like shine), colourless to light yellow and 
may contain a few small translucent or white particles of protein. Do not use GOBIVAZ if the solution 
is discoloured, cloudy or you can see foreign particles in it. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder  
Advanz Pharma Limited 
Unit 17 Northwood House 
Northwood Crescent 
Dublin 9 
D09 V504 
Ireland 
 
Manufacturer 
Alvotech Hf 
Sæmundargata 15-19 
Reykjavik, 102 
Iceland 

139 
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in  
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu  
 
 

140 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE  
 
If you would like to self inject Govibaz, you must be trained by a healthcare professional 
to prepare an injection and give it to yourself. If you have not been trained, please 
contact your doctor, nurse or pharmacist to schedule a training session. 
 
In these instructions: 
1. 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled syringe 
2. 
Choosing and preparing the injection site 
3. 
Injecting the medicine 
4. 
After the injection 
The diagram below (see figure 1) shows what the pre-filled syringe looks like. 
 
 
Figure 1 
 
1. 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled syringe  
 
Hold the pre-filled syringe by the body of the pre-filled syringe 
• 
Do not hold by the plunger, or needle cover. 
• 
Do not pull back on the plunger at any time. 
• 
Do not shake the pre-filled syringe at any time. 
• 
Do not remove the needle cover from the pre-filled syringe until instructed to do so. 
Check the number of pre-filled syringes  
Check the pre-filled syringes to make sure 
• 
the number of pre-filled syringes and strength is correct 
o 
IIf your dose is 100 mg, you will get one 100 mg pre-filled syringes. If your 
dose is 200 mg, you will get two 100 mg pre-filled syringes and you will need 
to give yourself two injections. Choose different sites for these injections and 
give the injections one right after the other. 
 
Check expiry date (see figure 2)  
• 
Check the expiration date printed or written on the carton and blister. 
• 
Check the expiration date (as indicated by “EXP”) on the label in the body of the pre-
filled syringe. 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if the expiration date has passed. The printed 
expiration date refers to the last day of the month. Please contact your doctor or 
pharmacist for assistance. 

141 
 
 
Figure 2 
 
Wait 30 minutes to allow pre-filled syringe to reach room temperature  
• 
To ensure proper injection, allow the pre-filled syringe to sit at room temperature 
outside the box for 30 minutes, out of the reach of children. 
Do not warm the pre-filled syringe in any other way (for example, do not warm it in a 
microwave or in hot water). 
Do not remove the pre-filled syringe’s needle cover while allowing it to reach room temperature. 
Get the rest of your equipment ready  
While you are waiting you can get the rest of your equipment ready, including an alcohol 
swab, a cotton ball or gauze and a sharps container. 
Check the liquid in the pre-filled syringe  
• 
Hold the pre-filled syringe by its body with the covered needle pointing downward. 
• 
Look at the liquid through the viewing window of the pre-filled syringe and make 
sure that it is clear to slightly opalescent (having a pearl-like shine) and colourless to 
light yellow. The solution can be used if it contains a few small translucent or white 
particles of protein. 
• 
If you cannot see the liquid through the viewing window, hold the pre-filled syringe 
by its body and rotate the needle cover to line up the liquid to the viewing window 
(see figure 2). 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if the liquid is the wrong colour, cloudy, or contains larger 
particles. If this happens, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
2. 
Choosing and preparing the injection site (see figure 3)   
• 
You usually inject the medicine into the front of the middle thighs. 
• 
You can also use the lower stomach (abdomen) below the belly button, except for 
approximately the 5 cm area directly underneath the belly button. 
• 
Do not inject into areas where the skin is tender, bruised, red, scaly, hard or has scars or stretch 
marks.  
• 
If multiple injections are required for a single administration, the injections should be 
administered at different sites on the body.  
 
 
 

142 
 
 
Figure 3 
 
Injection site selection for caregivers (see figure 4)  
• 
If a caregiver is giving you the injection, they can also use the outer area of the upper arms. 
• 
Again, all sites mentioned can be used regardless of your body type or size. 
 
 
 
Figure 4 
 
Preparing injection site  
• 
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and warm water. 
• 
Wipe the injection site with an alcohol swab. 
• 
Allow the skin to dry before injecting. Do not fan or blow on the clean area. 
Do not touch this area again before giving the injection. 
3. 
Injecting the medicine  
 
The needle cover should not be removed until you are ready to inject the medicine. The 
medicine should be injected within 5 minutes after the needle cover has been removed. 
Do not touch the plunger during needle cover removal. 
 
Remove the needle cover (see figure 5)  
• 
When you are ready to inject, hold the body of the pre-filled syringe with one hand. 
• 
Pull the needle cover straight off and throw it away after your injection. Do not 
touch the plunger while you do this. 
• 
You may notice an air bubble in the pre-filled syringe or a drop of liquid at the 
end of the needle. These are both normal and do not need to be removed. 
• 
Inject the dose promptly after removing the needle cover. 
Do not touch the needle or allow it to touch any surface. 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if it is dropped without the needle cover in place. If this 
happens, please contact your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
 

143 
 
 
Figure 5 
 
Position the pre-filled syringe to inject  
• 
Hold the body of the pre-filled syringe with one hand between the middle and index 
fingers and place the thumb on top of the plunger head and use the other hand to 
gently pinch the area of skin that you previously cleaned. Hold firmly. 
Do not pull back on the plunger at any time. 
 
Inject the medicine  
• 
Place the needle at approximately a 45-degree angle to the pinched skin. In a single 
and swift motion, insert the needle through the skin as far as it will go (see figure 6). 
 
Figure 6 
 
• 
Release pinch and reposition hand. Use your free hand to grasp the body of the pre-
filled syringe. Place thumb from the opposite hand on the plunger and press the 
plunger all the way down until it stops. (see figure 7). 
 
Figure 7 
 
• 
Release pressure from plunger, The safety guard will cover the needle and lock into 

144 
 
place, removing the needle from your skin. (see figure 8).  
 
 
Figure 8 
4. 
After the injection  
Use a cotton ball or gauze  
• 
There may be a small amount of blood or liquid at the injection site. This is normal. 
• 
You can press a cotton ball or gauze over the injection site and hold for 10 seconds. 
• 
You may cover the injection site with a small adhesive bandage, if necessary.  
• 
Do not rub your skin. 
 
Throw the pre-filled syringe away (see figure 9)  
• 
Place your pre-filled syringe in a sharps container straight away. Make sure you 
dispose of the bin as instructed by your doctor or nurse. 
Do not attempt to recap the needle. 
Do not ever re-use a pre-filled syringe, for your safety and health and for the safety of others. 
If you feel that something has gone wrong with the injection or if you are not sure, talk to 
your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
Figure 9 
 
 
 
 
