1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 

2 
 
▼This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions.  
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
IMULDOSA 130 mg concentrate for solution for infusion 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each vial contains 130 mg ustekinumab in 26 mL (5 mg/mL). 
 
Ustekinumab is a fully human IgG1κ monoclonal antibody to interleukin (IL)-12/23 produced in a murine 
myeloma cell line using recombinant DNA technology. 
 
Excipient with known effect 
Sodium content 
Each dose contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg). 
 
Polysorbate content 
Each unit volume contains 11.1 mg polysorbate 80, which is equivalent to 10.4 mg per 130 mg dose. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Concentrate for solution for infusion.  
 
The solution is colourless to slightly yellow and clear to slightly opalescent. 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Adult Crohn’s Disease 
IMULDOSA is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease 
who have had an inadequate response with, lost response to, or were intolerant to either conventional therapy or 
a TNFα antagonist. 
 
Paediatric Crohn’s Disease 
 
IMULDOSA is indicated for the treatment of moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease in paediatric 
patients weighing at least 40 kg, who have had an inadequate response to, or were intolerant to either 
conventional or biologic therapy. 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
IMULDOSA concentrate for solution for infusion is intended for use under the guidance and supervision of 
physicians experienced in the diagnosis and treatment of Crohn's disease. 
IMULDOSA concentrate for solution for infusion should only be used for the intravenous induction dose. 
 
Posology 

3 
 
 
Adults 
Crohn’s Disease 
IMULDOSA treatment is to be initiated with a single intravenous dose based on body weight. The infusion 
solution is to be composed of the number of vials of IMULDOSA 130 mg as specified in Table 1 (see section 
6.6 for preparation). 
 
Table 1       Initial intravenous dosing of IMULDOSA 
 
Body weight of patient at the time of 
dosing 
Recommended dosea 
Number of 130 mg 
IMULDOSA Vials 
≤ 55 kg 
260 mg 
2 
> 55 kg to ≤ 85 kg 
390 mg 
3 
> 85 kg 
520 mg 
4 
aApproximately 6 mg/kg 
 
The first subcutaneous dose should be given at week 8 following the intravenous dose. For the posology of the 
subsequent subcutaneous dosing regimen, see section 4.2 of the IMULDOSA solution for injection (vial) and 
solution for injection in pre-filled syringe SmPC. 
 
Elderly (≥ 65 years) 
No dose adjustment is needed for elderly patients (see section 4.4). 
 
Renal and hepatic impairment 
Ustekinumab has not been studied in these patient populations. No dose recommendations can be made. 
 
Paediatric population 
Paediatric Crohn’s disease (patients weighing at least 40 kg) 
IMULDOSA treatment is to be initiated with a single intravenous dose based on body weight. The infusion 
solution is to be composed of the number of vials of IMULDOSA 130 mg as specified in Table 2 (see 
section 6.6 for preparation). 
 
Table 2       Initial intravenous dosing of IMULDOSA 
Body weight of patient at the time of 
dosing 
Recommended dosea 
Number of 130 mg 
IMULDOSA Vials  
≥ 40 kg to ≤ 55 kg 
260 mg 
2 
> 55 kg to ≤ 85 kg 
390 mg 
3 
> 85 kg 
520 mg 
4 
aApproximately 6 mg/kg 
 
The first subcutaneous dose should be given at week 8 following the intravenous dose. For the posology 
of the subsequent subcutaneous dosing regimen, see section 4.2 of the IMULDOSA solution for injection 
(vial) and solution for injection in pre-filled syringe SmPC. 
 
The safety and efficacy IMULDOSA for the treatment of Crohn’s disease in paediatric patients weighing less 
than 40 kg  have not yet been established. No data are available. 
 
Method of administration 
IMULDOSA 130 mg is for intravenous use only. It should be administered over at least one hour. For 
instructions on dilution of the medicinal product before administration, see section 6.6. 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 

4 
 
Clinically important, active infection (e.g. active tuberculosis; see section 4.4). 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the tradename and the batch number of the 
administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Infections 
Ustekinumab may have the potential to increase the risk of infections and reactivate latent infections. In clinical 
studies and a post-marketing observational study in patients with psoriasis, serious bacterial, fungal, and viral 
infections have been observed in patients receiving ustekinumab (see section 4.8). 
 
Opportunistic infections including reactivation of tuberculosis, other opportunistic bacterial infections (including 
atypical mycobacterial infection, listeria meningitis, pneumonia legionella, and nocardiosis), opportunistic fungal 
infections, opportunistic viral infections (including encephalitis caused by herpes simplex 2), and parasitic 
infections (including ocular toxoplasmosis) have been reported in patients treated with ustekinumab. 
 
Caution should be exercised when considering the use of IMULDOSA in patients with a chronic infection or a 
history of recurrent infection (see section 4.3). 
 
Prior to initiating treatment with IMULDOSA, patients should be evaluated for tuberculosis infection. 
IMULDOSA must not be given to patients with active tuberculosis (see section 4.3). Treatment of latent 
tuberculosis infection should be initiated prior to administering IMULDOSA. Anti-tuberculosis therapy should 
also be considered prior to initiation of IMULDOSA in patients with a history of latent or active tuberculosis in 
whom an adequate course of treatment cannot be confirmed. Patients receiving IMULDOSA should be 
monitored closely for signs and symptoms of active tuberculosis during and after treatment. 
 
Patients should be instructed to seek medical advice if signs or symptoms suggestive of an infection occur. If a 
patient develops a serious infection, the patient should be closely monitored and IMULDOSA should not be 
administered until the infection resolves. 
Malignancies 
Immunosuppressants like ustekinumab have the potential to increase the risk of malignancy. Some patients who 
received ustekinumab in clinical studies and in a post-marketing observational study in patients with psoriasis 
developed cutaneous and non-cutaneous malignancies (see section 4.8). The risk of malignancy may be higher in 
psoriasis patients who have been treated with other biologics during the course of their disease. 
 
No studies have been conducted that include patients with a history of malignancy or that continue treatment in 
patients who develop malignancy while receiving ustekinumab. Thus, caution should be exercised when 
considering the use of IMULDOSA in these patients. 
 
All patients, in particular those greater than 60 years of age, patients with a medical history of prolonged 
immunosuppressant therapy or those with a history of PUVA treatment, should be monitored for the appearance 
of skin cancer (see section 4.8). 
 
Systemic and respiratory hypersensitivity reactions 
Systemic 
Serious hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in the post-marketing setting, in some cases several days 
after treatment. Anaphylaxis and angioedema have occurred. If an anaphylactic or other serious hypersensitivity 
reaction occurs, appropriate therapy should be instituted and administration of IMULDOSA should be 
discontinued (see section 4.8). 
 
Infusion-related reactions 
Infusion-related reactions were observed in clinical trials (see section 4.8). Serious infusion-related reactions 

5 
 
including anaphylactic reactions to the infusion have been reported in the post-marketing setting. If a serious or 
life-threatening reaction is observed, appropriate therapy should be instituted and ustekinumab should be 
discontinued. 
 
Respiratory 
Cases of allergic alveolitis, eosinophilic pneumonia, and non-infectious organising pneumonia have been 
reported during post-approval use of ustekinumab. Clinical presentations included cough, dyspnoea, and 
interstitial infiltrates following one to three doses. Serious outcomes have included respiratory failure and 
prolonged hospitalisation. Improvement has been reported after discontinuation of ustekinumab and also, in some 
cases, administration of corticosteroids. If infection has been excluded and diagnosis is confirmed, discontinue 
ustekinumab and institute appropriate treatment (see section 4.8). 
 
Cardiovascular events 
Cardiovascular events including myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular accident have been observed in 
patients with psoriasis exposed to ustekinumab in a post-marketing observational study. Risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease should be regularly assessed during treatment with ustekinumab. 
 
Vaccinations 
It is recommended that live viral or live bacterial vaccines (such as Bacillus of Calmette and Guérin (BCG)) 
should not be given concurrently with IMULDOSA. Specific studies have not been conducted in patients who 
had recently received live viral or live bacterial vaccines. No data are available on the secondary transmission of 
infection by live vaccines in patients receiving ustekinumab. Before live viral or live bacterial vaccination, 
treatment with IMULDOSA should be withheld for at least 15 weeks after the last dose and can be resumed at 
least 2 weeks after vaccination. Prescribers should consult the Summary of Product Characteristics for the 
specific vaccine for additional information and guidance on concomitant use of immunosuppressive agents post-
vaccination. 
 
Administration of live vaccines (such as the BCG vaccine) to infants exposed in utero to ustekinumab is not 
recommended for twelve months following birth or until ustekinumab infant serum levels are undetectable (see 
sections 4.5 and 4.6). If there is a clear clinical benefit for the individual infant, administration of a live vaccine 
might be considered at an earlier timepoint, if infant ustekinumab serum levels are undetectable. 
 
Patients receiving IMULDOSA may receive concurrent inactivated or non-live vaccinations.  
 
Long term treatment with ustekinumab does not suppress the humoral immune response to pneumococcal 
polysaccharide or tetanus vaccines (see section 5.1). 
 
Concomitant immunosuppressive therapy 
In psoriasis studies, the safety and efficacy of ustekinumab in combination with immunosuppressants, including 
biologics, or phototherapy have not been evaluated. In psoriatic arthritis studies, concomitant MTX use did not 
appear to influence the safety or efficacy of ustekinumab. In Crohn’s disease studies, concomitant use of 
immunosuppressants or corticosteroids did not appear to influence the safety or efficacy of ustekinumab. Caution 
should be exercised when considering concomitant use of other immunosuppressants and IMULDOSA or when 
transitioning from other immunosuppressive biologics (see section 4.5). 
 
Immunotherapy 
Ustekinumab has not been evaluated in patients who have undergone allergy immunotherapy. It is not known 
whether ustekinumab may affect allergy immunotherapy. 
 
Serious skin conditions 
In patients with psoriasis, exfoliative dermatitis has been reported following ustekinumab treatment (see section 
4.8). Patients with plaque psoriasis may develop erythrodermic psoriasis, with symptoms that may be clinically 
indistinguishable from exfoliative dermatitis, as part of the natural course of their disease. As part of the 
monitoring of the patient’s psoriasis, physicians should be alert for symptoms of erythrodermic psoriasis or 
exfoliative dermatitis. If these symptoms occur, appropriate therapy should be instituted. IMULDOSA should be 
discontinued if a drug reaction is suspected. 
 

6 
 
Lupus-related conditions 
Cases of lupus-related conditions have been reported in patients treated with ustekinumab, including cutaneous 
lupus erythematosus and lupus-like syndrome. If lesions occur, especially in sun exposed areas of the skin or if 
accompanied by arthralgia, the patient should seek medical attention promptly.  If the diagnosis of a lupus-
related condition is confirmed, ustekinumab should be discontinued and appropriate treatment initiated. 
 
Special populations 
Elderly (≥ 65 years) 
No overall differences in efficacy or safety in patients age 65 and older who received ustekinumab were 
observed compared to younger patients in clinical studies in approved indications, however the number of 
patients aged 65 and older is not sufficient to determine whether they respond differently from younger patients. 
Because there is a higher incidence of infections in the elderly population in general, caution should be used in 
treating the elderly. 
 
Sodium content 
IMULDOSA contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per dose, i.e. essentially ‘sodium-free’. IMULDOSA is 
however, diluted in sodium chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution for infusion. This should be taken into 
consideration for patients on a controlled sodium diet (see section 6.6). 
Polysorbate 80 
IMULDOSA contains 11.1 mg polysorbate 80 (E433) in each unit volume, which is equivalent to 10.4 mg per 130 
mg dose. 
Polysorbates may cause allergic reactions.  
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
Live vaccines should not be given concurrently with IMULDOSA. 
 
Administration of live vaccines (such as the BCG vaccine) to infants exposed in utero to ustekinumab is not 
recommended for twelve months following birth or until ustekinumab infant serum levels are undetectable (see 
sections 4.4 and 4.6). If there is a clear clinical benefit for the individual infant, administration of a live vaccine 
might be considered at an earlier timepoint, if infant ustekinumab serum levels are undetectable. 
 
In the population pharmacokinetic analyses of the phase 3 studies, the effect of the most frequently used 
concomitant medicinal products in patients with psoriasis (including paracetamol, ibuprofen, acetylsalicylic acid, 
metformin, atorvastatin, levothyroxine) on pharmacokinetics of ustekinumab was explored. There were no 
indications of an interaction with these concomitantly administered medicinal products. The basis for this 
analysis was that at least 100 patients (> 5% of the studied population) were treated concomitantly with these 
medicinal products for at least 90% of the study period. The pharmacokinetics of ustekinumab was not impacted 
by concomitant use of MTX, NSAIDs, 6-mercaptopurine, azathioprine and oral corticosteroids in patients with 
psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease or prior exposure to anti-TNFα agents, in patients with psoriatic arthritis or 
Crohn’s disease.  
 
The results of an in vitro study and a phase 1 study in subjects with active Crohn’s disease do not suggest the need 
for dose adjustments in patients who are receiving concomitant CYP450 substrates (see section 5.2). 
 
In psoriasis studies, the safety and efficacy of ustekinumab in combination with immunosuppressants, including 
biologics, or phototherapy have not been evaluated. In psoriatic arthritis studies, concomitant MTX use did not 
appear to influence the safety or efficacy of ustekinumab. In Crohn’s disease studies, concomitant use of 
immunosuppressants or corticosteroids did not appear to influence the safety or efficacy of ustekinumab (see 
section 4.4). 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Women of childbearing potential 
Women of childbearing potential should use effective methods of contraception during treatment and for at least 

7 
 
15 weeks after treatment. 
 
Pregnancy 
Data from a moderate number of prospectively collected pregnancies following exposure to ustekinumab with 
known outcomes, including more than 450 pregnancies exposed during the first trimester, do not indicate an 
increased risk of major congenital malformations in the newborn.  
 
Animal studies do not indicate direct or indirect harmful effects with respect to pregnancy, embryonic/foetal 
development, parturition or postnatal development (see section 5.3).  
However, the available clinical experience is limited. As a precautionary measure, it is preferable to avoid the use 
of IMULDOSA in pregnancy. 
Ustekinumab crosses the placenta and has been detected in the serum of infants born to female patients treated 
with ustekinumab during pregnancy. The clinical impact of this is unknown, however, the risk of infection in 
infants exposed in utero to ustekinumab may be increased after birth. Administration of live vaccines (such as the 
BCG vaccine) to infants exposed in utero to ustekinumab is not recommended for twelve months following birth 
or until ustekinumab infant serum levels are undetectable (see sections 4.4 and 4.5). If there is a clear clinical 
benefit for the individual infant, administration of a live vaccine might be considered at an earlier timepoint, if 
infant ustekinumab serum levels are undetectable. 
Breast-feeding 
Limited data from published literature suggests that ustekinumab is excreted in human breast milk in very small 
amounts. It is not known if ustekinumab is absorbed systemically after ingestion. Because of the potential for 
adverse reactions in nursing infants from ustekinumab, a decision on whether to discontinue breast-feeding 
during treatment and up to 15 weeks after treatment or to discontinue therapy with IMULDOSA must be made 
taking into account the benefit of breast-feeding to the child and the benefit of IMULDOSA therapy to the 
woman. 
 
Fertility 
The effect of ustekinumab on human fertility has not been evaluated (see section 5.3). 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 
IMULDOSA has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
The most common adverse reactions (> 5%) in controlled periods of the adult psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, 
Crohn’s disease clinical studies with ustekinumab were nasopharyngitis and headache. Most were considered to 
be mild and did not necessitate discontinuation of study treatment. The most serious adverse reaction that has 
been reported for ustekinumab is serious hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis (see section 4.4). The 
overall safety profile was similar for patients with psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease. 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
The safety data described below reflect exposure in adults to ustekinumab in 14 phase 2 and phase 3 studies in 
6,710 patients (4,135 with psoriasis and/or psoriatic arthritis and 1,749 with Crohn’s disease). This includes 
exposure to ustekinumab in the controlled and non-controlled periods of the clinical studies in patients with 
psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis or Crohn’s disease for at least 6 months (4,577 patients) or at least 1 year (3,648 
patients). 2,194 patients with psoriasis, Crohn’s disease were exposed for at least 4 years while 1,148 
patients with psoriasis or Crohn’s disease were exposed for at least 5 years. 
 
Table 3 provides a list of adverse reactions from adult psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn’s disease clinical 
studies as well as adverse reactions reported from post-marketing experience. The adverse reactions are classified 

8 
 
by System Organ Class and frequency, using the following convention: Very common (≥ 1/10), Common (≥ 
1/100 to < 1/10), Uncommon (≥ 1/1,000 to < 1/100), Rare (≥ 1/10,000 to < 1/1,000), Very rare (< 1/10,000), not 
known (cannot be estimated from the available data). Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are 
presented in order of decreasing seriousness. 
 
Table 3 
List of adverse reactions 
System Organ Class 
Frequency: Adverse reaction 
Infections and infestations 
Common: Upper respiratory tract infection, nasopharyngitis, 
sinusitis 
                                                           Uncommon: Cellulitis, dental infections, herpes zoster, lower respiratory 
                                                          tract infection, viral upper respiratory tract infection, vulvovaginal mycotic 
                                                            infection 
Immune system disorders 
Uncommon: Hypersensitivity reactions (including rash, urticaria)  
                                                    Rare: Serious hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylaxis, 
                                                    angioedema) 
Psychiatric disorders 
Uncommon: Depression 
Nervous system disorders 
Common: Dizziness, headache 
                                                          Uncommon: Facial palsy 
Respiratory, thoracic and 
Common: Oropharyngeal pain 
 
mediastinal disorders                    Uncommon: Nasal congestion 
                                                           Rare: Allergic alveolitis, eosinophilic pneumonia 
                                                           Very rare: Organising pneumonia* 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Common: Diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
Common: Pruritus 
disorders 
Uncommon: Pustular psoriasis, skin exfoliation, acne  
                                                           Rare: Exfoliative dermatitis, hypersensitivity vasculitis  
                                                         Very rare: Bullous pemphigoid, cutaneous lupus erythematosus 
Musculoskeletal and connective 
Common: Back pain, myalgia, arthralgia  
 
tissue disorders                             Very rare: Lupus-like syndrome 
General disorders and 
Common: Fatigue, injection site erythema, injection site pain 
administration site conditions 
Uncommon: Injection site reactions (including haemorrhage, 
                                                          haematoma, induration, swelling and pruritus), asthenia 
* 
See section 4.4, Systemic and respiratory hypersensitivity reactions. 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Infections 
In the placebo-controlled studies of patients with psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn’s disease, the rates of 
infection or serious infection were similar between ustekinumab-treated patients and those treated with placebo. 
In the placebo-controlled period of these clinical studies, the rate of infection was 1.36 per patient-year of follow-
up in ustekinumab-treated patients, and 1.34 in placebo-treated patients. Serious infections occurred at the rate of 
0.03 per patient-year of follow-up in ustekinumab-treated patients (30 serious infections in 930 patient-years of 
follow-up) and 0.03 in placebo-treated patients (15 serious infections in 434 patient-years of follow-up) (see 
section 4.4). 
 
In the controlled and non-controlled periods of psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn’s disease clinical studies, 
representing 15,227 patient-years of ustekinumab exposure in 6,710 patients, the median follow-up was 1.2 
years; 1.7 years for psoriatic disease studies and 0.6 year for Crohn’s disease studies. The rate of infection was 
0.85 per patient-year of follow-up in ustekinumab-treated patients, and the rate of serious infections was 0.02 per 
patient-year of follow-up in ustekinumab-treated patients (289 serious infections in 15,227  patient-years of 
follow-up) and serious infections reported included pneumonia, anal abscess, cellulitis, diverticulitis, 
gastroenteritis and viral infections. 
In clinical studies, patients with latent tuberculosis who were concurrently treated with isoniazid did not develop 

9 
 
tuberculosis. 
 
Malignancies 
In the placebo-controlled period of the psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and  Crohn’s disease clinical studies, the 
incidence of malignancies excluding non-melanoma skin cancer was 0.11 per 100 patient-years of follow-up for 
ustekinumab-treated patients (1 patient in 929 patient-years of follow-up) compared with 0.23 for placebo-treated 
patients (1 patient in 434 patient-years of follow-up). The incidence of non-melanoma skin cancer was 0.43 per 
100 patient-years of follow-up for ustekinumab-treated patients (4 patients in 929 patient-years of follow-up) 
compared to 0.46 for placebo-treated patients (2 patients in 433 patient-years of follow-up). 
 
In the controlled and non-controlled periods of psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and  Crohn’s disease clinical studies, 
representing 15,205 patient-years of ustekinumab exposure in 6,710 patients, the median follow-up was 1.2 
years; 1.7 years for psoriatic disease studies and  0.6 year for Crohn’s disease studies. Malignancies excluding 
non-melanoma skin cancers were reported in 76 patients in 15,205 patient-years of follow-up (incidence of 0.50 
per 100 patient- years of follow-up for ustekinumab-treated patients). The incidence of malignancies reported in 
ustekinumab-treated patients was comparable to the incidence expected in the general population (standardised 
incidence ratio = 0.94 [95% confidence interval: 0.73, 1.18], adjusted for age, gender and race). The most 
frequently observed malignancies, other than non-melanoma skin cancer, were prostate, melanoma, colorectal, 
and breast cancers. The incidence of non-melanoma skin cancer was 0.46 per 100 patient-years of follow-up for 
ustekinumab-treated patients (69 patients in 15,165 patient-years of follow-up). The ratio of patients with basal 
versus squamous cell skin cancers (3:1) is comparable with the ratio expected in the general population (see 
section 4.4). 
 
Hypersensitivity and infusion reactions 
In Crohn’s disease intravenous induction studies, no events of anaphylaxis or other serious infusion reactions 
were reported following the single intravenous dose. In these studies, 2.2% of 785 placebo-treated patients and 
1.9% of 790 patients treated with the recommended dose of ustekinumab reported adverse events occurring 
during or within an hour of the infusion. Serious infusion-related reactions including anaphylactic reactions to 
the infusion have been reported in the post-marketing setting (see section 4.4). 
 
Paediatric population 
Paediatric patients 6 years and older with plaque psoriasis 
The safety of ustekinumab has been studied in two phase 3 studies of paediatric patients with moderate to severe 
plaque psoriasis. The first study was in 110 patients from 12 to 17 years of age treated for up to 60 weeks and the 
second study was in 44 patients from 6 to 11 years of age treated for up to 56 weeks. In general, the adverse events 
reported in these two studies with safety data up to 1 year were similar to those seen in previous studies in adults 
with plaque psoriasis. 
 
Paediatric patients weighing at least 40 kg with Crohn’s disease 
 
The safety of Ustekinumab has been studied in one phase 1 and one phase 3 study of paediatric patients with 
moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease up to week 240 and week 52, respectively. In general, the safety 
profile in this cohort (n = 71) was similar to that seen in previous studies in adults with Crohn’s disease. 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It allows 
continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare professionals are asked to 
report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system listed in Appendix V. 
4.9 
Overdose 
Single doses up to 6 mg/kg have been administered intravenously in clinical studies without dose limiting 
toxicity. In case of overdose, it is recommended that the patient be monitored for any signs or symptoms of 
adverse reactions and appropriate symptomatic treatment be instituted immediately. 
 

10 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Immunosuppressants, interleukin inhibitors, ATC code: L04AC05. 
 
IMULDOSA is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the 
European Medicines Agency http://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
Mechanism of action 
Ustekinumab is a fully human IgG1κ monoclonal antibody that binds with specificity to the shared p40 protein 
subunit of human cytokines interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-23. Ustekinumab inhibits the bioactivity of human IL-12 
and IL-23 by preventing p40 from binding to the IL-12Rβ1 receptor protein expressed on the surface of immune 
cells. Ustekinumab cannot bind to IL-12 or IL-23 that is already bound to IL-12Rβ1 cell surface receptors. Thus, 
ustekinumab is not likely to contribute to complement- or antibody-mediated cytotoxicity of cells with IL-12 
and/or IL-23 receptors. IL-12 and IL-23 are heterodimeric cytokines secreted by activated antigen presenting 
cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells, and both cytokines participate in immune functions; IL-12 
stimulates natural killer (NK) cells and drives the differentiation of CD4+ T cells toward the T helper 1 (Th1) 
phenotype, IL- 23 induces the T helper 17 (Th17) pathway. However, abnormal regulation of IL 12 and IL 23 has 
been associated with immune mediated diseases, such as psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn’s disease. 
 
By binding the shared p40 subunit of IL-12 and IL-23, ustekinumab may exert its clinical effects in psoriasis, 
psoriatic arthritis and Crohn’s disease through interruption of the Th1 and Th17 cytokine pathways, which are 
central to the pathology of these diseases. 
 
In patients with Crohn’s disease, treatment with ustekinumab resulted in a decrease in inflammatory markers 
including C-Reactive Protein (CRP) and fecal calprotectin during the induction phase, which were then 
maintained throughout the maintenance phase. CRP was assessed during the study extension and the reductions 
observed during maintenance were generally sustained through week 252. 
 
Immunisation 
During the long term extension of Psoriasis Study 2 (PHOENIX 2), adult patients treated with ustekinumab for 
at least 3.5 years mounted similar antibody responses to both pneumococcal polysaccharide and tetanus 
vaccines as a non-systemically treated psoriasis control group. Similar proportions of adult patients developed 
protective levels of anti-pneumococcal and anti-tetanus antibodies and antibody titres were similar among 
ustekinumab-treated and control patients. 
 
Clinical efficacy 
 
Crohn’s Disease 
The safety and efficacy of ustekinumab was assessed in three randomised, double-blind, placebo- controlled, 
multicenter studies in adult patients with moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease (Crohn’s Disease 
Activity Index [CDAI] score of ≥ 220 and ≤ 450). The clinical development program consisted of two 8-week 
intravenous induction studies (UNITI-1 and UNITI-2) followed by a 44 week subcutaneous randomised 
withdrawal maintenance study (IM-UNITI) representing 52 weeks of therapy. 
 
The induction studies included 1409 (UNITI-1, n = 769; UNITI-2 n = 640) patients. The primary endpoint for 
both induction studies was the proportion of subjects in clinical response (defined as a reduction in CDAI score 
of ≥ 100 points) at week 6. Efficacy data were collected and analyzed through week 8 for both studies. 
Concomitant doses of oral corticosteroids, immunomodulators, aminosalicylates and antibiotics were permitted 
and 75% of patients continued to receive at least one of these medications. In both studies, patients were 
randomised to receive a single intravenous administration of either the recommended tiered dose of 
approximately 6 mg/kg (see Table 1, section 4.2), a fixed dose of 130 mg ustekinumab, or placebo at week 0. 
 
Patients in UNITI-1 had failed or were intolerant to prior anti-TNFα therapy. Approximately 48% of the patients 
had failed 1 prior anti-TNFα therapy and 52% had failed 2 or 3 prior anti-TNFα therapies. In this study, 29.1% 
of the patients had an inadequate initial response (primary non-responders), 69.4% responded but lost response 

11 
 
(secondary non-responders), and 36.4% were intolerant to anti-TNFα therapies. 
 
Patients in UNITI-2 had failed at least one conventional therapy, including corticosteroids or immunomodulators, 
and were either anti-TNF-α naïve (68.6%) or had previously received but not failed anti-TNFα therapy (31.4%). 
 
In both UNITI-1 and UNITI-2, a significantly greater proportion of patients were in clinical response and 
remission in the ustekinumab treated group compared to placebo (Table 4). Clinical response and remission were 
significant as early as week 3 in ustekinumab treated patients and continued to improve through week 8. In these 
induction studies, efficacy was higher and better sustained in the tiered dose group compared to the 130 mg dose 
group, and tiered dosing is therefore the recommended intravenous induction dose. 
 
Table 4: 
Induction of Clinical Response and Remission in UNITI-1 and UNITI 2 
UNITI-1* 
UNITI-2** 
Placebo 
N = 247 
Recommended 
dose of 
ustekinumab 
N = 249 
Placebo 
N = 209 
Recommended dose 
of 
ustekinumab 
N = 209 
Clinical Remission, week 8 
18 (7.3%) 
52 (20.9%)a 
41 (19.6%) 
84 (40.2%)a 
Clinical Response (100 point), week 6 
53 (21.5%) 84 (33.7%)b 
60 (28.7%) 
116 (55.5%)a 
Clinical Response (100 point), week 8 
50 (20.2%) 94 (37.8%)a 
67 (32.1%) 
121 (57.9%)a 
70 Point Response, week 3 
67 (27.1%) 101 (40.6%)b 
66 (31.6%) 
106 (50.7%)a 
70 Point Response, week 6 
75 (30.4%) 109 (43.8%)b 
81 (38.8%) 
135 (64.6%)a 
Clinical remission is defined as CDAI score < 150; Clinical response is defined as reduction in CDAI score by at least 
100 points or being in clinical remission 
70 point response is defined as reduction in CDAI score by at least 70 points 
*   Anti-TNFα failures 
** Conventional therapy failures 
a 
p < 0.001 
b     p < 0.01 
 
The maintenance study (IM-UNITI), evaluated 388 patients who achieved 100 point clinical response at week 8 
of induction with ustekinumab in studies UNITI-1 and UNITI-2. Patients were randomised to receive a 
subcutaneous maintenance regimen of either 90 mg ustekinumab every 8 weeks, 90 mg ustekinumab every 12 
weeks or placebo for 44 weeks (for recommended maintenance posology, see section 4.2 of the IMULDOSA 
Solution for injection (vial) and Solution for injection in pre-filled syringe SmPC). 
 
Significantly higher proportions of patients maintained clinical remission and response in the ustekinumab treated 
groups compared to the placebo group at week 44 (see Table 5). 
 
Table 5: 
Maintenance of Clinical Response and Remission in IM-UNITI (week 44; 52 weeks from initiation 
of the induction dose) 
Placebo* 
N = 131†
90 mg 
ustekinumab 
every 8 weeks 
N = 128†
90 mg ustekinumab 
every 
12 weeks 
N = 129† 
Clinical Remission 
36% 
53%a 
49%b 
Clinical Response 
44% 
59%b 
58%b 
Corticosteroid-Free Clinical Remission 
30% 
47%a 
43%c 
Clinical Remission in patients: 
in remission at the start of maintenance 
therapy 
46% (36/79) 
67% (52/78)a 
56% (44/78) 
who entered from study CRD3002‡ 
44% (31/70) 
63% (45/72)c 
57% (41/72) 
who are Anti-TNFα naïve 
49% (25/51) 
65% (34/52)c 
57% (30/53) 
who entered from study CRD3001§ 
26% (16/61) 
41% (23/56) 
39% (22/57) 
Clinical remission is defined as CDAI score < 150; Clinical response is defined as reduction in CDAI of at least 100 points or being in 
clinical remission 
*   The placebo group consisted of patients who were in response to ustekinumab and were randomised to receive placebo at the start of 

12 
 
maintenance therapy. 
†     Patients who were in 100 point clinical response to ustekinumab at start of maintenance therapy 
‡     Patients who failed conventional therapy but not anti-TNFα therapy 
§     Patients who are anti-TNFα refractory/intolerant 
a 
p < 0.01 
b     p < 0.05 
c 
nominally significant (p < 0.05) 
 
In IM-UNITI, 29 of 129 patients did not maintain response to ustekinumab when treated every 12 weeks and 
were allowed to dose adjust to receive ustekinumab every 8 weeks. Loss of response was defined as a CDAI 
score ≥ 220 points and a ≥ 100 point increase from the CDAI score at baseline. In these patients, clinical 
remission was achieved in 41.4% of patients 16 weeks after dose adjustment. 
 
Patients who were not in clinical response to ustekinumab induction at week 8 of the UNITI-1 and UNITI-2 
induction studies (476 patients) entered into the non-randomised portion of the maintenance study (IM-UNITI) 
and received a 90 mg subcutaneous injection of ustekinumab at that time. 
Eight weeks later, 50.5% of the patients achieved clinical response and continued to receive maintenance dosing 
every 8 weeks; among these patients with continued maintenance dosing, a majority maintained response (68.1%) 
and achieved remission (50.2%) at week 44, at proportions that were similar to the patients who initially 
responded to ustekinumab induction. 
 
Of 131 patients who responded to ustekinumab induction, and were randomised to the placebo group at the start 
of the maintenance study, 51 subsequently lost response and received 90 mg ustekinumab subcutaneously every 8 
weeks. The majority of patients who lost response and resumed ustekinumab did so within 24 weeks of the 
induction infusion. Of these 51 patients, 70.6% achieved clinical response and 39.2% percent achieved clinical 
remission 16 weeks after receiving the first subcutaneous dose of ustekinumab. 
 
In IM-UNITI, patients who completed the study through week 44 were eligible to continue treatment in a study 
extension. Among the 567 patients who entered on and were treated with ustekinumab in the study extension, 
clinical remission and response were generally maintained through week 252 for both patients who failed TNF-
therapies and those who failed conventional therapies. 
 
No new safety concerns were identified in this study extension with up to 5 years of treatment in patients with 
Crohn’s Disease. 
 
Endoscopy 
Endoscopic appearance of the mucosa was evaluated in 252 patients with eligible baseline endoscopic disease 
activity in a substudy. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in Simplified Endoscopic Disease 
Severity Score for Crohn’s Disease (SES-CD), a composite score across 5 ileo- colonic segments of 
presence/size of ulcers, proportion of mucosal surface covered by ulcers, proportion of mucosal surface affected 
by any other lesions and presence/type of narrowing/strictures. At week 8, after a single intravenous induction 
dose, the change in SES-CD score was greater in the ustekinumab group (n = 155, mean change = -2.8) than in 
the placebo group (n = 97, mean change = -0.7, p = 0.012). 
 
Fistula Response 
In a subgroup of patients with draining fistulas at baseline (8.8%; n = 26), 12/15 (80%) of ustekinumab-treated 
patients achieved a fistula response over 44 weeks (defined as ≥ 50% reduction from baseline of the induction 
study in the number of draining fistulas) compared to 5/11 (45.5%) exposed to placebo. 
 
Health-related quality of life 
Health-related quality of life was assessed by Inflammatory Bowel Disease Questionnaire (IBDQ) and SF-36 
questionnaires. At week 8, patients receiving ustekinumab showed statistically significantly greater and 
clinically meaningful improvements on IBDQ total score and SF-36 Mental Component Summary Score in both 
UNITI-1 and UNITI-2, and SF-36 Physical Component Summary Score in UNITI-2, when compared to placebo. 
These improvements were generally better maintained in ustekinumab-treated patients in the IM-UNITI study 
through week 44 when compared to placebo. Improvement in health-related quality of life was generally 
maintained during the extension through week 252. 

13 
 
 
Immunogenicity 
Antibodies to ustekinumab may develop during ustekinumab treatment and most are neutralising. The formation 
of anti-ustekinumab antibodies is associated with increased clearance of ustekinumab in patients with Crohn’s 
disease. No reduced efficacy was observed. There is no apparent correlation between the presence of anti-
ustekinumab antibodies and the occurrence of injection site reactions. 
 
Paediatric population 
The European Medicines Agency has deferred the obligation to submit the results of studies with ustekinumab in 
one or more subsets of the paediatric population in Crohn’s Disease (see section 4.2 for information on paediatric 
use). 
 
Paediatric Crohn’s disease 
The safety and efficacy of ustekinumab was evaluated in 48 paediatric patients weighing at least 40 kg, 
in an interim analysis of a multicentre phase 3 study (UNITI-Jr) for paediatric patients with moderately 
to severely active Crohn's disease (defined by a Paediatric Crohn’s Disease Activity Index [PCDAI] 
score >30) through 52 weeks of treatment (8 weeks of induction and 44 weeks of maintenance 
treatment). Patients included in the study either had not adequately responded to or had not tolerated 
prior biologic therapy or conventional therapy for Crohn’s disease. The study included an open-label 
induction treatment with a single ustekinumab intravenous dose, of approximately 6 mg/kg (see 
section 4.2), followed by a randomised double-blind subcutaneous maintenance regimen of 90 mg 
ustekinumab administered either every 8 weeks or every 12 weeks. 
 
Efficacy results 
The primary endpoint of the study was clinical remission at induction week 8 (defined as PCDAI score 
≤ 10). The proportion of patients who achieved clinical remission was 52.1% (25/48) and is 
comparable to that observed in the adult ustekinumab phase 3 studies. 
 
Clinical response was observed as early as week 3. The proportion of patients in clinical response at 
week 8 (defined as a reduction from baseline in the PCDAI score of >12.5 points with a total PCDAI 
score not more than 30) was 93.8% (45/48). 
 
Table 6 presents the analyses for the secondary endpoints through maintenance week 44. 
 
Table 6: 
Summary of Secondary endpoints through Maintenance week 44 
  
90 mg 
ustekinumab 
every 8 weeks 
N = 23 
90 mg 
ustekinumab 
every 12 weeks 
N = 25 
Total number of 
patients 
N = 48 
Clinical Remission *  
43.5% (10/23) 
60.0% (15/25) 
52.1% (25/48) 
Corticosteroid-free Clinical 
Remission §  
43.5% (10/23) 
60.0% (15/25) 
52.1% (25/48) 
Clinical remission for patients who 
were in clinical remission at 
induction week 8 *  
64.3% (9/14) 
54.5% (6/11) 
60.0% (15/25) 
Clinical Response †  
52.2% (12/23) 
60.0% (15/25) 
56.3% (27/48) 
Endoscopic response £  
22.7% (5/22) 
28.0% (7/25) 
25.5% (12/47) 
* 
Clinical remission is defined as PCDAI score ≤10 points. 
§ 
Corticosteroid-free remission is defined as PCDAI score of ≤10 points and not receiving corticosteroids for at 
least 90 days prior to Week M-44. 
† 
Clinical response is defined as a reduction from baseline in the PCDAI score of ≥12.5 points with a total PCDAI 
score not more than 30. 
£ 
Endoscopic response is defined as a reduction in the SES-CD score of ≥50% or SES-CD score ≤2, in patients 
with a baseline SES-CD score of ≥3. 
 
 

14 
 
Dosing frequency adjustment 
Patients who entered the maintenance regimen and experienced loss of response (LOR) based on 
PCDAI score were eligible for dose adjustment. Patients were either switched from treatment every 12 
weeks to every 8 weeks or stayed on treatment every 8 weeks (sham adjustment). 2 patients were dose 
adjusted to the shorter dosing interval. In these patients, clinical remission was achieved in 100% (2/2) 
of patients 8 weeks after dose adjustment. 
 
The safety profile of the induction dose regimen and both maintenance dose regimens in the paediatric 
population weighing at least 40 kg is comparable with that established in the adult Crohn’s disease 
population (see Section 4.8). 
 
Serum and faecal inflammatory biomarkers 
The mean change from baseline at maintenance week 44 in C-Reactive protein (CRP) and faecal 
calprotectin concentrations were -11.17 mg/L (24.159) and -538.2 mg/kg (1271.33), respectively. 
 
Health-related quality of life 
The total IMPACT-III scores and all subdomains (bowel symptoms, fatigue-related systemic 
symptoms, and well-being) demonstrated clinically meaningful improvements after 52 weeks. 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
Following the recommended intravenous induction dose, median peak serum ustekinumab concentration, 
observed 1 hour after the infusion, was 126.1 μg/mL in patients with Crohn’s disease. 
 
Distribution 
Median volume of distribution during the terminal phase (Vz) following a single intravenous administration to 
patients with psoriasis ranged from 57 to 83 mL/kg. 
 
Biotransformation 
The exact metabolic pathway for ustekinumab is unknown. 
 
Elimination 
Median systemic clearance (CL) following a single intravenous administration to patients with psoriasis ranged 
from 1.99 to 2.34 mL/day/kg. Median half-life (t1/2) of ustekinumab was approximately 3 weeks in patients with 
Crohn’s disease, psoriasis and/or psoriatic arthritis, ranging from 15 to 32 days across all psoriasis and psoriatic 
arthritis studies. 
 
Dose linearity 
The systemic exposure of ustekinumab (Cmax and AUC) increased in an approximately dose-proportional 
manner after a single intravenous administration at doses ranging from 0.09 mg/kg to 4.5 mg/kg. 
 
Special populations 
No pharmacokinetic data are available in patients with impaired renal or hepatic function. 
No specific studies have been conducted with intravenous ustekinumab in elderly or paediatric patients 
weighing less than 40 kg. 
 
In patients with Crohn’s disease, variability in ustekinumab clearance was affected by body weight, serum 
albumin level, sex, and antibody to ustekinumab status while body weight was the main covariate affecting the 
volume of distribution. Additionally in Crohn’s disease, clearance was affected by C-reactive protein, TNF 
antagonist failure status and race (Asian versus non-Asian). The impact of these covariates was within ±20% of 
the typical or reference value of the respective PK parameter, thus dose adjustment is not warranted for these 
covariates. Concomitant use of immunomodulators did not have a significant impact on ustekinumab 
disposition. 
 
Regulation of CYP450 enzymes 
The effects of IL-12 or IL-23 on the regulation of CYP450 enzymes were evaluated in an in vitro study using 

15 
 
human hepatocytes, which showed that IL-12 and/or IL-23 at levels of 10 ng/mL did not alter human CYP450 
enzyme activities (CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, or 3A4; see section 4.5). 
 
A phase 1, open-label, drug interaction study, Study CNTO1275CRD1003, was conducted to evaluate the effect of 
ustekinumab on cytochrome P450 enzyme activities following induction and maintenance dosing in patients with 
active Crohn’s disease (n=18). No clinically significant changes in exposure of caffeine (CYP1A2 substrate), 
warfarin (CYP2C9 substrate), omeprazole (CYP2C19 substrate), dextromethorphan (CYP2D6 substrate), or 
midazolam (CYP3A substrate) were observed when used concomitantly with ustekinumab at the approved 
recommended dosing in patients with Crohn’s disease (see section 4.5). 
 
Paediatric population 
Serum ustekinumab concentrations in paediatric Crohn’s disease patients weighing at least 40 kg, treated with the 
recommended weight-based dose were generally comparable to those in the adult Crohn’s disease population 
treated with the adult weight-based dose. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
Non-clinical data reveal no special hazard (e.g. organ toxicity) for humans based on studies of repeated-dose 
toxicity and developmental and reproductive toxicity, including safety pharmacology evaluations. In 
developmental and reproductive toxicity studies in cynomolgus monkeys, neither adverse effects on male 
fertility indices nor birth defects or developmental toxicity were observed. No adverse effects on female fertility 
indices were observed using an analogous antibody to IL-12/23 in mice. 
Dose levels in animal studies were up to approximately 45-fold higher than the highest equivalent dose intended 
to be administered to psoriasis patients and resulted in peak serum concentrations in monkeys that were more 
than 100-fold higher than observed in humans. 
 
Carcinogenicity studies were not performed with ustekinumab due to the lack of appropriate models for an 
antibody with no cross-reactivity to rodent IL-12/23 p40. 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
EDTA disodium salt dihydrate (E385) 
L-histidine 
L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate 
L-methionine 
Polysorbate 80 (E433) 
Sucrose 
Water for injection 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal products. 
IMULDOSA should only be diluted with sodium chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution. IMULDOSA should not be 
administered concomitantly in the same intravenous line with other medicinal products. 
6.3 
Shelf life 
3 years. 
Do not freeze. 
 
After dilution, the chemical and physical in-use stability has been demonstrated for 24 hours at 23°C - 27°C or 7 
days at 2°C - 8°C. 
From a microbiological point of view, the product should be used immediately. If not used immediately, in-use 
storage times and conditions prior to use are the responsibility of the user and would normally not be longer than 

16 
 
24 hours at 2°C to 8°C unless dilution has taken place in controlled and validated aseptic conditions. 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C – 8°C). Do not freeze. 
Keep the vial in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
For storage conditions after dilution of the medicinal product, see section 6.3. 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
26 mL solution in a type I glass 30 mL vial closed with a coated butyl rubber stopper. IMULDOSA is available 
in a 1 vial pack. 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
The solution in the IMULDOSA vial should not be shaken. The solution should be visually inspected for 
particulate matter or discolouration prior to administration. The solution is colourless to slightly yellow and clear 
to slightly opalescent. The medicinal product should not be used if the solution is discoloured or cloudy, or if 
foreign particulate matter is present. 
 
Dilution 
IMULDOSA concentrate for solution for infusion must be diluted and prepared by a healthcare professional using 
aseptic technique. 
 
1. 
Calculate the dose and the number of IMULDOSA vials needed based on patient weight (see section 4.2, 
Table 1). Each 26 mL vial of IMULDOSA contains 130 mg of ustekinumab. Only use complete vials of 
IMULDOSA. 
2. 
Withdraw and discard a volume of the sodium chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution from the 250 mL 
infusion bag equal to the volume of IMULDOSA to be added. (discard 26 mL sodium chloride for each 
vial of IMULDOSA needed, for 2 vials-discard 52 mL, for 3 vials- discard 78 mL, for 4 vials- discard 
104 mL) 
3. 
Withdraw 26 mL of IMULDOSA from each vial needed and add it to the 250 mL infusion bag. The final 
volume in the infusion bag should be 250 mL. Gently mix. 
4. 
Visually inspect the diluted solution before administration. Do not use if visibly opaque particles, 
discolouration or foreign particles are observed. 
5. 
Administer the diluted solution over a period of at least one hour. Once diluted, the infusion should be 
completed within 24 hours of the dilution in the infusion bag. 
6. 
Use only an infusion set with an in-line, sterile, non-pyrogenic, low protein-binding filter (pore size 0.2 
micrometer). 
7. 
Each vial is for single use only and any unused medicinal product should be disposed of in accordance 
with local requirements. 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U. 
World Trade Center, Moll de Barcelona, s/n 
Edifici Est, 6a Planta 
08039 Barcelona 
Spain 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/24/1872/003 
 

17 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorization: 12 December 2024 
  
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency http://www.ema.europa.eu/ 

18 
 
▼This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions.  
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
IMULDOSA 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
IMULDOSA 90 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
IMULDOSA 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
Each pre-filled syringe contains 45 mg ustekinumab in 0.5 mL. 
 
IMULDOSA 90 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
Each pre-filled syringe contains 90 mg ustekinumab in 1 mL. 
 
Ustekinumab is a fully human IgG1κ monoclonal antibody to interleukin (IL)-12/23 produced in a murine 
myeloma cell line using recombinant DNA technology. 
 
Excipient with known effect 
Each unit volume contains 0.02 mg of polysorbate 80; which is equivalent to 0.02 mg per 45 mg dose 
Each unit volume contains 0.05 mg of polysorbate 80; which is equivalent to 0.04 mg per 90 mg dose 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
IMULDOSA 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe (solution for injection) 
 
IMULDOSA 90 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe (solution for injection) 
 
The solution is colourless to slightly yellow and clear to slightly opalescent. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Plaque psoriasis 
IMULDOSA is indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in adults who failed to respond 
to, or who have a contraindication to, or are intolerant to other systemic therapies including ciclosporin, 
methotrexate (MTX) or PUVA (psoralen and ultraviolet A) (see section 5.1). 
 
Paediatric plaque psoriasis 
IMULDOSA is indicated for the treatment of moderate to severe plaque psoriasis in children and adolescent 
patients from the age of 6 years and older, who are inadequately controlled by, or are intolerant to, other systemic 
therapies or phototherapies (see section 5.1). 
 
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) 
IMULDOSA, alone or in combination with MTX, is indicated for the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis in 
adult patients when the response to previous non-biological disease- modifying anti-rheumatic drug (DMARD) 
therapy has been inadequate (see section 5.1). 

19 
 
 
Adult Crohn’s Disease 
IMULDOSA is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease 
who have had an inadequate response with, lost response to, or were intolerant to either conventional therapy or 
a TNFα antagonist. 
 
Paediatric Crohn's Disease 
IMULDOSA is indicated for the treatment of moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease in 
paediatric patients weighing at least 40 kg, who have had an inadequate response to, or were intolerant 
to either conventional or biologic therapy. 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
IMULDOSA is intended for use under the guidance and supervision of physicians experienced in the diagnosis 
and treatment of conditions for which IMULDOSA is indicated. 
 
Posology 
 
Plaque psoriasis 
The recommended posology of IMULDOSA is an initial dose of 45 mg administered subcutaneously, followed 
by a 45 mg dose 4 weeks later, and then every 12 weeks thereafter. 
 
Consideration should be given to discontinuing treatment in patients who have shown no response up to 28 weeks 
of treatment. 
 
Patients with body weight > 100 kg 
For patients with a body weight > 100 kg the initial dose is 90 mg administered subcutaneously, followed by a 
90 mg dose 4 weeks later, and then every 12 weeks thereafter. In these patients, 45 mg was also shown to be 
efficacious. However, 90 mg resulted in greater efficacy (see section 5.1, Table 3). 
 
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) 
The recommended posology of IMULDOSA is an initial dose of 45 mg administered subcutaneously, followed 
by a 45 mg dose 4 weeks later, and then every 12 weeks thereafter. Alternatively, 90 mg may be used in patients 
with a body weight > 100 kg. 
 
Consideration should be given to discontinuing treatment in patients who have shown no response up to 28 weeks 
of treatment. 
 
Elderly (≥ 65 years) 
No dose adjustment is needed for elderly patients (see section 4.4). 
 
Renal and hepatic impairment 
Ustekinumab has not been studied in these patient populations. No dose recommendations can be made. 
 
Paediatric population 
The safety and efficacy of ustekinumab in children with psoriasis less than 6 years of age or in children with 
psoriatic arthritis less than 18 years of age have not yet been established. 
 
Paediatric plaque psoriasis (6 years and older) 
The recommended dose of IMULDOSA based on body weight over 60 kg is shown below (Table 1). IMULDOSA 
should be administered at Weeks 0 and 4, then every 12 weeks thereafter. 
 
Table 1:           Recommended dose of IMULDOSA for paediatric psoriasis 

20 
 
Body weight at the time of dosing 
Recommended Dose 
< 60 kg* 
- 
≥ 60-≤ 100 kg 
45 mg 
> 100 kg 
90 mg 
 
*  IMULDOSA is not available for patients that require less than a full 45 mg dose. If an alternative 
dose is required, other ustekinumab products offering such an option should be used.  
There is no dose form for IMULDOSA that allows weight-based dosing for paediatric patients below 60 kg. 
Patients weighing less than 60 kg should be accurately dosed on a mg/kg basis using another ustekinumab product, 
45 mg solution for injection in vials offering weight-based dosing instead. 
 
Consideration should be given to discontinuing treatment in patients who have shown no response up to 28 weeks 
of treatment. 
 
Adult Crohn’s Disease  
In the treatment regimen, the first dose of IMULDOSA is administered intravenously. For the posology of 
the intravenous dosing regimen, see section 4.2 of the IMULDOSA 130 mg Concentrate for solution for 
infusion SmPC. 
 
The first subcutaneous administration of 90 mg IMULDOSA should take place at week 8 after the intravenous 
dose. After this, dosing every 12 weeks is recommended. 
 
Patients who have not shown adequate response at 8 weeks after the first subcutaneous dose, may receive a 
second subcutaneous dose at this time (see section 5.1). 
 
Patients who lose response on dosing every 12 weeks may benefit from an increase in dosing frequency to every 
8 weeks (see section 5.1, section 5.2). 
 
Patients may subsequently be dosed every 8 weeks or every 12 weeks according to clinical judgment (see section 
5.1). 
 
Consideration should be given to discontinuing treatment in patients who show no evidence of therapeutic benefit 
16 weeks after the IV induction dose or 16 weeks after switching to the 8-weekly maintenance dose. 
 
Immunomodulators and/or corticosteroids may be continued during treatment with IMULDOSA. In patients who 
have responded to treatment with IMULDOSA, corticosteroids may be reduced or discontinued in accordance 
with standard of care. 
 
In Crohn’s disease, if therapy is interrupted, resumption of treatment with subcutaneous dosing every 8 weeks is 
safe and effective. 
 
Elderly (≥ 65 years) 
No dose adjustment is needed for elderly patients (see section 4.4). 
 
Renal and hepatic impairment 
Ustekinumab has not been studied in these patient populations. No dose recommendations can be made. 
 
Paediatric population 
Paediatric Crohn's disease (patients weighing at least 40 kg) 
In the treatment regimen, the first dose of IMULDOSA is administered intravenously. For the 
posology of the intravenous dosing regimen, see section 4.2 of the IMULDOSA 130 mg Concentrate 
for solution for infusion SmPC. 
 
The first subcutaneous administration of 90 mg IMULDOSA should take place at week 8 after the 

21 
 
intravenous dose. After this, dosing every 12 weeks is recommended. 
 
Patients who lose response on dosing every 12 weeks may benefit from an increase in dosing 
frequency to every 8 weeks (see section 5.1, section 5.2). 
 
Patients may subsequently be dosed every 8 weeks or every 12 weeks according to clinical judgment 
(see section 5.1). 
 
Consideration should be given to discontinuing treatment in patients who show no evidence of 
therapeutic benefit 16 weeks after the IV induction dose or 16 weeks after dose adjustment. 
 
Immunomodulators, 5-aminosalicylate (5-ASA) compounds, antibiotics, and/or corticosteroids may be 
continued during treatment with IMULDOSA. In patients who have responded to treatment with 
IMULDOSA, these medications maybe reduced or discontinued in accordance with standard of care. 
 
The safety and efficacy of IMULDOSA in treatment of Crohn’s disease for paediatric patients weighing less than 
40 kg have not yet been established. No data are available. 
 
Method of administration 
IMULDOSA 45 mg and 90 mg pre-filled syringes are for subcutaneous injection only. If possible, areas of the 
skin that show psoriasis should be avoided as injection sites. 
 
After proper training in subcutaneous injection technique, patients or their caregivers may inject IMULDOSA if 
a physician determines that it is appropriate. However, the physician should ensure appropriate follow-up of 
patients. Patients or their caregivers should be instructed to inject the prescribed amount of IMULDOSA 
according to the directions provided in the package leaflet. 
Comprehensive instructions for administration are given in the package leaflet. 
 
For further instructions on preparation and special precautions for handling, see section 6.6. 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1.  
Clinically important, active infection (e.g. active tuberculosis; see section 4.4). 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the tradename and the batch number of the 
administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Infections 
Ustekinumab may have the potential to increase the risk of infections and reactivate latent infections. In clinical 
studies and a post-marketing observational study in patients with psoriasis, serious bacterial, fungal, and viral 
infections have been observed in patients receiving ustekinumab (see section 4.8). 
 
Opportunistic infections including reactivation of tuberculosis, other opportunistic bacterial infections (including 
atypical mycobacterial infection, listeria meningitis, pneumonia legionella, and nocardiosis), opportunistic fungal 
infections, opportunistic viral infections (including encephalitis caused by herpes simplex 2), and parasitic 
infections (including ocular toxoplasmosis) have been reported in patients treated with ustekinumab. 
 
Caution should be exercised when considering the use of IMULDOSA in patients with a chronic infection or a 
history of recurrent infection (see section 4.3). 
 
Prior to initiating treatment with IMULDOSA, patients should be evaluated for tuberculosis infection. 
IMULDOSA must not be given to patients with active tuberculosis (see section 4.3). Treatment of latent 

22 
 
tuberculosis infection should be initiated prior to administering IMULDOSA. Anti-tuberculosis therapy should 
also be considered prior to initiation of IMULDOSA in patients with a history of latent or active tuberculosis in 
whom an adequate course of treatment cannot be confirmed. Patients receiving IMULDOSA should be 
monitored closely for signs and symptoms of active tuberculosis during and after treatment. 
 
Patients should be instructed to seek medical advice if signs or symptoms suggestive of an infection occur. If a 
patient develops a serious infection, the patient should be closely monitored and IMULDOSA should not be 
administered until the infection resolves. 
 
Malignancies 
Immunosuppressants like ustekinumab have the potential to increase the risk of malignancy. Some patients who 
received ustekinumab in clinical studies and in a post-marketing observational study in patients with psoriasis 
developed cutaneous and non-cutaneous malignancies (see section 4.8). The risk of malignancy may be higher in 
psoriasis patients who have been treated with other biologics during the course of their disease. 
 
No studies have been conducted that include patients with a history of malignancy or that continue treatment in 
patients who develop malignancy while receiving ustekinumab. Thus, caution should be exercised when 
considering the use of IMULDOSA in these patients. 
 
All patients, in particular those greater than 60 years of age, patients with a medical history of prolonged 
immunosuppressant therapy or those with a history of PUVA treatment, should be monitored for the appearance 
of skin cancer (see section 4.8). 
 
Systemic and respiratory hypersensitivity reactions 
Systemic 
Serious hypersensitivity reactions have been reported in the post-marketing setting, in some cases several days 
after treatment. Anaphylaxis and angioedema have occurred. If an anaphylactic or other serious hypersensitivity 
reaction occurs, appropriate therapy should be instituted and administration of IMULDOSA should be 
discontinued (see section 4.8). 
 
Respiratory 
Cases of allergic alveolitis, eosinophilic pneumonia, and non-infectious organising pneumonia have been 
reported during post-approval use of ustekinumab. Clinical presentations included cough, dyspnoea, and 
interstitial infiltrates following one to three doses. Serious outcomes have included respiratory failure and 
prolonged hospitalisation. Improvement has been reported after discontinuation of ustekinumab and also, in some 
cases, administration of corticosteroids. If infection has been excluded and diagnosis is confirmed, discontinue 
ustekinumab and institute appropriate treatment (see section 4.8). 
 
Cardiovascular events 
Cardiovascular events including myocardial infarction and cerebrovascular accident have been observed in 
patients with psoriasis exposed to ustekinumab in a post-marketing observational study. Risk factors for 
cardiovascular disease should be regularly assessed during treatment with ustekinumab. 
 
Vaccinations 
It is recommended that live viral or live bacterial vaccines (such as Bacillus of Calmette and Guérin (BCG)) 
should not be given concurrently with IMULDOSA. Specific studies have not been conducted in patients who 
had recently received live viral or live bacterial vaccines. No data are available on the secondary transmission of 
infection by live vaccines in patients receiving ustekinumab. Before live viral or live bacterial vaccination, 
treatment with IMULDOSA should be withheld for at least 15 weeks after the last dose and can be resumed at 
least 2 weeks after vaccination. Prescribers should consult the Summary of Product Characteristics for the 
specific vaccine for additional information and guidance on concomitant use of immunosuppressive agents post-
vaccination. 
 
Administration of live vaccines (such as the BCG vaccine) to infants exposed in utero to ustekinumab is not 
recommended for twelve months following birth or until ustekinumab infant serum levels are undetectable (see 
sections 4.5 and 4.6). If there is a clear clinical benefit for the individual infant, administration of a live vaccine 
might be considered at an earlier timepoint, if infant ustekinumab serum levels are undetectable. 

23 
 
 
Patients receiving IMULDOSA may receive concurrent inactivated or non-live vaccinations.  
 
Long term treatment with ustekinumab does not suppress the humoral immune response to pneumococcal 
polysaccharide or tetanus vaccines (see section 5.1). 
 
Concomitant immunosuppressive therapy 
In psoriasis studies, the safety and efficacy of ustekinumab in combination with immunosuppressants, including 
biologics, or phototherapy have not been evaluated. In psoriatic arthritis studies, concomitant MTX use did not 
appear to influence the safety or efficacy of ustekinumab. In Crohn’s disease studies, concomitant use of 
immunosuppressants or corticosteroids did not appear to influence the safety or efficacy of ustekinumab. Caution 
should be exercised when considering concomitant use of other immunosuppressants and IMULDOSA or when 
transitioning from other immunosuppressive biologics (see section 4.5). 
 
Immunotherapy 
 
Ustekinumab has not been evaluated in patients who have undergone allergy immunotherapy. It is not known 
whether ustekinumab may affect allergy immunotherapy. 
 
Serious skin conditions 
In patients with psoriasis, exfoliative dermatitis has been reported following ustekinumab treatment (see section 
4.8). Patients with plaque psoriasis may develop erythrodermic psoriasis, with symptoms that may be clinically 
indistinguishable from exfoliative dermatitis, as part of the natural course of their disease. As part of the 
monitoring of the patient’s psoriasis, physicians should be alert for symptoms of erythrodermic psoriasis or 
exfoliative dermatitis. If these symptoms occur, appropriate therapy should be instituted. IMULDOSA should be 
discontinued if a drug reaction is suspected. 
Lupus-related conditions 
Cases of lupus-related conditions have been reported in patients treated with ustekinumab, including cutaneous 
lupus erythematosus and lupus-like syndrome. If lesions occur, especially in sun exposed areas of the skin or if 
accompanied by arthralgia, the patient should seek medical attention promptly. If the diagnosis of a lupus-related 
condition is confirmed, ustekinumab should be discontinued and appropriate treatment initiated. 
 
Special populations 
Elderly (≥ 65 years) 
No overall differences in efficacy or safety in patients age 65 and older who received ustekinumab were observed 
compared to younger patients in clinical studies in approved indications, however the number of patients aged 
65 and older is not sufficient to determine whether they respond differently from younger patients. Because 
there is a higher incidence of infections in the elderly population in general, caution should be used in treating the 
elderly. 
Polysorbate 80 
IMULDOSA contains 0.02 mg polysorbate 80 (E433) in each unit volume, which is equivalent to 0.02 
mg per 45 mg dose. 
IMULDOSA contains 0.05 mg polysorbate 80 (E433) in each unit volume, which is equivalent to 0.04 
mg per 90 mg dose. 
Polysorbates may cause allergic reactions.  
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
Live vaccines should not be given concurrently with IMULDOSA. 
 
Administration of live vaccines (such as the BCG vaccine) to infants exposed in utero to ustekinumab is not 
recommended for twelve months following birth or until ustekinumab infant serum levels are undetectable (see 
sections 4.4 and 4.6). If there is a clear clinical benefit for the individual infant, administration of a live vaccine 
might be considered at an earlier timepoint, if infant ustekinumab serum levels are undetectable. 
 

24 
 
In the population pharmacokinetic analyses of the phase 3 studies, the effect of the most frequently used 
concomitant medicinal products in patients with psoriasis (including paracetamol, ibuprofen, acetylsalicylic 
acid, metformin, atorvastatin, levothyroxine) on pharmacokinetics of ustekinumab was explored. There were no 
indications of an interaction with these concomitantly administered medicinal products. The basis for this 
analysis was that at least 100 patients (> 5% of the studied population) were treated concomitantly with these 
medicinal products for at least 90% of the study period. The pharmacokinetics of ustekinumab was not impacted 
by concomitant use of MTX, NSAIDs, 6-mercaptopurine, azathioprine and oral corticosteroids in patients with 
psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease, or prior exposure to anti-TNFα agents, in patients with psoriatic arthritis or 
Crohn’s disease. 
 
The results of an in vitro study and a phase 1 study in subjects with active Crohn’s disease do not suggest the need 
for dose adjustments in patients who are receiving concomitant CYP450 substrates (see section 5.2). 
 
In psoriasis studies, the safety and efficacy of Ustekinumab in combination with immunosuppressants, including 
biologics, or phototherapy have not been evaluated. In psoriatic arthritis studies, concomitant MTX use did not 
appear to influence the safety or efficacy of ustekinumab. In Crohn’s disease studies, concomitant use of 
immunosuppressants or corticosteroids did not appear to influence the safety or efficacy of ustekinumab (see 
section 4.4). 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Women of childbearing potential 
Women of childbearing potential should use effective methods of contraception during treatment and for at least 
15 weeks after treatment. 
 
Pregnancy 
Data from a moderate number of prospectively collected pregnancies following exposure to ustekinumab with 
known outcomes, including more than 450 pregnancies exposed during the first trimester, do not indicate an 
increased risk of major congenital malformations in the newborn.  
 
Animal studies do not indicate direct or indirect harmful effects with respect to pregnancy, embryonic/foetal 
development, parturition or postnatal development (see section 5.3).  
However, the available clinical experience is limited. As a precautionary measure, it is preferable to avoid the use 
of IMULDOSA in pregnancy. 
Ustekinumab crosses the placenta and has been detected in the serum of infants born to female patients treated 
with ustekinumab during pregnancy. The clinical impact of this is unknown, however, the risk of infection in 
infants exposed in utero to ustekinumab may be increased after birth. Administration of live vaccines (such as the 
BCG vaccine) to infants exposed in utero to ustekinumab is not recommended for twelve months following birth 
or until ustekinumab infant serum levels are undetectable (see sections 4.4 and 4.5). If there is a clear clinical 
benefit for the individual infant, administration of a live vaccine might be considered at an earlier timepoint, if 
infant ustekinumab serum levels are undetectable. 
Breast-feeding 
Limited data from published literature suggests that ustekinumab is excreted in human breast milk in very small 
amounts. It is not known if ustekinumab is absorbed systemically after ingestion. Because of the potential for 
adverse reactions in nursing infants from ustekinumab, a decision on whether to discontinue breast-feeding during 
treatment and up to 15 weeks after treatment or to discontinue therapy with IMULDOSA must be made taking 
into account the benefit of breast-feeding to the child and the benefit of IMULDOSA therapy to the woman. 
Fertility 
The effect of ustekinumab on human fertility has not been evaluated (see section 5.3). 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 

25 
 
IMULDOSA has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
The most common adverse reactions (> 5%) in controlled periods of the adult psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, 
Crohn’s disease clinical studies with ustekinumab were nasopharyngitis and headache. Most were considered to 
be mild and did not necessitate discontinuation of study treatment. The most serious adverse reaction that has 
been reported for ustekinumab is serious hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis (see section 4.4). The 
overall safety profile was similar for patients with psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease. 
 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
The safety data described below reflect exposure in adults to ustekinumab in 14 phase 2 and phase 3 studies in 
6,710 patients (4,135 with psoriasis and/or psoriatic arthritis and 1,749 with Crohn’s disease). This includes 
exposure to ustekinumab in the controlled and non-controlled periods of the clinical studies in patients with 
psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease for at least 6 months (4,577 patients) or at least 1 year (3,648 
patients). 2,194 patients with psoriasis, and Crohn’s disease for at least 4 years while 1,148 patients with psoriasis 
or Crohn’s disease were exposed for at least 5 years. 
 
Table 2 provides a list of adverse reactions from adult psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn’s disease clinical 
studies as well as adverse reactions reported from post-marketing experience. The adverse reactions are classified 
by System Organ Class and frequency, using the following convention: Very common (≥ 1/10), Common (≥ 
1/100 to < 1/10), Uncommon (≥ 1/1,000 to < 1/100), Rare (≥ 1/10,000 to < 1/1,000), Very rare (< 1/10,000), not 
known (cannot be estimated from the available data). Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are 
presented in order of decreasing seriousness. 
 
Table 2: 
List of adverse reactions 
System Organ Class 
Frequency: Adverse reaction 
Infections and infestations 
Common: Upper respiratory tract infection, nasopharyngitis, 
                                                         sinusitis 
Uncommon: Cellulitis, dental infections, herpes zoster, lower 
respiratory tract infection, viral upper respiratory tract infection, 
                                                        vulvovaginal mycotic infection 
Immune system disorders 
Uncommon: Hypersensitivity reactions (including rash, urticaria) 
                                                           Rare: Serious hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylaxis, 
                                                         angioedema) 
Psychiatric disorders 
Uncommon: Depression 
Nervous system disorders 
Common: Dizziness, headache 
                                                          Uncommon: Facial palsy 
Respiratory, thoracic and 
Common: Oropharyngeal pain 
 
mediastinal disorders                    Uncommon: Nasal congestion 
                                                          Rare: Allergic alveolitis, eosinophilic pneumonia 
                                                          Very rare: Organising pneumonia* 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Common: Diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
Common: Pruritus 
disorders 
Uncommon: Pustular psoriasis, skin exfoliation, acne  
                                                   Rare: Exfoliative dermatitis, hypersensitivity vasculitis  
                                                        Very rare: Bullous pemphigoid, cutaneous lupus 
                                                        erythematosus 

26 
 
Musculoskeletal and connective 
Common: Back pain, myalgia, arthralgia 
tissue disorders 
Very rare: Lupus-like syndrome 
General disorders and 
Common: Fatigue, injection site erythema, injection site pain 
administration site conditions 
Uncommon: Injection site reactions (including haemorrhage, 
                                                         haematoma, induration, swelling and pruritus), asthenia 
* See section 4.4, Systemic and respiratory hypersensitivity reactions. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
Infections 
In the placebo-controlled studies of patients with psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn’s disease the rates of 
infection or serious infection were similar between ustekinumab- treated patients and those treated with placebo. 
In the placebo-controlled period of these clinical studies, the rate of infection was 1.36 per patient-year of 
follow-up in ustekinumab-treated patients, and 1.34 in placebo-treated patients. Serious infections occurred at 
the rate of 0.03 per patient-year of follow-up in ustekinumab-treated patients (30 serious infections in 930 
patient-years of follow-up) and 0.03 in placebo-treated patients (15 serious infections in 434 patient- years of 
follow-up) (see section 4.4). 
 
In the controlled and non-controlled periods of psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and Crohn’s disease clinical 
studies, representing 15,227 patient years of ustekinumab exposure in 6,710 patients, the median 
follow-up was 1.2 years; 1.7 years for psoriatic disease studies, 0.6 year for Crohn’s disease studies. 
The rate of infection was 0.85 per patient-year of follow-up in Ustekinumab-treated patients, and the 
rate of serious infections was 0.02 per patient-year of follow-up in Ustekinumab-treated patients (289 
serious infections in 15,227 patient-years of follow-up) and serious infections reported included 
pneumonia, anal abscess, cellulitis, diverticulitis, gastroenteritis and viral infections. 
In clinical studies, patients with latent tuberculosis who were concurrently treated with isoniazid did not develop 
tuberculosis. 
 
Malignancies 
In the placebo-controlled period of the psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and Crohn’s disease clinical studies, the 
incidence of malignancies excluding non-melanoma skin cancer was 0.11 per 100 patient-years of follow-up for 
ustekinumab-treated patients (1 patient in 929 patient-years of follow-up) compared with 0.23 for placebo-treated 
patients (1 patient in 434 patient-years of follow-up). The incidence of non-melanoma skin cancer was 0.43 per 
100 patient-years of follow-up for ustekinumab-treated patients (4 patients in 929 patient-years of follow-up) 
compared to 0.46 for placebo-treated patients (2 patients in 433 patient-years of follow-up). 
 
In the controlled and non-controlled periods of psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and Crohn’s disease clinical 
studies, representing 15,205 patient-years of ustekinumab exposure in 6,710 patients, the median 
follow-up was 1.2 years; 1.7 years for psoriatic disease studies, and 0.6 year for Crohn’s disease studies  
. Malignancies excluding non-melanoma skin cancers were reported in 76 patients in 15,205 patient 
years of follow up (incidence of 0.50 per 100 patient-years of follow-up for ustekinumab treated 
patients). The incidence of malignancies reported in ustekinumab-treated patients was comparable to 
the incidence expected in the general population (standardised incidence ratio = 0.94 [95% confidence 
interval: 0.73, 1.18], adjusted for age, gender and race). The most frequently observed malignancies, 
other than non-melanoma skin cancer, were prostate, melanoma, colorectal, and breast cancers. The 
incidence of non-melanoma skin cancer was 0.46 per 100 patient-years of follow-up for Ustekinumab-
treated patients (69 patients in 15,165 patient-years of follow-up). The ratio of patients with basal versus 
squamous cell skin cancers (3:1) is comparable with the ratio expected in the general population (see 
section 4.4). 
 
Hypersensitivity reactions 
During the controlled periods of the psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis clinical studies of ustekinumab, rash and 
urticaria have each been observed in < 1% of patients (see section 4.4). 
 
Paediatric population 
Paediatric patients 6 years and older with plaque psoriasis 
The safety of ustekinumab has been studied in two phase 3 studies of paediatric patients with moderate to 

27 
 
severe plaque psoriasis. The first study was in 110 patients from 12 to 17 years of age treated for up to 60 weeks 
and the second study was in 44 patients from 6 to 11 years of age treated for up to 56 weeks. In general, the 
adverse events reported in these two studies with safety data up to 1 year were similar to those seen in previous 
studies in adults with plaque psoriasis. 
 
Paediatric patients weighing at least 40 kg with Crohn’s disease 
The safety of ustekinumab has been studied in one phase 1 and one phase 3 study of paediatric patients 
with moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease up to week 240 and week 52, respectively. In 
general, the safety profile in this cohort (n = 71) was similar to that seen in previous studies in adults 
with Crohn’s disease. 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It allows 
continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare professionals are asked 
to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
Single doses up to 6 mg/kg have been administered intravenously in clinical studies without dose- limiting 
toxicity. In case of overdose, it is recommended that the patient be monitored for any signs or symptoms of 
adverse reactions and appropriate symptomatic treatment be instituted immediately. 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Immunosuppressants, interleukin inhibitors, ATC code: L04AC05 
 
IMULDOSA is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the European 
Medicines Agency http://www.ema.europa.eu 
 
Mechanism of action 
Ustekinumab is a fully human IgG1κ monoclonal antibody that binds with specificity to the shared p40 protein 
subunit of human cytokines interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-23. Ustekinumab inhibits the bioactivity of human IL-12 
and IL-23 by preventing p40 from binding to the IL-12Rβ1 receptor protein expressed on the surface of immune 
cells. Ustekinumab cannot bind to IL-12 or IL-23 that is already bound to IL-12Rβ1 cell surface receptors. Thus, 
ustekinumab is not likely to contribute to complement- or antibody-mediated cytotoxicity of cells with IL-12 
and/or IL-23 receptors. IL-12 and IL-23 are heterodimeric cytokines secreted by activated antigen presenting 
cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells, and both cytokines participate in immune functions; IL-12 
stimulates natural killer (NK) cells and drives the differentiation of CD4+ T cells toward the T helper 1 (Th1) 
phenotype, IL-23 induces the T helper 17 (Th17) pathway. However, abnormal regulation of IL 12 and IL 23 has 
been associated with immune mediated diseases, such as psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease. 
 
By binding the shared p40 subunit of IL-12 and IL-23, ustekinumab may exert its clinical effects in psoriasis, 
psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease through interruption of the Th1 and Th17 cytokine pathways, which are central 
to the pathology of these diseases. 
 
In patients with Crohn’s disease, treatment with ustekinumab resulted in a decrease in inflammatory markers 
including C-Reactive Protein (CRP) and fecal calprotectin during the induction phase, which were then 
maintained throughout the maintenance phase. CRP was assessed during the study extension and the reductions 
observed during maintenance were generally sustained through week 252. 
 
Immunisation 
During the long-term extension of Psoriasis Study 2 (PHOENIX 2), adult patients treated with ustekinumab for at 
least 3.5 years mounted similar antibody responses to both pneumococcal polysaccharide and tetanus vaccines 
as a non-systemically treated psoriasis control group. Similar proportions of adult patients developed protective 

28 
 
levels of anti-pneumococcal and anti- tetanus antibodies and antibody titres were similar among ustekinumab-
treated and control patients. 
 
Clinical efficacy 
Plaque psoriasis (Adults) 
The safety and efficacy of ustekinumab was assessed in 1,996 patients in two randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled studies in patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis and who were candidates for phototherapy 
or systemic therapy. In addition, a randomised, blinded assessor, active-controlled study compared ustekinumab 
and etanercept in patients with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis who had had an inadequate response to, 
intolerance to, or contraindication to ciclosporin, MTX, or PUVA. 
Psoriasis Study 1 (PHOENIX 1) evaluated 766 patients. 53% of these patients were either non- responsive, 
intolerant, or had a contraindication to other systemic therapy. Patients randomised to ustekinumab received 45 
mg or 90 mg doses at Weeks 0 and 4 and followed by the same dose every 12 weeks. Patients randomised to 
receive placebo at Weeks 0 and 4 crossed over to receive ustekinumab (either 45 mg or 90 mg) at Weeks 12 and 
16 followed by dosing every 12 weeks. Patients originally randomised to ustekinumab who achieved Psoriasis 
Area and Severity Index 75 response (PASI improvement of at least 75% relative to baseline) at both Weeks 28 
and 40 were re-randomised to receive ustekinumab every 12 weeks or to placebo (i.e., withdrawal of therapy). 
Patients who were re-randomised to placebo at week 40 reinitiated ustekinumab at their original dosing regimen 
when they experienced at least a 50% loss of their PASI improvement obtained at week 40. All patients were 
followed for up to 76 weeks following first administration of study treatment. 
 
Psoriasis Study 2 (PHOENIX 2) evaluated 1,230 patients. 61% of these patients were either non- responsive, 
intolerant, or had a contraindication to other systemic therapy. Patients randomised to ustekinumab received 45 
mg or 90 mg doses at Weeks 0 and 4 followed by an additional dose at 16 weeks. Patients randomised to receive 
placebo at Weeks 0 and 4 crossed over to receive ustekinumab (either 45 mg or 90 mg) at Weeks 12 and 16. All 
patients were followed for up to 52 weeks following first administration of study treatment. 
 
Psoriasis Study 3 (ACCEPT) evaluated 903 patients with moderate to severe psoriasis who inadequately 
responded to, were intolerant to, or had a contraindication to other systemic therapy and compared the efficacy 
of ustekinumab to etanercept and evaluated the safety of ustekinumab and etanercept. During the 12-week 
active-controlled portion of the study, patients were randomised to receive etanercept (50 mg twice a week), 
ustekinumab 45 mg at Weeks 0 and 4, or ustekinumab 90 mg at Weeks 0 and 4. 
 
Baseline disease characteristics were generally consistent across all treatment groups in Psoriasis Studies 1 and 
2 with a median baseline PASI score from 17 to 18, median baseline Body Surface Area (BSA) ≥ 20, and median 
Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) range from 10 to 12. Approximately one third (Psoriasis Study 1) and 
one quarter (Psoriasis Study 2) of subjects had Psoriatic Arthritis (PsA). Similar disease severity was also seen in 
Psoriasis Study 3. 
 
The primary endpoint in these studies was the proportion of patients who achieved PASI 75 response from 
baseline at week 12 (see Tables 3 and 4). 
 
 
 
Table 3: Summary of clinical response in Psoriasis Study 1 (PHOENIX 1) and Psoriasis Study 2 (PHOENIX 2) 
 
 
Week 12 
2 doses (week 0 and week 4) 
Week 28 
3 doses (week 0, 
week 4 and week 16) 
 
PBO 
45 mg 
90 mg 
45 mg 
90 mg 
Psoriasis Study 1 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of patients 
randomised 
255 
255 
256 
250 
243 
PASI 50 response N (%) 
26 (10%) 
213 (84%)a 
220 (86%)a 
228 (91%) 
234 
(96%) 
PASI 75 response N (%) 
8 (3%) 
171 (67%)a 
170 (66%)a 
178 (71%) 
191 
(79%) 

29 
 
PASI 90 response N (%) 
5 (2%) 
106 (42%)a 
94 (37%)a 
123 (49%) 
135 
(56%) 
PGAb of cleared or 
minimal N (%) 
10 (4%) 
151 (59%)a 
156 (61%)a 
146 (58%) 
160 
(66%) 
Number of patients 
≤ 100 kg  
166 
168 
164 
164 
153 
PASI 75 response N (%) 
6 (4%) 
124 (74%) 
107 (65%) 
130 (79%) 
124 
(81%) 
Number of patients 
> 100 kg  
89 
87 
92 
86 
90 
PASI 75 response N (%) 
2 (2%) 
47 (54%) 
63 (68%) 
48 (56%) 
67 (74%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Psoriasis Study 2 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of patients 
randomised 
410 
409 
411 
397 
400 
PASI 50 response N (%) 
41 (10%) 
342 (84%)a 
367 (89%)a 
369 (93%) 
380 
(95%) 
PASI 75 response N (%) 
15 (4%) 
273 (67%)a 
311 (76%)a 
276 (70%) 
314 
(79%) 
PASI 90 response N (%) 
3 (1%) 
173 (42%)a 
209 (51%)a 
178 (45%) 
217 
(54%) 
PGAb of cleared or 
minimal N (%) 
18 (4%) 
277 (68%)a 
300 (73%)a 
241 (61%) 
279 
(70%) 
Number of patients 
≤ 100 kg  
290 
297 
289 
287 
280 
PASI 75 response N (%) 
12 (4%) 
218 (73%) 
225 (78%) 
217 (76%) 
226 
(81%) 
Number of patients 
> 100 kg  
120 
112 
121 
110 
119 
PASI 75 response N (%) 
3 (3%) 
55 (49%) 
86 (71%) 
59 (54%) 
88 (74%) 
a 
p < 0.001 for ustekinumab 45 mg or 90 mg in comparison with placebo (PBO). 
b 
PGA = Physician Global Assessment 
 
 
Table 4: 
Summary of clinical response at week 12 in Psoriasis Study 3 (ACCEPT) 
Psoriasis Study 3 
Etanercept 
24 doses 
(50 mg twice a week) 
Ustekinumab 
2 doses (week 0 and week 4) 
45 mg 
90 mg 
Number of patients randomised 
347 
209 
347 
PASI 50 response N (%) 
286 (82%) 
181 (87%) 
320 (92%)a 
PASI 75 response N (%) 
197 (57%) 
141 (67%)b 
256 (74%)a 
PASI 90 response N (%) 
80 (23%) 
76 (36%)a 
155 (45%)a 
PGA of cleared or minimal N (%) 
170 (49%) 
136 (65%)a 
245 (71%)a 
Number of patients ≤ 100 kg 
251 
151 
244 
PASI 75 response N (%) 
154 (61%) 
109 (72%) 
189 (77%) 
Number of patients > 100 kg 
96 
58 
103 
PASI 75 response N (%) 
43 (45%) 
32 (55%) 
67 (65%) 
a 
p < 0.001 for ustekinumab 45 mg or 90 mg in comparison with etanercept. 
b 
p = 0.012 for ustekinumab 45 mg in comparison with etanercept. 
 
In Psoriasis Study 1 maintenance of PASI 75 was significantly superior with continuous treatment compared 
with treatment withdrawal (p < 0.001). Similar results were seen with each dose of ustekinumab. At 1 year (week 
52), 89% of patients re-randomised to maintenance treatment were PASI 75 responders compared with 63% of 

30 
 
patients re-randomised to placebo (treatment withdrawal) (p < 0.001). At 18 months (week 76), 84% of patients 
re-randomised to maintenance treatment were PASI 75 responders compared with 19% of patients re-randomised 
to placebo (treatment withdrawal). At 3 years (week 148), 82% of patients re-randomised to maintenance 
treatment were PASI 75 responders. At 5 years (week 244), 80% of patients re- randomised to maintenance 
treatment were PASI 75 responders. 
 
In patients re-randomised to placebo, and who reinitiated their original ustekinumab treatment regimen after loss 
of ≥ 50% of PASI improvement 85% regained PASI 75 response within 12 weeks after re-initiating therapy. 
 
In Psoriasis Study 1, at week 2 and week 12, significantly greater improvements from baseline were 
demonstrated in the DLQI in each ustekinumab treatment group compared with placebo. The improvement was 
sustained through week 28. Similarly, significant improvements were seen in Psoriasis Study 2 at week 4 and 12, 
which were sustained through week 24. In Psoriasis Study 1, improvements in nail psoriasis (Nail Psoriasis 
Severity Index), in the physical and mental component summary scores of the SF-36 and in the Itch Visual 
Analogue Scale (VAS) were also significant in each ustekinumab treatment group compared with placebo. In 
Psoriasis Study 2, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) and Work Limitations Questionnaire 
(WLQ) were also significantly improved in each ustekinumab treatment group compared with placebo. 
 
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) (Adults) 
Ustekinumab has been shown to improve signs and symptoms, physical function and health- related quality of 
life, and reduce the rate of progression of peripheral joint damage in adult patients with active PsA. 
 
The safety and efficacy of ustekinumab was assessed in 927 patients in two randomised, double- blind, 
placebo-controlled studies in patients with active PsA (≥ 5 swollen joints and ≥ 5 tender joints) despite non-
steroidal  anti-inflammatory  (NSAID)  or disease modifying  antirheumatic (DMARD) therapy. Patients in these 
studies had a diagnosis of PsA for at least 6 months. Patients with each subtype of PsA were enrolled, 
including polyarticular arthritis with no evidence of rheumatoid nodules (39%), spondylitis with peripheral 
arthritis (28%), asymmetric peripheral arthritis (21%), distal interphalangeal involvement (12%) and arthritis 
mutilans (0.5%). Over 70% and 40% of the patients in both studies had enthesitis and dactylitis at baseline, 
respectively. Patients were randomised to receive treatment  with ustekinumab  45 mg, 90 mg, or placebo 
subcutaneously at Weeks 0 and 4 followed by every 12 weeks (q12w) dosing. Approximately 50% of patients 
continued on stable doses of MTX (≤ 25 mg/week). 
 
In PsA Study 1 (PSUMMIT I) and PsA Study 2 (PSUMMIT II), 80% and 86% of the patients, respectively, had 
been previously treated with DMARDs. In Study 1 previous treatment with anti-tumour necrosis factor (TNF)α 
agent was not allowed. In Study 2, the majority of patients (58%, n = 180) had been previously treated with one 
or more anti-TNFα agent(s), of whom over 70% had discontinued their anti-TNFα treatment for lack of efficacy 
or intolerance at any time. 
 
Signs and symptoms 
Treatment with ustekinumab resulted in significant improvements in the measures of disease activity compared 
to placebo at week 24. The primary endpoint was the percentage of patients who achieved American College of 
Rheumatology (ACR) 20 response at week 24. The key efficacy results are shown in Table 5 below. 
 
Table 5: 
Number of patients who achieved clinical response in Psoriatic arthritis Study 1 (PSUMMIT I) 
and Study 2 (PSUMMIT II) at week 24 
Psoriatic arthritis Study 1 
Psoriatic arthritis Study 2 
PBO 
45 mg 
90 mg 
PBO 
45 mg 
90 mg 
Number of 
patients 
randomised
206 
205 
204 
104 
103 
105 
ACR 20 response, N 
(%) 
47 (23%) 
87 (42%)a 101 (50%)a 21 (20%) 
45 (44%)a 46 (44%)a 
ACR 50 response, N 
(%) 
18 (9%) 
51 (25%)a 57 (28%)a 7 (7%) 
18 (17%)b 24 (23%)a 
ACR 70 response, N 
(%) 
5 (2%) 
25 (12%)a 29 (14%)a 3 (3%) 
7 (7%)c 
9 (9%)c 

31 
 
Number of patients 
with ≥ 3% BSAd 
146 
145 
149 
80 
80 
81 
PASI 75 response, N 
(%) 
16 (11%) 
83 (57%)a 93 (62%)a 4 (5%) 
41 (51%)a 45 (56%)a 
PASI 90 response, N 
(%) 
4 (3%) 
60 (41%)a
65 (44%)a
3 (4%) 
24 (30%)a
36 (44%)a
Combined PASI 75 
and ACR 20 
response, N (%) 
8 (5%) 
40 (28%)a 62 (42%)a 2 (3%) 
24 (30%)a 31 (38%)a 
Number of patients 
≤ 100 kg 
154 
153 
154 
74 
74 
73 
ACR 20 response, N 
(%) 
39 (25%) 
67 (44%) 
78 (51%) 
17 (23%) 
32 (43%) 
34 (47%) 
Number of patients 
with ≥ 3% BSAd 
105 
105 
111 
54 
58 
57 
PASI 75 response, N 
(%) 
14 (13%) 
64 (61%) 
73 (66%) 
4 (7%) 
31 (53%) 
32 (56%) 
Number of patients 
> 100 kg 
52 
52 
50 
30 
29 
31 
ACR 20 response, N 
(%) 
8 (15%) 
20 (38%) 
23 (46%) 
4 (13%) 
13 (45%) 
12 (39%) 
Number of patients 
with ≥ 3% BSAd 
41 
40 
38 
26 
22 
24 
PASI 75 response, N 
(%) 
2 (5%) 
19 (48%) 
20 (53%) 
0 
10 (45%) 
13 (54%) 
a 
p < 0.001 
b 
p < 0.05 
c 
p = NS 
d 
Number of patients with ≥ 3% BSA psoriasis skin involvement at baseline 
ACR 20, 50 and 70 responses continued to improve or were maintained through week 52 (PsA Study 1 and 2) 
and week 100 (PsA Study 1). In PsA Study 1, ACR 20 responses at week 100 were achieved by 57% and 64%, for 
45 mg and 90 mg, respectively. In PsA Study 2, ACR 20 responses at week 52 were achieved by 47% and 48%, 
for 45 mg and 90 mg, respectively. 
 
The proportion of patients achieving a modified PsA response criteria (PsARC) response was also significantly 
greater in the ustekinumab groups compared to placebo at week 24. PsARC responses were maintained through 
weeks 52 and 100. A higher proportion of patients treated with ustekinumab who had spondylitis with peripheral 
arthritis as their primary presentation, demonstrated 50 and 70 percent improvement in Bath Ankylosing 
Spondylitis Disease Activity Index (BASDAI) scores compared with placebo at week 24. 
 
Responses observed in the ustekinumab treated groups were similar in patients receiving and not receiving 
concomitant MTX, and were maintained through weeks 52 and 100. Patients previously treated with anti-TNFα 
agents who received ustekinumab achieved a greater response at week 24 than patients receiving placebo (ACR 
20 response at week 24 for 45 mg and 90 mg was 37% and 34%, respectively, compared with placebo 15%; p < 
0.05), and responses were maintained through week 52. 
 
For patients with enthesitis and/or dactylitis at baseline, in PsA Study 1 significant improvement in enthesitis 
and dactylitis score was observed in the ustekinumab groups compared with placebo at week 24. In PsA Study 2 
significant improvement in enthesitis score and numerical improvement (not statistically significant) in dactylitis 
score was observed in the ustekinumab 90 mg group compared with placebo at week 24. Improvements in 
enthesitis score and dactylitis score were maintained through weeks 52 and 100. 
 
Radiographic Response 
Structural damage in both hands and feet was expressed as change in total van der Heijde-Sharp score (vdH-S 
score), modified for PsA by addition of hand distal interphalangeal joints, compared to baseline. A pre-specified 
integrated analysis combining data from 927 subjects in both PsA Study 1 and 2 was performed. Ustekinumab 

32 
 
demonstrated a statistically significant decrease in the rate of progression of structural damage compared to 
placebo, as measured by change from baseline to week 24 in the total modified vdH-S score (mean ± SD score 
was 0.97 ± 3.85 in the placebo group compared with 0.40 ± 2.11 and 0.39 ± 2.40 in the ustekinumab 45 mg (p < 
0.05) and 90 mg (p < 0.001) groups, respectively). This effect was driven by PsA Study 1. The effect is 
considered demonstrated irrespective of concomitant MTX use, and was maintained through Weeks 52 
(integrated analysis) and 100 (PsA Study 1). 
 
Physical function and health-related quality of life 
Ustekinumab-treated patients showed significant improvement in physical function as assessed by the Disability 
Index of the Health Assessment Questionnaire (HAQ-DI) at week 24. The proportion of patients achieving a 
clinically meaningful ≥ 0.3 improvement in HAQ-DI score from baseline was also significantly greater in the 
ustekinumab groups when compared with placebo. Improvement in HAQ-DI score from baseline was maintained 
through Weeks 52 and 100. 
 
There was significant improvement in DLQI scores in the ustekinumab groups as compared with placebo at 
week 24, which was maintained through weeks 52 and 100. In PsA Study 2 there was a significant improvement 
in Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Fatigue (FACIT-F) scores in the ustekinumab groups 
when compared with placebo at week 24. The proportion of patients achieving a clinically significant 
improvement in fatigue (4 points in FACIT-F) was also significantly greater in the ustekinumab groups compared 
with placebo. Improvements in FACIT scores were maintained through week 52. 
 
Paediatric population 
The European Medicines Agency has deferred the obligation to submit the results of studies with ustekinumab in 
one or more subsets of the paediatric population with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (see section 4.2 for information 
on paediatric use). 
 
Paediatric plaque psoriasis 
Ustekinumab has been shown to improve signs and symptoms, and health-related quality of life in paediatric 
patients 6 years and older with plaque psoriasis. 
 
Adolescent patients (12-17 years) 
The efficacy of ustekinumab was studied in 110 paediatric patients aged 12 to 17 years with moderate to severe 
plaque psoriasis in a multicentre, phase 3, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study (CADMUS). 
Patients were randomised to receive either placebo (n =37), or the recommended dose of ustekinumab (see 
section 4.2; n = 36) or half of the recommended dose of ustekinumab (n = 37) by subcutaneous injection at 
Weeks 0 and 4 followed by every 12 week (q12w) dosing. At week 12, placebo-treated patients crossed over to 
receive ustekinumab. 
 
Patients with PASI ≥ 12, PGA ≥ 3 and BSA involvement of at least 10%, who were candidates for systemic 
therapy or phototherapy, were eligible for the study. Approximately 60% of the patients had prior exposure to 
conventional systemic therapy or phototherapy. Approximately 
11% of the patients had prior exposure to biologics. 
 
The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients who achieved a PGA score of cleared (0) or minimal (1) at 
week 12. Secondary endpoints included PASI 75, PASI 90, change from baseline in Children’s Dermatology 
Life Quality Index (CDLQI), change from baseline in the total scale score of PedsQL (Paediatric Quality of Life 
Inventory) at week 12. At week 12, subjects treated with ustekinumab showed significantly greater improvement 
in their psoriasis and health-related quality of life compared with placebo (Table 6). 
 
All patients were followed for efficacy for up to 52 weeks following first administration of study agent. The 
proportion of patients with a PGA score of cleared (0) or minimal (1) and the proportion achieving PASI 75 
showed separation between the ustekinumab treated group and placebo at the first post-baseline visit at week 4, 
reaching a maximum by week 12. Improvements in PGA, PASI, CDLQI and PedsQL were maintained through 
week 52 (Table 6). 
Table 6: 
Summary of primary and secondary endpoints at week 12 and week 52 
 
Paediatric psoriasis study (CADMUS) (Age 12-17) 

33 
 
Week 12 
Week 52 
Placebo 
Recommended dose 
of Ustekinumab 
Recommended dose 
of Ustekinumab 
N (%) 
N (%) 
N (%) 
Patients randomised 
37 
36 
35 
PGA 
PGA of cleared (0) or minimal 
(1) 
2 (5.4%) 
25 (69.4%)a 
20 (57.1%) 
PGA of Cleared (0) 
1 (2.7%) 
17 (47.2%)a 
13 (37.1%) 
PASI 
PASI 75 responders 
4 (10.8%) 
29 (80.6%)a 
28 (80.0%) 
PASI 90 responders 
2 (5.4%) 
22 (61.1%)a 
23 (65.7%) 
PASI 100 responders 
1 (2.7%) 
14 (38.9%)a 
13 (37.1%) 
CDLQI 
CDLQI of 0 or 1b 
6 (16.2%) 
18 (50.0%)c 
20 (57.1%) 
PedsQL 
Change from baseline Mean 
(SD)d 
3.35 (10.04) 
8.03 (10.44)e 
7.26 (10.92) 
a p < 0.001 
b 
CDLQI: The CDLQI is a dermatology instrument to assess the effect of a skin problem on the 
health-related quality of life in the paediatric population. CDLQI of 0 or 1 indicates no effect on 
child’s quality of life. 
c 
p = 0.002 
d 
PedsQL: The PedsQL Total Scale Score is a general health-related quality of life measure developed 
for use in children and adolescent populations. For the placebo group at week 12, N = 36 
e 
p = 0.028 
 
During the placebo-controlled period through week 12, the efficacy of both the recommended and half of the 
recommended dose groups were generally comparable at the primary endpoint (69.4% and 67.6% respectively) 
although there was evidence of a dose response for higher level efficacy criteria (e.g. PGA of cleared (0), PASI 
90). Beyond week 12, efficacy was generally higher and better sustained in the recommended dose group 
compared with half of the recommended dosage group in which a modest loss of efficacy was more frequently 
observed toward the end of each 12 week dosing interval. The safety profiles of the recommended dose and half 
of the recommended dose were comparable. 
 
Children (6-11 years) 
The efficacy of ustekinumab was studied in 44 paediatric patients aged 6 to 11 years with moderate to severe 
plaque psoriasis in an open label, single-arm, multicentre, phase 3, study (CADMUS Jr.). 
Patients were treated with the recommended dose of ustekinumab (see section 4.2; n = 44) by subcutaneous 
injection at weeks 0 and 4 followed by every 12 week (q12w) dosing. 
 
Patients with PASI ≥ 12, PGA ≥ 3 and BSA involvement of at least 10%, who were candidates for systemic 
therapy or phototherapy, were eligible for the study. Approximately 43% of the patients had prior exposure to 
conventional systemic therapy or phototherapy. Approximately 5% of the patients had prior exposure to 
biologics. 
 
The primary endpoint was the proportion of patients who achieved a PGA score of cleared (0) or minimal (1) at 
week 12. Secondary endpoints included PASI 75, PASI 90, and change from baseline in Children’s Dermatology 
Life Quality Index (CDLQI) at week 12. At week 12, subjects treated with ustekinumab showed clinically 
meaningful improvements in their psoriasis and health-related quality of life (Table 7). 
 
All patients were followed for efficacy for up to 52 weeks following first administration of study agent. The 
proportion of patients with a PGA score of cleared (0) or minimal (1) at week 12 was 77.3%. Efficacy (defined 
as PGA 0 or 1) was observed as early as the first post-baseline visit at week 4 and the proportion of subjects who 
achieved a PGA score of 0 or 1 increased through week 16 and then remained relatively stable through week 52. 
Improvements in PGA, PASI, and CDLQI were maintained through week 52 (Table 7). 

34 
 
 
Table 7: 
Summary of primary and secondary endpoints at week 12 and week 52 
Paediatric psoriasis study (CADMUS Jr.) (Age 6-11) 
Week 12 
Week 52 
Recommended dose of 
Ustekinumab 
Recommended dose of 
Ustekinumab 
N (%) 
N (%) 
Patients enrolled 
44 
41 
PGA 
PGA of cleared (0) or minimal 
(1) 
34 (77.3%) 
31 (75.6%) 
PGA of cleared (0) 
17 (38.6%) 
23 (56.1%) 
PASI 
PASI 75 responders 
37 (84.1%) 
36 (87.8%) 
PASI 90 responders 
28 (63.6%) 
29 (70.7%) 
PASI 100 responders 
15 (34.1%) 
22 (53.7%) 
CDLQIa 
Patients with a CDLQI > 1 at baseline (N=39) 
(N=36) 
CDLQI of 0 or 1 
24 (61.5%) 
21 (58.3%) 
a 
CDLQI: The CDLQI is a dermatology instrument to assess the effect of a skin problem on the health-
related quality of life in the paediatric population. CDLQI of 0 or 1 indicates no effect on child’s quality 
of life. 
 
Crohn’s Disease 
The safety and efficacy of ustekinumab was assessed in three randomised, double-blind, placebo- controlled, 
multicentre studies in adult patients with moderately to severely active Crohn’s disease (Crohn’s Disease 
Activity Index [CDAI] score of ≥ 220 and ≤ 450). The clinical development program consisted of two 8-week 
intravenous induction studies (UNITI-1 and UNITI-2) followed by a 44-week subcutaneous randomised 
withdrawal maintenance study (IM- UNITI) representing 52 weeks of therapy. 
 
The induction studies included 1409 (UNITI-1, n = 769; UNITI-2 n = 640) patients. The primary endpoint for 
both induction studies was the proportion of subjects in clinical response (defined as a reduction in CDAI score 
of ≥ 100 points) at week 6. Efficacy data were collected and analyzed through week 8 for both studies. 
Concomitant doses of oral corticosteroids, immunomodulators, aminosalicylates and antibiotics were permitted 
and 75% of patients continued to receive at least one of these medications. In both studies, patients were 
randomised to receive a single intravenous administration of either the recommended tiered dose of 
approximately 6 mg/kg (see section 4.2 of the IMULDOSA 130 mg Concentrate for solution for infusion SmPC), 
a fixed dose of 130 mg ustekinumab, or placebo at week 0. 
 
Patients in UNITI-1 had failed or were intolerant to prior anti-TNFα therapy. Approximately 
48% of the patients had failed 1 prior anti-TNFα therapy and 52% had failed 2 or 3 prior anti- TNFα therapies. 
In this study, 29.1% of the patients had an inadequate initial response (primary non-responders), 69.4% 
responded but lost response (secondary non-responders), and 36.4% were intolerant to anti- TNFα therapies. 
 
Patients in UNITI-2 had failed at least one conventional therapy, including corticosteroids or immunomodulators, 
and were either anti-TNF-α naïve (68.6%) or had previously received but not failed anti-TNFα therapy (31.4%). 
 
In both UNITI-1 and UNITI-2, a significantly greater proportion of patients were in clinical response and 
remission in the ustekinumab treated group compared to placebo (Table 8). Clinical response and remission were 
significant as early as week 3 in ustekinumab treated patients and continued to improve through week 8. In these 
induction studies, efficacy was higher and better sustained in the tiered dose group compared to the 130 mg dose 
group, and tiered dosing is therefore the recommended intravenous induction dose. 
Table 8: 
Induction of Clinical Response and Remission in UNITI-1 and UNITI 2 
UNITI-1* 
UNITI-2** 

35 
 
Placebo 
N = 247 
Recommended 
dose of 
ustekinumab N 
= 249 
Placebo 
N = 209 
Recommended 
dose of 
ustekinumab N 
= 209 
Clinical Remission, week 8 
18 (7.3%) 
52 (20.9%)a 
41 (19.6%) 84 (40.2%)a 
Clinical Response (100 point), week 6 
53 (21.5%) 84 (33.7%)b 
60 (28.7%) 116 (55.5%)a 
Clinical Response (100 point), week 8 
50 (20.2%) 94 (37.8%)a 
67 (32.1%) 121 (57.9%)a 
70 Point Response, week 3 
67 (27.1%) 101 (40.6%)b 
66 (31.6%) 106 (50.7%)a 
70 Point Response, week 6 
75 (30.4%) 109 (43.8%)b 
81 (38.8%) 135 (64.6%)a 
Clinical remission is defined as CDAI score < 150; Clinical response is defined as reduction in CDAI score by at 
least 100 points or being in clinical remission 
70 point response is defined as reduction in CDAI score by at least 70 points 
* 
Anti-TNFα failures 
** 
Conventional therapy failures 
a 
p < 0.001 
b 
p < 0.01 
The maintenance study (IM-UNITI), evaluated 388 patients who achieved 100 point clinical response at week 8 
of induction with ustekinumab in studies UNITI-1 and UNITI-2. Patients were randomised to receive a 
subcutaneous maintenance regimen of either 90 mg ustekinumab every 8 weeks, 90 mg ustekinumab every 12 
weeks or placebo for 44 weeks (for recommended maintenance posology, see section 4.2). 
Significantly higher proportions of patients maintained clinical remission and response in the ustekinumab treated 
groups compared to the placebo group at week 44 (see Table 9). 
 
Table 9: Maintenance of Clinical Response and Remission in IM-UNITI (week 44; 52 weeks from initiation of the 
induction dose) 
Placebo* 
N = 131† 
90 mg 
ustekinumab 
every 8 weeks 
N = 128† 
90 mg 
ustekinumab 
every 12 weeks 
N = 129† 
Clinical Remission 
36% 
53%a 
49%b 
Clinical Response 
44% 
59%b 
58%b 
Corticosteroid-Free Clinical Remission 
30% 
47%a 
43%c 
Clinical Remission in patients: 
in remission at the start of maintenance 
therapy 
46% (36/79) 67% (52/78)a 
56% (44/78) 
who entered from study CRD3002‡ 
44% (31/70) 63% (45/72)c 
57% (41/72) 
who are Anti-TNFα naïve 
49% (25/51) 65% (34/52)c 
57% (30/53) 
who entered from study CRD3001§ 
26% (16/61) 41% (23/56) 
39% (22/57) 
Clinical remission is defined as CDAI score < 150; Clinical response is defined as reduction in CDAI of at least 
100 points or being in clinical remission 
* 
The placebo group consisted of patients who were in response to ustekinumab and were randomised to 
receive placebo at the start of maintenance therapy. 
† 
Patients who were in 100 point clinical response to ustekinumab at start of maintenance therapy 
‡ 
Patients who failed conventional therapy but not anti-TNFα therapy 
§ 
Patients who are anti-TNFα refractory/intolerant 
a 
p < 0.01 
b 
p < 0.05 
c 
nominally significant (p < 0.05) 
 
In IM-UNITI, 29 of 129 patients did not maintain response to ustekinumab when treated every 12 weeks and were 
allowed to dose adjust to receive ustekinumab every 8 weeks. Loss of response was defined as a CDAI score ≥ 
220 points and a ≥ 100 point increase from the CDAI score at baseline. In these patients, clinical remission was 
achieved in 41.4% of patients 16 weeks after dose adjustment. 
 
 

36 
 
Patients who were not in clinical response to ustekinumab induction at week 8 of the UNITI-1 and UNITI-2 
induction studies (476 patients) entered into the non-randomised portion of the maintenance study (IM-UNITI) 
and received a 90 mg subcutaneous injection of ustekinumab at that time. Eight weeks later, 50.5% of the 
patients achieved clinical response and continued to receive maintenance dosing every 8 weeks; among these 
patients with continued maintenance dosing, a majority maintained response (68.1%) and achieved remission 
(50.2%) at week 44, at proportions that were similar to the patients who initially responded to ustekinumab 
induction. 
 
Of 131 patients who responded to ustekinumab induction, and were randomised to the placebo group at the start 
of the maintenance study, 51 subsequently lost response and received 90 mg ustekinumab subcutaneously every 
8 weeks. The majority of patients who lost response and resumed ustekinumab did so within 24 weeks of the 
induction infusion. Of these 51 patients, 
70.6% achieved clinical response and 39.2% percent achieved clinical remission 16 weeks after receiving the 
first subcutaneous dose of ustekinumab. 
 
In IM-UNITI, patients who completed the study through week 44 were eligible to continue treatment in a study 
extension. Among the 567 patients who entered on and were treated with ustekinumab in the study extension, 
clinical remission and response were generally maintained through week 252 for both patients who failed TNF-
therapies and those who failed conventional therapies. 
No new safety concerns were identified in this study extension with up to 5 years of treatment in patients with 
Crohn’s Disease. 
 
Endoscopy 
Endoscopic appearance of the mucosa was evaluated in 252 patients with eligible baseline endoscopic disease 
activity in a substudy. The primary endpoint was change from baseline in Simplified Endoscopic Disease 
Severity Score for Crohn’s Disease (SES-CD), a composite score across 5 ileo- colonic segments of 
presence/size of ulcers, proportion of mucosal surface covered by ulcers, proportion of mucosal surface affected 
by any other lesions and presence/type of narrowing/strictures. At week 8, after a single intravenous induction 
dose, the change in SES-CD score was greater in the ustekinumab group (n = 155, mean change = -2.8) than in 
the placebo group (n = 97, mean change = -0.7, p = 0.012). 
 
Fistula Response 
In a subgroup of patients with draining fistulas at baseline (8.8%; n = 26), 12/15 (80%) of ustekinumab-treated 
patients achieved a fistula response over 44 weeks (defined as ≥ 50% reduction from baseline of the induction 
study in the number of draining fistulas) compared to 
5/11 (45.5%) exposed to placebo. 
 
Health-related quality of life 
Health-related quality of life was assessed by Inflammatory Bowel Disease Questionnaire (IBDQ) and SF-36 
questionnaires. At week 8, patients receiving ustekinumab showed statistically significantly greater and 
clinically meaningful improvements on IBDQ total score and SF-36 Mental Component Summary Score in both 
UNITI-1 and UNITI-2, and SF-36 Physical Component Summary Score in UNITI-2, when compared to placebo. 
These improvements were generally better maintained in ustekinumab-treated patients in the IM-UNITI study 
through week 44 when compared to placebo. Improvement in health-related quality of life was generally 
maintained during the extension through week 252. 
 
Immunogenicity 
Antibodies to ustekinumab may develop during ustekinumab treatment and most are neutralising. The formation 
of anti-ustekinumab antibodies is associated with both increased clearance and reduced efficacy of ustekinumab, 
except in patients with Crohn’s disease where no reduced efficacy was observed. There is no apparent 
correlation between the presence of anti-ustekinumab antibodies and the occurrence of injection site reactions. 
 
Paediatric population 
The European Medicines Agency has deferred the obligation to submit the results of studies with ustekinumab in 
one or more subsets of the paediatric population in Crohn’s Disease (see section 4.2 for information on paediatric 
use). 
 

37 
 
Paediatric Crohn’s disease 
The safety and efficacy of ustekinumab was evaluated in 48 paediatric patients weighing at least 40 kg, 
in an interim analysis of a multicentre phase 3 study (UNITI-Jr) for paediatric patients with moderately 
to severely active Crohn's disease (defined by a Paediatric Crohn’s Disease Activity Index [PCDAI] 
score >30) through 52 weeks of treatment (8 weeks of induction and 44 weeks of maintenance 
treatment). Patients included in the study either had not adequately responded to or had not tolerated 
prior biologic therapy or conventional therapy for Crohn’s disease. The study included an open-label 
induction treatment with a single ustekinumab intravenous dose, of approximately 6 mg/kg (see 
section 4.2), followed by a randomised double-blind subcutaneous maintenance regimen of 90 mg 
ustekinumab administered either every 8 weeks or every 12 weeks. 
 
Efficacy results 
The primary endpoint of the study was clinical remission at induction week 8 (defined as PCDAI score 
≤ 10). The proportion of patients who achieved clinical remission was 52.1% (25/48) and is 
comparable to that observed in the adult ustekinumab phase 3 studies. 
 
Clinical response was observed as early as week 3. The proportion of patients in clinical response at 
week 8 (defined as a reduction from baseline in the PCDAI score of >12.5 points with a total PCDAI 
score not more than 30) was 93.8% (45/48). 
 
Table 10 presents the analyses for the secondary endpoints through maintenance week 44. 
 
Table 10: 
Summary of Secondary endpoints through Maintenance week 44 
90 mg 
ustekinumab 
every 8 weeks 
N = 23 
90 mg 
ustekinumab 
every 12 weeks 
N = 25 
Total number of 
patients 
N = 48 
Clinical Remission *  
43.5% (10/23) 
60.0% (15/25) 
52.1% (25/48) 
Corticosteroid-free Clinical 
Remission §  
43.5% (10/23) 
60.0% (15/25) 
 
52.1% (25/48) 
Clinical remission for patients who 
were in clinical remission at 
induction week 8 *  
64.3% (9/14) 
54.5% (6/11) 
60.0% (15/25) 
Clinical Response †  
52.2% (12/23) 
60.0% (15/25) 
56.3% (27/48) 
Endoscopic response £  
22.7% (5/22) 
28.0% (7/25) 
25.5% (12/47) 
* 
Clinical remission is defined as PCDAI score ≤10 points. 
§ 
Corticosteroid-free remission is defined as PCDAI score of ≤10 points and not receiving corticosteroids for at 
least 90 days prior to Week M-44. 
† 
Clinical response is defined as a reduction from baseline in the PCDAI score of ≥12.5 points with a total PCDAI 
score not more than 30. 
£ 
Endoscopic response is defined as a reduction in the SES-CD score of ≥50% or SES-CD score ≤2, in patients 
with a baseline SES-CD score of ≥3. 
 
Dosing frequency adjustment 
Patients who entered the maintenance regimen and experienced loss of response (LOR) based on 
PCDAI score were eligible for dose adjustment. Patients were either switched from treatment every 12 
weeks to every 8 weeks or stayed on treatment every 8 weeks (sham adjustment). 2 patients were dose 
adjusted to the shorter dosing interval. In these patients, clinical remission was achieved in 100% (2/2) 
of patients 8 weeks after dose adjustment. 
 
The safety profile of the induction dose regimen and both maintenance dose regimens in the paediatric 
population weighing at least 40 kg is comparable with that established in the adult Crohn’s disease 
population (see Section 4.8). 
 
Serum and faecal inflammatory biomarkers 
The mean change from baseline at maintenance week 44 in C-Reactive protein (CRP) and faecal 

38 
 
calprotectin concentrations were -11.17 mg/L (24.159) and -538.2 mg/kg (1271.33), respectively. 
 
Health-related quality of life 
The total IMPACT-III scores and all subdomains (bowel symptoms, fatigue-related systemic 
symptoms, and well-being) demonstrated clinically meaningful improvements after 52 weeks. 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
Absorption 
The median time to reach the maximum serum concentration (tmax) was 8.5 days after a single 90 mg 
subcutaneous administration in healthy subjects. The median tmax values of ustekinumab following a single 
subcutaneous administration of either 45 mg or 90 mg in patients with psoriasis were comparable to those 
observed in healthy subjects. 
 
The absolute bioavailability of ustekinumab following a single subcutaneous administration was estimated to be 
57.2% in patients with psoriasis. 
 
Distribution 
Median volume of distribution during the terminal phase (Vz) following a single intravenous administration to 
patients with psoriasis ranged from 57 to 83 mL/kg. 
 
Biotransformation 
The exact metabolic pathway for ustekinumab is unknown. 
 
Elimination 
Median systemic clearance (CL) following a single intravenous administration to patients with psoriasis ranged 
from 1.99 to 2.34 mL/day/kg. Median half-life (t1/2) of ustekinumab was approximately 3 weeks in patients with 
psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, Crohn’s disease, ranging from 15 to 32 days across all psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis 
studies. In a population pharmacokinetic analysis, the apparent clearance (CL/F) and apparent volume of 
distribution (V/F) were 0.465 l/day and 15.7 l, respectively, in patients with psoriasis. The CL/F of ustekinumab 
was not impacted by gender. Population pharmacokinetic analysis showed that there was a trend towards a higher 
clearance of ustekinumab in patients who tested positive for antibodies to ustekinumab. 
 
Dose linearity 
The systemic exposure of ustekinumab (Cmax and AUC) increased in an approximately dose- proportional 
manner after a single intravenous administration at doses ranging from 0.09 mg/kg to 
4.5 mg/kg or following a single subcutaneous administration at doses ranging from approximately 
24 mg to 240 mg in patients with psoriasis. 
 
Single dose versus multiple doses 
Serum concentration-time profiles of ustekinumab were generally predictable after single or multiple 
subcutaneous dose administrations. In patients with psoriasis, steady-state serum concentrations of ustekinumab 
were achieved by week 28 after initial subcutaneous doses at Weeks 0 and 4 followed by doses every 12 weeks. 
The median steady-state trough concentration ranged from 0.21 μg/mL to 0.26 μg/mL (45 mg) and from 0.47 
μg/mL to 0.49 μg/mL (90 mg). There was no apparent accumulation in serum ustekinumab concentration over 
time when given subcutaneously every 12 weeks. 
In patients with Crohn’s disease, following an intravenous dose of ~6 mg/kg, starting at week 8, subcutaneous 
maintenance dosing of 90 mg ustekinumab was administered every 8 or 12 weeks. Steady state ustekinumab 
concentration was achieved by the start of the second maintenance dose. In patients with Crohn’s disease, median 
steady-state trough concentrations ranged from 1.97 μg/mL to 2.24 μg/mL and from 0.61 μg/mL to 0.76 μg/mL 
for 90 mg ustekinumab every 8 weeks or every 12 weeks respectively.  
 
Impact of weight on pharmacokinetics 
In a population pharmacokinetic analysis using data from patients with psoriasis, body weight was found to be 
the most significant covariate affecting the clearance of ustekinumab. The median CL/F in patients with weight > 
100 kg was approximately 55% higher compared to patients with weight ≤ 100 kg. The median V/F in patients 

39 
 
with weight > 100 kg was approximately 37% higher as compared to patients with weight ≤ 100 kg. The median 
trough serum concentrations of ustekinumab in patients with higher weight (> 100 kg) in the 90 mg group were 
comparable to those in patients with lower weight (≤ 100 kg) in the 45 mg group. Similar results were obtained 
from a confirmatory population pharmacokinetic analysis using data from patients with psoriatic arthritis. 
 
Dosing frequency adjustment 
In patients with Crohn’s disease, based on observed data and population PK analyses, randomised subjects who 
lost response to treatment had lower serum ustekinumab concentrations over time compared with subjects who 
did not lose response. In Crohn’s disease, dose adjustment from 90 mg every 12 weeks to 90 mg every 8 weeks 
was associated with an increase in trough serum ustekinumab concentrations and an accompanying increase in 
efficacy.  
 
Special populations 
No pharmacokinetic data are available in patients with impaired renal or hepatic function. No specific studies 
have been conducted in elderly patients. 
 
The pharmacokinetics of ustekinumab were generally comparable between Asian and non-Asian patients with 
psoriasis. 
 
In patients with Crohn’s disease, variability in ustekinumab clearance was affected by body weight, serum 
albumin level, sex, and antibody to ustekinumab status while body weight was the main covariate affecting the 
volume of distribution. Additionally in Crohn’s disease, clearance was affected by C-reactive protein, TNF 
antagonist failure status and race (Asian versus non-Asian). The impact of these covariates was within ± 20% of 
the typical or reference value of the respective PK parameter, thus dose adjustment is not warranted for these 
covariates. Concomitant use of immunomodulators did not have a significant impact on ustekinumab 
disposition. 
 
In the population pharmacokinetic analysis, there were no indications of an effect of tobacco or alcohol on the 
pharmacokinetics of ustekinumab. 
 
Serum ustekinumab concentrations in paediatric psoriasis patients 6 to 17 years of age, treated with the 
recommended weight-based dose were generally comparable to those in the adult psoriasis population treated 
with the adult dose. Serum ustekinumab concentrations in paediatric psoriasis patients 12-17 years of age 
(CADMUS) treated with half of the recommended weight- based dose were generally lower than those in adults. 
 
The steady-state serum concentration in paediatric patients with Crohn’s disease weighing at least 40 
kg were comparable to those in the adult Crohn’s disease population. 
 
Regulation of CYP450 enzymes 
The effects of IL-12 or IL-23 on the regulation of CYP450 enzymes were evaluated in an in vitro study using 
human hepatocytes, which showed that IL-12 and/or IL-23 at levels of 10 ng/mL did not alter human CYP450 
enzyme activities (CYP1A2, 2B6, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, or 3A4; see section 4.5). A phase 1, open-label, drug 
interaction study, Study CNTO1275CRD1003, was conducted to evaluate the effect of ustekinumab on 
cytochrome P450 enzyme activities following induction and maintenance dosing in patients with 
active Crohn’s disease (n=18). No clinically significant changes in exposure of caffeine (CYP1A2 
substrate), warfarin (CYP2C9 substrate), omeprazole (CYP2C19 substrate), dextromethorphan 
(CYP2D6 substrate), or midazolam (CYP3A substrate) were observed when used concomitantly with 
ustekinumab at the approved recommended dosing in patients with Crohn’s disease (see section 4.5). 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
Non-clinical data reveal no special hazard (e.g. organ toxicity) for humans based on studies of repeated-dose 
toxicity and developmental and reproductive toxicity, including safety pharmacology evaluations. In 
developmental and reproductive toxicity studies in cynomolgus monkeys, neither adverse effects on male 
fertility indices nor birth defects or developmental toxicity were observed. No adverse effects on female fertility 
indices were observed using an analogous antibody to IL-12/23 in mice. 
Dose levels in animal studies were up to approximately 45-fold higher than the highest equivalent dose intended 

40 
 
to be administered to psoriasis patients and resulted in peak serum concentrations in monkeys that were more 
than 100-fold higher than observed in humans. 
 
Carcinogenicity studies were not performed with ustekinumab due to the lack of appropriate models for an 
antibody with no cross-reactivity to rodent IL-12/23 p40. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
L-histidine 
L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate 
Polysorbate 80 (E433) 
Sucrose 
Water for injections 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal products. 
6.3 
Shelf life 
IMULDOSA 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 3 years. 
 
IMULDOSA 90 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 3 years. 
 
Individual pre-filled syringes may be stored at room temperature up to 30°C for a maximum single period of up 
to 30 days in the original carton in order to protect from light. Record the date when the pre-filled syringe is first 
removed from the refrigerator and the discard date in the space provided on the outer carton. The discard date 
must not exceed the original expiry date printed on the carton. Once a syringe has been stored at room 
temperature (up to 30°C), it should not be returned to the refrigerator. Discard the syringe if not used within 30 
days at room temperature storage or by the original expiry date, whichever is earlier. 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C – 8°C). Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
If needed, individual pre-filled syringes may be stored at room temperature up to 30°C (see section 6.3). 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
IMULDOSA 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
0.5 mL solution in a type I glass 1 mL syringe with a fixed stainless-steel 29-gauge needle, extended finger 
flanges and a needle cover with an elastomeric needle shield and a plastic rigid needle shield. The syringe is fitted 
with automatic needle guard. 
 
IMULDOSA 90 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
1 mL solution in a type I glass 1 mL syringe with a fixed stainless-steel 29-gauge needle, extended 
finger flanges and a needle cover with an elastomeric needle shield and a plastic rigid needle shield. 
The syringe is fitted with automatic needle guard. 
IMULDOSA is available in a pack of 1 pre-filled syringe. 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
The solution in the IMULDOSA pre-filled syringe should not be shaken. The solution should be visually 
inspected for particulate matter or discolouration prior to subcutaneous administration. The solution is 

41 
 
colourless to slightly yellow and clear to slightly opalescent. This appearance is not unusual for proteinaceous 
solutions. The medicinal product should not be used if the solution is discoloured or cloudy, or if foreign 
particulate matter is present. Before administration, IMULDOSA should be allowed to reach room temperature 
(approximately half an hour). Detailed instructions for use are provided in the package leaflet. 
 
IMULDOSA does not contain preservatives; therefore any unused medicinal product remaining in the syringe 
should not be used. IMULDOSA is supplied as a sterile, single- use pre-filled syringe. The syringe and needle 
must never be re-used. Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance 
with local requirements. 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U. 
World Trade Center, Moll de Barcelona, s/n 
Edifici Est, 6a Planta 
08039 Barcelona 
Spain 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
  
EU/1/24/1872/001 
EU/1/24/1872/002 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorization: 12 December 2024 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European 
Medicines Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu/ 

42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURERS OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE 
AND MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND 
USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE 
AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 

43 
 
A. MANUFACTURERS OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturers of the biological active substance 
 
STgen Bio Co., Ltd. 
45, Jisikgiban-ro, Yeonsu-gu,  
Incheon-si, Republic of Korea 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release 
 
Accord Healthcare Polska Sp. z.o.o. 
ul. Lutomierska 50, 
95-200, Pabianice, Poland 
Accord Healthcare B.V. 
Winthontlaan 200, 
3526 KV Utrecht, Netherlands 
 
The printed package leaflet of the medicinal product must state the name and address of the 
manufacturer responsible for the release of the concerned batch. 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (see Annex I: Summary of Product 
Characteristics, section 4.2). 
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
•  
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union reference 
dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any subsequent updates 
published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE 
OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
•  
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance activities and 
interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the marketing authorisation and any 
agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
•  
At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
•  
Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information being 
received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of an important 
(pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 

44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 

45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 

46 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
OUTER CARTON (130 mg) 
 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
IMULDOSA 130 mg concentrate for solution for infusion  
ustekinumab 
 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
 
Each vial contains 130 mg of ustekinumab in 26 mL. 
 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
Excipients: EDTA disodium salt dihydrate, L-histidine, L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, L-methionine, 
polysorbate 80, sucrose, water for injection. 
 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
Concentrate for Solution for infusion 
130 mg/26 mL 
1 vial 
 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Do not shake. 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
For single use only. 
Intravenous use after dilution. 
 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE 
SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 

47 
 
 
Store in a refrigerator. 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the vial in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR 
WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U. 
World Trade Center, Moll de Barcelona, s/n 
Edifici Est, 6a Planta 
08039 Barcelona 
Spain 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
 
EU/1/24/1872/003 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
Justification for not including Braille accepted. 
 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC  
SN  
NN 

48 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
VIAL LABEL (130 mg) 
 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
IMULDOSA 130 mg concentrate for solution for infusion  
ustekinumab 
 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
 
Each vial contains 130 mg of ustekinumab in 26 mL. 
 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
Excipients: EDTA disodium salt dihydrate, L-histidine, L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, L-methionine, 
polysorbate 80, sucrose, water for injection. 
 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
Concentrate for Solution for infusion 
130 mg/26 mL 
1 vial 
 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Do not shake. 
Read the package leaflet before use. For single use only. 
Intravenous use after dilution. 
 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE 
SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 

49 
 
Store in a refrigerator. Do not freeze. 
Keep the vial in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR 
WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U. 
World Trade Center, Moll de Barcelona, s/n 
Edifici Est, 6a Planta 
08039 Barcelona 
Spain 
 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
 
EU/1/24/1872/003 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
  
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 

50 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE OUTER CARTON (45 mg) 
 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
IMULDOSA 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe  
ustekinumab 
 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
 
Each pre-filled syringe contains 45 mg of ustekinumab in 0.5 mL. 
 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
Excipients: Sucrose, L-histidine, L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, polysorbate 80, water for injections. See 
the package leaflet for further information. 
 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
45 mg/0.5 mL 
1 pre-filled syringe 
 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Do not shake. Subcutaneous use. 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE 
SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
Discard date, if stored at room temperature:   
 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 
Store in a refrigerator. Do not freeze. 

51 
 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
Can be stored at room temperature (up to 30°C) for a single period up to 30 days, but not exceeding the original 
expiry date. 
 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR 
WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U. 
World Trade Center, Moll De Barcelona, s/n 
Edifici Est, 6a Planta 
08039 Barcelona 
Spain 
 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
 
EU/1/24/1872/001 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
IMULDOSA 45 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC  
SN  
NN 

52 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE LABEL (45 mg) 
 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
IMULDOSA 45 mg solution for injection  
ustekinumab 
SC 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
 
45 mg/0.5 mL 
 
 
 
6. 
OTHER 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS 
 
SYRINGE BLISTER (45 mg) 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
IMULDOSA 45 mg solution for injection ustekinumab SC 
 
2. 
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Accord 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
5. 
OTHER 
 
45 mg/0.5 mL 

54 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE OUTER CARTON (90 mg) 
 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
IMULDOSA 90 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe  
ustekinumab 
 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
 
Each pre-filled syringe contains 90 mg of ustekinumab in 1 mL. 
 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
Excipients: Sucrose, L-histidine, L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, polysorbate 80, water for injections. See 
the package leaflet for further information. 
 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
Solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
90 mg/1 mL 
1 pre-filled syringe 
 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Do not shake. Subcutaneous use. 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF THE 
SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
Discard date, if stored at room temperature:   
 
 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 

55 
 
Store in a refrigerator.  
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
Can be stored at room temperature (up to 30°C) for a single period up to 30 days, but not exceeding the original 
expiry date. 
 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR 
WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U. 
World Trade Center, Moll De Barcelona, s/n 
Edifici Est, 6a Planta 
08039 Barcelona 
Spain 
 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
 
EU/1/24/1872/002 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
IMULDOSA 90 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC  
SN  
NN 

56 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE LABEL (90 mg) 
 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
IMULDOSA 90 mg solution for injection  
ustekinumab 
SC 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
 
90 mg/1 mL 
 
 
 
6. 
OTHER 
 
 
 
 

57 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS 
 
SYRINGE BLISTER (90 mg) 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
IMULDOSA 90 mg solution for injection  
ustekinumab 
SC 
 
2. 
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Accord 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
5. 
OTHER 
 
90 mg/1 mL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET 

59 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user 
 
IMULDOSA 130 mg concentrate for solution for infusion 
ustekinumab 
 
▼This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new safety 
information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 for how 
to report side effects. 
 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains important 
information for you. 
 
This leaflet has been written for the person taking the medicine. 
 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects not 
listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What IMULDOSA is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you use IMULDOSA 
3. 
How IMULDOSA will be given 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store IMULDOSA 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What IMULDOSA is and what it is used for 
 
What IMULDOSA is 
IMULDOSA contains the active substance ‘ustekinumab’, a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies are 
proteins that recognise and bind specifically to certain proteins in the body. 
 
IMULDOSA belongs to a group of medicines called ‘immunosuppressants’. These medicines work by 
weakening part of the immune system. 
 
What IMULDOSA is used for 
IMULDOSA is used to treat the following inflammatory diseases: 
•  
Moderate to severe Crohn’s disease - in adults  and children who weigh at least 40 kg 
 
Crohn’s disease 
Crohn’s disease is an inflammatory disease of the bowel. If you have Crohn’s disease you will first be given 
other medicines. If you do not respond well enough or are intolerant to these medicines, you may be given 
IMULDOSA to reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use IMULDOSA  
Do not use IMULDOSA 
•  
If you are allergic to ustekinumab or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in section 6). 
•  
If you have an active infection which your doctor thinks is important. 

60 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
IMULDOSA. 
 
Warnings and precautions 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using IMULDOSA. Your doctor will check how well you are before 
treatment. Make sure you tell your doctor about any illness you have before each treatment. Also tell your 
doctor if you have recently been near anyone who might have tuberculosis. Your doctor will examine you and do 
a test for tuberculosis, before you have IMULDOSA. If your doctor thinks you are at risk of 
tuberculosis, you may be given medicines to treat it. 
 
Look out for serious side effects 
IMULDOSA can cause serious side effects, including allergic reactions and infections. You must look out for 
certain signs of illness while you are taking IMULDOSA. See ‘Serious side effects’ in section 4 for a 
full list of these side effects. 
 
Before you use IMULDOSA tell your doctor: 
•  
If you ever had an allergic reaction to IMULDOSA. Ask your doctor if you are not sure. 
•  
If you have ever had any type of cancer – this is because immunosuppressants like IMULDOSA weaken 
part of the immune system. This may increase the risk of cancer. 
•  
If you have been treated for psoriasis with other biologic medicines (a medicine produced from a biological 
source and usually given by injection) – the risk of cancer may be higher. 
•  
If you have or have had a recent infection or if you have any abnormal skin openings (fistulae). 
•  
If you have any new or changing lesions within psoriasis areas or on normal skin. 
•  
If you are having any other treatment for psoriasis and/or psoriatic arthritis – such as another 
immunosuppressant or phototherapy (when your body is treated with a type of ultraviolet (UV) light). 
These treatments may also weaken part of the immune system. Using these therapies together with 
IMULDOSA has not been studied. However, it is possible it may increase the chance of diseases related 
to a weaker immune system. 
•  
If you are having or have ever had injections to treat allergies – it is not known if IMULDOSA may 
affect these. 
•  
If you are 65 years of age or over – you may be more likely to get infections. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
IMULDOSA. 
 
Some patients have experienced lupus-like reactions including skin lupus or lupus-like syndrome during 
treatment with ustekinumab. Talk to your doctor right away if you experience a red, raised, scaly rash sometimes 
with a darker border, in areas of the skin that are exposed to the sun or with joint pains. 
 
Heart attack and strokes 
Heart attack and strokes have been observed in a study in patients with psoriasis treated with ustekinumab. 
Your doctor will regularly check your risk factors for heart disease and stroke in order to ensure that they are 
appropriately treated. Seek medical attention right away if you develop chest pain, weakness or abnormal 
sensation on one side of your body, facial droop, or speech or visual abnormalities. 
 
Children and adolescents 
IMULDOSA is not recommended for use in children who weigh less than 40 kg with Crohn’s disease because 
it has not been studied in this age group. 
 
Other medicines, vaccines and IMULDOSA 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist: 
•  
If you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other medicines. 
•  
If you have recently had or are going to have a vaccination. Some types of vaccines (live vaccines) 
should not be given while using IMULDOSA. 
•  
If you received IMULDOSA while pregnant, tell your baby’s doctor about your IMULDOSA treatment 
before the baby receives any vaccine, including live vaccines, such as the BCG vaccine (used to prevent 

61 
 
tuberculosis). Live vaccines are not recommended for your baby in the first twelve months after birth if 
you received IMULDOSA during the pregnancy unless your baby’s doctor recommends otherwise. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding 
•  
If you are pregnant, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask your doctor 
for advice before taking this medicine. 
• 
A higher risk of birth defects has not been seen in babies exposed to Imudosa in the womb. 
However, there is limited experience with Imuldosa in pregnant women. It is therefore preferable 
to avoid the use of Imuldosa in pregnancy. 
• 
If you are a woman of childbearing potential, you are advised to avoid becoming pregnant and 
must use adequate contraception while using Imuldosa and for at least 15 weeks after the last 
Imuldosa treatment. 
• 
Imuldosa can pass across the placenta to the unborn baby. If you received Imuldosa during your 
pregnancy, your baby may have a higher risk for getting an infection. 
• 
It is important that you tell your baby’s doctors and other health care professionals if you 
received Imuldosa during your pregnancy before the baby receives any vaccine. Live vaccines 
such as the BCG vaccine (used to prevent tuberculosis) are not recommended for your baby in 
the first twelve months after birth if you received Imuldosa during the pregnancy unless your 
baby’s doctor recommends otherwise. 
• 
Ustekinumab may pass into breast milk in very small amounts. Talk to your doctor if you are 
breast feeding or are planning to breast feed. You and your doctor should decide if you should 
breast-feed or use Imuldosa - do not do both. 
 
Driving and using machines 
IMULDOSA has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
 
IMULDOSA contains Polysorbate 80 
IMULDOSA contains 11.1 mg of polysorbate 80 (E433) in each unit volume, which is equivalent to 10.4 mg per 
130 mg dose. 
Polysorbates may cause allergic reactions. Tell your doctor if you have any known allergies. 
 
IMULDOSA contains sodium 
IMULDOSA contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per dose, that is to say essentially ‘sodium-free’. 
However, before IMULDOSA is given to you, it is mixed with a solution that contains sodium. Talk to your 
doctor if you are on a low salt diet. 
 
3. How IMULDOSA will be given 
 
IMULDOSA is intended for use under the guidance and supervision of a doctor experienced in the diagnosis and 
treatment of Crohn’s disease. 
 
IMULDOSA 130 mg concentrate for solution for infusion will be given to you by your doctor, through a drip in 
the vein of your arm (intravenous infusion) over at least one hour. Talk to your doctor about when you will have 
your injections and follow-up appointments. 
 
How much IMULDOSA is given 
Your doctor will decide how much IMULDOSA you need to receive and for how long. 
 
Adults aged 18 years or older 
•  
The doctor will work out the recommended intravenous infusion dose for you based on your body 
weight. 
Your body weight 
Dose 
≤ 55 kg 
260 mg 

62 
 
> 55 kg to ≤ 85 kg 
390 mg 
> 85 kg 
520 mg 
 
 
•  
After the starting intravenous dose, you will have the next dose of 90 mg IMULDOSA by an injection 
under your skin (subcutaneous injection) 8 weeks later, and then every 12 weeks thereafter. 
 
Children with Crohn’s disease who weigh at least 40 kg 
• 
The doctor will work out the recommended intravenous infusion dose for you based on your body 
weight. 
  
Your body weight 
Dose 
≥ 40 to ≤ 55 kg 
260 mg 
> 55 kg to ≤ 85 kg 
390 mg 
> 85 kg 
520 mg 
 
• 
After the starting intravenous dose, you will have the next dose of 90 mg Imuldosa by an injection 
under your skin (subcutaneous injection) 8 weeks later, and then every 12 weeks thereafter. 
 
How IMULDOSA is given 
•  
The first dose of IMULDOSA for treatment of Crohn’s disease is given by a doctor as a drip in the vein 
of an arm (intravenous infusion). 
Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about receiving IMULDOSA. 
 
If you forget to use IMULDOSA 
If you forget or miss the appointment for receiving the dose, contact your doctor to reschedule your 
appointment. 
 
If you stop using IMULDOSA 
It is not dangerous to stop using IMULDOSA. However, if you stop, your symptoms may come back. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
4. Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
Serious side effects 
Some patients may have serious side effects that may need urgent treatment. 
 
Allergic reactions – these may need urgent treatment. Tell your doctor or get emergency medical help 
straight away if you notice any of the following signs. 
•  
Serious allergic reactions (‘anaphylaxis’) are rare in people taking IMULDOSA (may affect up to 1 in 
1,000 people). Signs include: 
o 
difficulty breathing or swallowing 
o 
low blood pressure, which can cause dizziness or light-headedness 
o 
swelling of the face, lips, mouth or throat. 
•  
Common signs of an allergic reaction include skin rash and hives (these may affect up to 1 in 100 
people). 
 
Infusion-related reactions – If you are being treated for Crohn’s disease, the first dose of IMULDOSA is 

63 
 
given through a drip into a vein (intravenous infusion). Some patients have experienced serious allergic 
reactions during the infusion. 
 
In rare cases, allergic lung reactions and lung inflammation have been reported in patients who receive 
ustekinumab. Tell your doctor right away if you develop symptoms such as cough, shortness of breath, 
and fever. 
 
If you have a serious allergic reaction, your doctor may decide that you should not use IMULDOSA again. 
 
Infections – these may need urgent treatment. Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the 
following signs. 
•  
Infections of the nose or throat and common cold are common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
•  
Infections of the chest are uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
•  
Inflammation of tissue under the skin (‘cellulitis’) is uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
•  
Shingles (a type of painful rash with blisters) are uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
 
IMULDOSA may make you less able to fight infections. Some infections could become serious and may include 
infections caused by viruses, fungi, bacteria (including tuberculosis), or parasites, including infections that 
mainly occur in people with a weakened immune system (opportunistic infections). Opportunistic infections of 
the brain (encephalitis, meningitis), lungs, and eye have been reported in patients receiving treatment with 
ustekinumab. 
 
You must look out for signs of infection while you are using IMULDOSA. These include: 
•  
fever, flu-like symptoms, night sweats, weight loss 
•  
feeling tired or short of breath; cough which will not go away 
•  
warm, red and painful skin, or a painful skin rash with blisters 
•  
burning when passing water 
•  
diarrhoea 
•  
visual disturbance or vision loss 
•  
headache, neck stiffness, light sensitivity, nausea or confusion. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of these signs of infection. These may be signs of infections such 
as chest infections, skin infections, shingles or opportunistic infections that could have serious complications. 
Tell your doctor if you have any kind of infection that will not go away or keeps coming back. Your doctor may 
decide that you should not use IMULDOSA until the infection goes away. Also tell your doctor if you have any 
open cuts or sores as they might get infected. 
 
Shedding of skin – increase in redness and shedding of skin over a larger area of the body may be 
symptoms of erythrodermic psoriasis or exfoliative dermatitis, which are serious skin conditions. You 
should tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of these signs. 
 
Other side effects 
 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
•  
Diarrhoea 
•  
Nausea 
•  
Vomiting 
•  
Feeling tired 
•  
Feeling dizzy 
•  
Headache 
•  
Itching (‘pruritus’) 
•  
Back, muscle or joint pain 
•  
Sore throat 
•  
Redness and pain where the injection is given 
•  
Sinus infection 
 

64 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
•  
Tooth infections 
•  
Vaginal yeast infection 
•  
Depression 
•  
Blocked or stuffy nose 
•  
Bleeding, bruising, hardness, swelling and itching where the injection is given 
•  
Feeling weak 
•  
Drooping eyelid and sagging muscles on one side of the face (‘facial palsy’ or ‘Bell’s palsy’), which is 
usually temporary 
•  
A change in psoriasis with redness and new tiny, yellow or white skin blisters, sometimes accompanied 
by fever (pustular psoriasis) 
•  
Peeling of the skin (skin exfoliation) 
•  
Acne 
 
Rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 1000 people) 
•  
Redness and shedding of skin over a larger area of the body, which may be itchy or painful (exfoliative 
dermatitis). Similar symptoms sometimes develop as a natural change in the type of psoriasis symptoms 
(erythrodermic psoriasis) 
•  
Inflammation of small blood vessels, which can lead to a skin rash with small red or purple bumps, fever 
or joint pain (vasculitis) 
 
Very rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10,000 people) 
•  
Blistering of the skin that may be red, itchy, and painful (Bullous pemphigoid). 
•  
Skin lupus or lupus-like syndrome (red, raised scaly rash on areas of the skin exposed to the sun possibly 
with joint pains). 
 
Reporting of side effects 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects not listed in 
this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting system listed in Appendix V. By 
reporting side effects, you can help provide more information on the safety of this medicine. 
 
5. How to store IMULDOSA 
 
•  
IMULDOSA 130 mg concentrate for solution for infusion is given in a hospital or clinic and patients 
should not need to store or handle it. 
•  
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
•  
Store in a refrigerator (2°C–8°C). Do not freeze. 
•  
Keep the vial in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
•  
Do not shake the IMULDOSA vials. Prolonged vigorous shaking may damage the medicine. 
 
Do not use this medicine: 
•  
After the expiry date which is stated on the label and the carton after ‘EXP’. The expiry date refers to the 
last day of that month. 
•  
If the liquid is discoloured, cloudy or you can see other foreign particles floating in it (see section 6 ‘What 
IMULDOSA looks like and contents of the pack’). 
•  
If you know, or think that it may have been exposed to extreme temperatures (such as accidentally frozen 
or heated). 
•  
If the product has been shaken vigorously. 
•  
If the seal is broken. 
 
IMULDOSA is for single use only. Any diluted infusion solution or unused product remaining in the vial and the 
syringe should be thrown away in accordance with local requirements. 
 
 

65 
 
6. Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What IMULDOSA contains 
•  
The active substance is ustekinumab. Each vial contains 130 mg ustekinumab in 26 mL. 
•  
The other ingredients are EDTA disodium salt dihydrate (E385), L-histidine, L-histidine hydrochloride 
monohydrate, L-methionine, polysorbate 80 (E433), sucrose and water for injection. 
 
What IMULDOSA looks like and contents of the pack 
IMULDOSA is a colourless to slightly yellow and clear to slightly opalescent solution for infusion. It is supplied 
as a carton pack containing 1 single-dose, glass 30 mL vial. Each vial contains 130 mg ustekinumab in 26 mL of 
concentrate for solution for infusion. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U. 
World Trade Center, Moll De Barcelona, s/n 
Edifici Est, 6a Planta 
08039 Barcelona 
Spain 
 
Manufacturer 
Accord Healthcare Polska Sp. z.o.o. 
ul. Lutomierska 50, 
95-200, Pabianice, Poland 
Accord Healthcare B.V. 
Winthontlaan 200, 
3526 KV Utrecht, Netherlands 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
AT / BE / BG / CY / CZ / DE / DK / EE / ES / FI / FR / HR / HU / IE / IS / IT / LT / LV / LU / MT / 
NL / NO / PL / PT / RO / SE / SI / SK  
 
 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U.  
Tel: +34 93 301 00 64  
 
EL  
Win Medica Α.Ε. 
Τηλ: +30 210 74 88 821 
 
This leaflet was last revised in {MM/YYYY}. 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 

66 
 
The following information is intended for healthcare professionals only: 
 
Traceability: 
 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the tradename and the batch number of the 
administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Instructions for dilution: 
 
IMULDOSA concentrate for solution for infusion must be diluted, prepared and infused by a healthcare 
professional using aseptic technique. 
 
1. 
Calculate the dose and the number of IMULDOSA vials needed based on patient weight (see section 3, 
Table 1, Table 2). Each 26 mL vial of IMULDOSA contains 130 mg of ustekinumab. 
2. 
Withdraw and then discard a volume of the sodium chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution from the 250 mL 
infusion bag equal to the volume of IMULDOSA to be added (discard 26 mL sodium chloride for each 
vial of IMULDOSA needed, for 2 vials- discard 52 mL, for 3 vials discard 78 mL, for 4 vials-discard 104 
mL). 
3. 
Withdraw 26 mL of IMULDOSA from each vial needed and add it to the 250 mL infusion bag. The final 
volume in the infusion bag should be 250 mL. Gently mix. 
4. 
Visually inspect the diluted solution before infusion. Do not use if visibly opaque particles, 
discolouration or foreign particles are observed. 
5. 
Infuse the diluted solution over a period of at least one hour. Once diluted, the infusion should be 
completed within 24 hours of the dilution in the infusion bag. 
6. 
Use only an infusion set with an in-line, sterile, non-pyrogenic, low protein-binding filter (pore size 0.2 
micrometer). 
7. 
Each vial is for single use only and any unused medicinal product should be disposed of in accordance 
with local requirements. 
 
Storage 
If necessary, the diluted infusion solution may be stored at room temperature. The infusion should be completed 
within 24 hours of the dilution in the infusion bag. Do not freeze. 

67 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user 
 
IMULDOSA 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
ustekinumab 
 
▼This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new safety 
information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 for how 
to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains important 
information for you. 
 
This leaflet has been written for the person taking the medicine. If you are the parent or caregiver who 
will give IMULDOSA to a child, please read this information carefully. 
 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, even if 
their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What IMULDOSA is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you use IMULDOSA 
3. 
How to use IMULDOSA 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store IMULDOSA 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What IMULDOSA is and what it is used for 
 
What IMULDOSA is 
IMULDOSA contains the active substance ‘ustekinumab’, a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies are 
proteins that recognise and bind specifically to certain proteins in the body. 
 
IMULDOSA belongs to a group of medicines called ‘immunosuppressants’. These medicines work by 
weakening part of the immune system. 
 
What IMULDOSA is used for 
IMULDOSA is used to treat the following inflammatory diseases: 
•  
Plaque psoriasis - in adults and children aged 6 years and older 
•  
Psoriatic arthritis - in adults 
•  
Moderate to severe Crohn’s disease - in adults and children who weigh at least 40 kg 
 
Plaque psoriasis 
Plaque psoriasis is a skin condition that causes inflammation affecting the skin and nails. IMULDOSA will 
reduce the inflammation and other signs of the disease. 
 
IMULDOSA is used in adults with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis, who cannot use ciclosporin, methotrexate 
or phototherapy, or where these treatments did not work. 
 
IMULDOSA is used in children and adolescents aged 6 years and older with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis 
who are unable to tolerate phototherapy or other systemic therapies or where these treatments did not work. 

68 
 
Psoriatic arthritis 
Psoriatic arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints, usually accompanied by psoriasis. If you have active 
psoriatic arthritis you will first be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, 
you may be given IMULDOSA to: 
•  
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
•  
Improve your physical function. 
•  
Slow down the damage to your joints. 
 
Crohn’s disease 
Crohn’s disease is an inflammatory disease of the bowel. If you have Crohn’s disease you will first be given 
other medicines. If you do not respond well enough or are intolerant to these medicines, you may be given 
IMULDOSA to reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
 
2. What you need to know before you use IMULDOSA 
Do not use IMULDOSA 
•  
If you are allergic to ustekinumab or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in section 6). 
•  
If you have an active infection which your doctor thinks is important. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
IMULDOSA. 
 
Warnings and precautions 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using IMULDOSA. Your doctor will check how well you are before 
each treatment. Make sure you tell your doctor about any illness you have before each treatment. Also tell your 
doctor if you have recently been near anyone who might have tuberculosis. Your doctor will examine you and do 
a test for tuberculosis, before you have IMULDOSA. If your doctor thinks you are at risk of tuberculosis, you 
may be given medicines to treat it. 
 
 
Look out for serious side effects 
IMULDOSA can cause serious side effects, including allergic reactions and infections. You must look out for 
certain signs of illness while you are taking IMULDOSA. See ‘Serious side effects’ in section 
4 for a full list of these side effects. 
 
Before you use IMULDOSA tell your doctor: 
•  
If you ever had an allergic reaction to IMULDOSA. Ask your doctor if you are not sure. 
•  
If you have ever had any type of cancer – this is because immunosuppressants like IMULDOSA weaken 
part of the immune system. This may increase the risk of cancer. 
•  
If you have been treated for psoriasis with other biologic medicines (a medicine produced from a biological 
source and usually given by injection) – the risk of cancer may be higher. 
•  
If you have or have had a recent infection. 
•  
If you have any new or changing lesions within psoriasis areas or on normal skin. 
•  
If you are having any other treatment for psoriasis and/or psoriatic arthritis – such as another 
immunosuppressant or phototherapy (when your body is treated with a type of ultraviolet (UV) light). 
These treatments may also weaken part of the immune system. Using these therapies together with 
IMULDOSA has not been studied. However it is possible it may increase the chance of diseases related to 
a weaker immune system 
•  
If you are having or have ever had injections to treat allergies – it is not known if IMULDOSA may affect 
these. 
•  
If you are 65 years of age or over – you may be more likely to get infections. 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
IMULDOSA. 
 
Some patients have experienced lupus-like reactions including skin lupus or lupus-like syndrome during 
treatment with ustekinumab. Talk to your doctor right away if you experience a red, raised, scaly rash sometimes 

69 
 
with a darker border, in areas of the skin that are exposed to the sun or with joint pains. 
 
Heart attack and strokes 
Heart attack and strokes have been observed in a study in patients with psoriasis treated with ustekinumab. 
Your doctor will regularly check your risk factors for heart disease and stroke in order to ensure that they are 
appropriately treated. Seek medical attention right away if you develop chest pain, weakness 
or abnormal sensation on one side of your body, facial droop, or speech or visual abnormalities. 
 
Children and adolescents 
IMULDOSA is not recommended for use in children with psoriasis under 6 years of age, children with Crohn’s 
disease who weigh less than 40 kg or for use in children under 18 years of age with psoriatic arthritis 
because it has not been studied in this age group. 
 
 
Other medicines, vaccines and IMULDOSA 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist: 
•  
If you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other medicines. 
•  
If you have recently had or are going to have a vaccination. Some types of vaccines (live vaccines) should 
not be given while using IMULDOSA. 
•  
If you received IMULDOSA while pregnant, tell your baby’s doctor about your IMULDOSA treatment 
before the baby receives any vaccine, including live vaccines, such as the BCG vaccine (used to prevent 
tuberculosis).  Live vaccines are not recommended for your baby in the first twelve months after birth if 
you received IMULDOSA during the pregnancy unless your baby’s doctor recommends otherwise. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding 
• 
If you are pregnant, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask your doctor for 
advice before taking this medicine. 
• 
A higher risk of birth defects has not been seen in babies exposed to Imuldosa in the womb. 
However, there is limited experience with Imuldosa in pregnant women. It is therefore preferable 
to avoid the use of Imuldosa in pregnancy. 
• 
If you are a woman of childbearing potential, you are advised to avoid becoming pregnant and must 
use adequate contraception while using Imuldosa and for at least 15 weeks after the last Imuldosa 
treatment. 
• 
Imuldosa can pass across the placenta to the unborn baby. If you received Imuldosa during your 
pregnancy, your baby may have a higher risk for getting an infection. 
• 
It is important that you tell your baby’s doctors and other health care professionals if you received 
Imuldosa during your pregnancy before the baby receives any vaccine. Live vaccines such as the 
BCG vaccine (used to prevent tuberculosis) are not recommended for your baby in the first 
twelve months after birth if you received Imuldosa during the pregnancy unless your baby’s 
doctor recommends otherwise. 
• 
Ustekinumab may pass into breast milk in very small amounts. Talk to your doctor if you are 
breast-feeding or are planning to breast-feed. You and your doctor should decide if you should 
breast-feed or use Imuldosa - do not do both. 
 
Driving and using machines 
IMULDOSA has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
IMULDOSA contains Polysorbate 80 
IMULDOSA contains 0.02 mg of polysorbate 80 (E433) in each dosage unit, which is equivalent to 
0.04 mg/ml. 
Polysorbates may cause allergic reactions. Tell your doctor if you have any known allergies. 
  
3. How to use IMULDOSA 
 
IMULDOSA is intended for use under the guidance and supervision of a doctor experienced in treating 
conditions for which IMULDOSA is intended. 

70 
 
 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor has told you. Check with your doctor if you are not sure. Talk to 
your doctor about when you will have your injections and follow-up appointments. 
 
How much IMULDOSA is given 
Your doctor will decide how much IMULDOSA you need to use and for how long. 
 
Adults aged 18 years or older 
Psoriasis or Psoriatic Arthritis 
•  
The recommended starting dose is 45 mg IMULDOSA. Patients who weigh more than 100 kilograms (kg) 
may start on a dose of 90 mg instead of 45 mg. 
•  
After the starting dose, you will have the next dose 4 weeks later, and then every 12 weeks. The following 
doses are usually the same as the starting dose. 
 
Crohn’s disease 
•  
During treatment, the first dose of approximately 6 mg/kg IMULDOSA will be given by your doctor 
through a drip in a vein in your arm (intravenous infusion). After the starting dose, you will receive the 
next dose of 90 mg IMULDOSA after 8 weeks, then every 12 weeks thereafter by an injection under the 
skin (‘subcutaneously’). 
•  
In some patients, after the first injection under the skin, 90 mg IMULDOSA may be given every 
8 weeks. Your doctor will decide when you should receive your next dose. 
 
Children and adolescents aged 6 years or older 
Psoriasis 
 
The doctor will work out the right dose for you, including the amount (volume) of IMULDOSA to be 
injected to give the right dose. The right dose for you will depend on your body weight at the time each 
dose is given. 
 
If you weigh less than 60 kg, there is no dosage form for IMULDOSA for children below 60 kg 
body weight, therefore other ustekinumab products should be used. 
 
 If you weigh 60 kg to 100 kg, the recommended dose is 45 mg IMULDOSA. 
 
If you weigh more than 100 kg, the recommended dose is 90 mg IMULDOSA. 
 
After the starting dose, you will have the next dose 4 weeks later, and then every 12 weeks. 
 
Children who weigh at least 40 kg 
Crohn’s disease 
• 
During treatment, the first dose of approximately 6 mg/kg Imuldosa will be given by your doctor 
through a drip in a vein in your arm (intravenous infusion). After the starting dose, you will 
receive the next dose of 90 mg Imuldosa after 8 weeks, then every 12 weeks thereafter by an 
injection under the skin (‘subcutaneously’). 
• 
In some patients, after the first injection under the skin, 90 mg Imuldosa may be given every 
8 weeks. Your doctor will decide when you should receive your next dose. 
 
How IMULDOSA is given 
•  
IMULDOSA is given as an injection under the skin (‘subcutaneously’). At the start of your treatment, 
medical or nursing staff may inject IMULDOSA. 
•  
However, you and your doctor may decide that you may inject IMULDOSA yourself. In this case you 
will get training on how to inject IMULDOSA yourself. 
•  
For instructions on how to inject IMULDOSA, see ‘Instructions for administration’ at the end of this 
leaflet. 
Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about giving yourself an injection. 
 
If you use more IMULDOSA than you should 
If you have used or been given too much IMULDOSA, talk to a doctor or pharmacist straight away. Always 
have the outer carton of the medicine with you, even if it is empty. 
 
If you forget to use IMULDOSA 
If you forget a dose, contact your doctor or pharmacist. Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten 

71 
 
dose. 
 
If you stop using IMULDOSA 
It is not dangerous to stop using IMULDOSA. However, if you stop, your symptoms may come back. If you 
have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
4. Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
Serious side effects 
Some patients may have serious side effects that may need urgent treatment. 
Allergic reactions – these may need urgent treatment. Tell your doctor or get emergency medical help 
straight away if you notice any of the following signs. 
•  
Serious allergic reactions (‘anaphylaxis’) are rare in people taking IMULDOSA (may affect up to 1 in 
1,000 people). Signs include: 
 
o 
difficulty breathing or swallowing 
 
o 
low blood pressure, which can cause dizziness or light-headedness 
 
o 
swelling of the face, lips, mouth or throat. 
•  
Common signs of an allergic reaction include skin rash and hives (these may affect up to 1 in 100 
people). 
 
In rare cases, allergic lung reactions and lung inflammation have been reported in patients who receive 
ustekinumab. Tell your doctor right away if you develop symptoms such as cough, shortness of breath, and 
fever. 
 
If you have a serious allergic reaction, your doctor may decide that you should not use 
IMULDOSA again. 
 
Infections – these may need urgent treatment. Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the 
following signs. 
•  
Infections of the nose or throat and common cold are common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
•  
Infections of the chest are uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
•  
Inflammation of tissue under the skin (‘cellulitis’) is uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
•  
Shingles (a type of painful rash with blisters) are uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
 
IMULDOSA may make you less able to fight infections. Some infections could become serious and may include 
infections caused by viruses, fungi, bacteria (including tuberculosis), or parasites, including infections that 
mainly occur in people with a weakened immune system (opportunistic infections). Opportunistic infections of 
the brain (encephalitis, meningitis), 
lungs, and eye have been reported in patients receiving treatment with ustekinumab. 
 
You must look out for signs of infection while you are using IMULDOSA. These include: 
•  
fever, flu-like symptoms, night sweats, weight loss 
•  
feeling tired or short of breath; cough which will not go away 
•  
warm, red and painful skin, or a painful skin rash with blisters 
•  
burning when passing water 
•  
diarrhoea 
•  
visual disturbance or vision loss 
•  
headache, neck stiffness, light sensitivity, nausea or confusion. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of these signs of infection. These may be signs of infections 
such as chest infections, skin infections, shingles or opportunistic infections that could have serious 
complications. Tell your doctor if you have any kind of infection that will not go away or keeps coming back. 

72 
 
Your doctor may decide that you should not use IMULDOSA until the infection goes away. Also, tell your 
doctor if you have any open cuts or sores as they might get infected. 
 
Shedding of skin – increase in redness and shedding of skin over a larger area of the body may be 
symptoms of erythrodermic psoriasis or exfoliative dermatitis, which are serious skin conditions. You 
should tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of these signs. 
 
Other side effects 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
•  
Diarrhoea 
•  
Nausea 
•  
Vomiting 
•  
Feeling tired 
•  
Feeling dizzy 
•  
Headache 
•  
Itching (‘pruritus’) 
•  
Back, muscle or joint pain 
•  
Sore throat 
•  
Redness and pain where the injection is given 
•  
Sinus infection 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
•  
Tooth infections 
•  
Vaginal yeast infection 
•  
Depression 
•  
Blocked or stuffy nose 
•  
Bleeding, bruising, hardness, swelling and itching where the injection is given 
•  
Feeling weak 
•  
Drooping eyelid and sagging muscles on one side of the face (‘facial palsy’ or ‘Bell’s palsy’), which is 
usually temporary 
•  
A change in psoriasis with redness and new tiny, yellow or white skin blisters, sometimes accompanied 
by fever (pustular psoriasis) 
•  
Peeling of the skin (skin exfoliation) 
•  
Acne 
 
Rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 1000 people) 
•  
Redness and shedding of skin over a larger area of the body, which may be itchy or painful (exfoliative 
dermatitis). Similar symptoms sometimes develop as a natural change in the type of psoriasis symptoms 
(erythrodermic psoriasis) 
•  
Inflammation of small blood vessels, which can lead to a skin rash with small red or purple bumps, fever 
or joint pain (vasculitis) 
 
Very rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10,000 people) 
•  
Blistering of the skin that may be red, itchy, and painful (Bullous pemphigoid). 
•  
Skin lupus or lupus-like syndrome (red, raised scaly rash on areas of the skin exposed to the sun possibly 
with joint pains). 
 
Reporting of side effects 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects not listed in 
this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting system listed in Appendix V. By 
reporting side effects, you can help provide more information on the safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. How to store IMULDOSA 
 

73 
 
•  
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
•  
Store in a refrigerator (2°C–8°C). Do not freeze. 
•  
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
•  
If needed, individual IMULDOSA pre-filled syringes may also be stored at room temperature up to 30°C 
for a maximum single period of up to 30 days in the original carton in order to protect from light. Record 
the date when the pre-filled syringe is first removed from the refrigerator and the discard date in the space 
provided on the outer carton. The discard date must not exceed the original expiry date printed on the 
carton. Once a syringe has been stored at room temperature (up to 30°C), it should not be returned to the 
refrigerator. Discard the syringe if not used within 30 days at room temperature storage or by the original 
expiry date, whichever is earlier. 
•  
Do not shake the IMULDOSA pre-filled syringes. Prolonged vigorous shaking may damage the 
medicine. 
 
Do not use this medicine: 
•  
After the expiry date which is stated on the label and the carton after ‘EXP’. The expiry date refers to the 
last day of that month. 
•  
If the liquid is discoloured, cloudy or you can see other foreign particles floating in it (see section 6 ‘What 
IMULDOSA looks like and contents of the pack’). 
•  
If you know, or think that it may have been exposed to extreme temperatures (such as accidentally frozen 
or heated). 
•  
If the product has been shaken vigorously. 
 
IMULDOSA is for single use only. Any unused product remaining in the syringe should be thrown away. Do not 
throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to throw away 
medicines you no longer use. These measures will help protect the environment. 
 
 
6. Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What IMULDOSA contains 
•  
The active substance is ustekinumab. Each pre-filled syringe contains 45 mg ustekinumab in 0.5 mL. 
•  
The other ingredients are L-histidine, L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, polysorbate 80 (E433), 
sucrose and water for injections. 
 
What IMULDOSA looks like and contents of the pack 
IMULDOSA is a colourless to slightly yellow and clear to slightly opalescent solution. It is supplied as a carton 
pack containing 1 single-dose, glass 1 mL pre-filled syringe. Each pre-filled syringe contains 45 mg ustekinumab 
in 0.5 mL of solution for injection. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U. 
World Trade Center, Moll De Barcelona, s/n 
Edifici Est, 6a Planta 
08039 Barcelona 
Spain 
 
Manufacturer 
Accord Healthcare Polska Sp. z.o.o. 
ul. Lutomierska 50, 
95-200, Pabianice, Poland 
Accord Healthcare B.V. 
Winthontlaan 200, 
3526 KV Utrecht, Netherlands 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 

74 
 
 
 
AT / BE / BG / CY / CZ / DE / DK / EE / ES / FI / FR / HR / HU / IE / IS / IT / LT / LV / LU / MT / 
NL / NO / PL / PT / RO / SE / SI / SK  
 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U.  
Tel: +34 93 301 00 64  
EL  
Win Medica Α.Ε. 
Τηλ: +30 210 74 88 821 
 
This leaflet was last revised in {MM/YYYY}. 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu. 

75 
 
Instructions for administration 
 
At the start of treatment, your healthcare provider will assist you with your first injection. However, you and 
your doctor may decide that you may inject IMULDOSA yourself. If this happens, you will get training on how 
to inject IMULDOSA. Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about giving yourself an injection. 
•  
Do not mix IMULDOSA with other liquids for injection 
•  
Do not shake IMULDOSA pre-filled syringes. This is because strong shaking may damage the medicine. 
Do not use the medicine if it has been shaken strongly. 
 
Figure 1 shows what the pre-filled syringe looks like. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 
 
1. Check the number of pre-filled syringes and prepare the materials: 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled syringe 
•  
Take the pre-filled syringe(s) out of the refrigerator. Let the pre-filled syringe stand outside the box for 
about half an hour. This will let the liquid come to a comfortable temperature for injection (room 
temperature). Do not remove the syringe’s needle cover while allowing it to reach room temperature 
•  
Hold the pre-filled syringe by the body of the syringe with the covered needle pointing upward 
•  
Do not hold by the plunger head, plunger, needle guard wings, or needle cover 
•  
Do not pull back on the plunger at any time 
•  
Do not remove the needle cover from the pre-filled syringe until instructed to do so 
•  
Do not touch the needle guard activation clips to prevent prematurely covering the needle with the needle 
guard. 
 
Check the pre-filled syringe(s) to make sure 
•  
the number of pre-filled syringes and strength is correct 
o 
If your dose is 45 mg you will get one 45 mg pre-filled syringe of IMULDOSA 
o 
If your dose is 90 mg you will get two 45 mg pre-filled syringes of IMULDOSA and you 
will need to give yourself two injections. Choose two different sites for these injections 
(e.g. one injection in the right thigh and the other injection in the left thigh), and give the injections 
one right after the other. 
•  
it is the right medicine 
•  
it has not passed its expiry date 
•  
the pre-filled syringe is not damaged 
•  
the solution in the pre-filled syringe is colourless to slightly yellow and clear to slightly opalescent 
•  
the solution in the pre-filled syringe is not discoloured or cloudy and does not contain any foreign 
particles 
•  
the solution in the pre-filled syringe is not frozen. 

76 
 
Get everything together that you need and lay out on a clean surface. This includes antiseptic wipes, a cotton ball 
or gauze, and a sharps container. 
 
 
2. Choose and prepare the injection site: 
Choose an injection site (see Figure 2) 
•  
IMULDOSA is given by injection under the skin (subcutaneously) 
•  
Good places for the injection are the upper thigh or around the belly (abdomen) at least 5 cm away from 
the navel (belly button) 
•  
If possible, do not use areas of skin that show signs of psoriasis 
•  
If someone will assist in giving you the injection, then he or she may also choose the upper arms as an 
injection site 
 
 
 
 
 
*Areas in gray are recommended injection sites. 
 
Figure 2 
 
 
Prepare the injection site 
•  
Wash your hands very well with soap and warm water 
•  
Wipe the injection site on the skin with an antiseptic wipe 
•  
Do not touch this area again before giving the injection 
 
3. Remove the needle cover (see Figure 3): 
•  
The needle cover should not be removed until you are ready to inject the dose 
•  
Pick up the pre-filled syringe, hold the body of the syringe with one hand 
•  
Pull the needle cover straight off and throw it away. Do not touch the plunger while you do this 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 

77 
 
•  
You may notice an air bubble in the pre-filled syringe or a drop of liquid at the end of the needle. These 
are both normal and do not need to be removed 
•  
Do not touch the needle or allow it to touch any surface 
•  
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if it is dropped without the needle cover in place. If this happens, please 
contact your doctor or pharmacist 
•  
Inject the dose promptly after removing the needle cover. 
 
4. Inject the dose: 
•  
Hold the pre-filled syringe with one hand between the middle and index fingers and place the thumb on 
top of the plunger head and use the other hand to gently pinch the cleaned skin between your thumb and 
index finger. Do not squeeze it tightly 
•  
Do not pull back on the plunger at any time 
•  
In a single and swift motion, insert the needle through the skin as far as it will go (see Figure 4) 
 
 
 
Figure 4 
 
•  
Inject all of the medication by pushing in the plunger until the plunger head is completely between the 
needle guard wings (see Figure 5) 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 
 
 
•  
When the plunger is pushed as far as it will go, continue to keep the pressure on the plunger head, take 
out the needle and let go of the skin (see Figure 6) 

78 
 
 
 
Figure 6 
 
 
•  
Slowly take your thumb off the plunger head to allow the empty syringe to move up until the entire needle 
is covered by the needle guard, as shown by Figure 7: 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 
 
5. After the injection: 
•  
Press an antiseptic wipe over the injection site for a few seconds after the injection. 
•  
There may be a small amount of blood or liquid at the injection site. This is normal. 
•  
You can press a cotton ball or gauze over the injection site and hold for 10 seconds. 
•  
Do not rub the skin at the injection site. You may cover the injection site with a small adhesive bandage, 
if necessary. 
 
6. Disposal: 
•  
Used syringes should be placed in a puncture-resistant container, like a sharps container (see Figure 8). 
Never re-use a syringe, for your safety and health and for the safety of others. Dispose of your sharps 
container according to your local regulations 
•  
Antiseptic wipes and other supplies can be disposed of in your garbage. 
 
 
Figure 8 

79 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user 
 
IMULDOSA 90 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
ustekinumab 
 
▼This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new safety 
information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 for how 
to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains important 
information for you. 
 
This leaflet has been written for the person taking the medicine. If you are the parent or caregiver who 
will give IMULDOSA to a child, please read this information carefully. 
 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, even if 
their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects not 
listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
1. 
What IMULDOSA is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you use IMULDOSA 
3. 
How to use IMULDOSA 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store IMULDOSA 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What IMULDOSA is and what it is used for 
 
What IMULDOSA is 
IMULDOSA contains the active substance ‘ustekinumab’, a monoclonal antibody. Monoclonal antibodies are 
proteins that recognise and bind specifically to certain proteins in the body. 
 
IMULDOSA belongs to a group of medicines called ‘immunosuppressants’. These medicines work by 
weakening part of the immune system. 
 
What IMULDOSA is used for 
IMULDOSA is used to treat the following inflammatory diseases: 
•  
Plaque psoriasis - in adults and children aged 6 years and older 
•  
Psoriatic arthritis - in adults 
•  
Moderate to severe Crohn’s disease - in adults and children who weigh at least 40 kg 
 
Plaque psoriasis 
Plaque psoriasis is a skin condition that causes inflammation affecting the skin and nails. IMULDOSA 
will reduce the inflammation and other signs of the disease. 
 
IMULDOSA is used in adults with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis, who cannot use ciclosporin, methotrexate 
or phototherapy, or where these treatments did not work. 
 
IMULDOSA is used in children and adolescents aged 6 years and older with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis 
who are unable to tolerate phototherapy or other systemic therapies or where these treatments did not work. 

80 
 
Psoriatic arthritis 
Psoriatic arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the joints, usually accompanied by psoriasis. If you have active 
psoriatic arthritis you will first be given other medicines. If you do not respond well enough to these medicines, 
you may be given IMULDOSA to: 
•  
Reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
•  
Improve your physical function. 
•  
Slow down the damage to your joints. 
 
Crohn’s disease 
Crohn’s disease is an inflammatory disease of the bowel. If you have Crohn’s disease you will first be given 
other medicines. If you do not respond well enough or are intolerant to these medicines, you 
may be given IMULDOSA to reduce the signs and symptoms of your disease. 
 
2. What you need to know before you use IMULDOSA  
Do not use IMULDOSA 
•  
If you are allergic to ustekinumab or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in section 6). 
•  
If you have an active infection which your doctor thinks is important. 
 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
IMULDOSA. 
 
 
Warnings and precautions 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using IMULDOSA. Your doctor will check how well you are before 
each treatment. Make sure you tell your doctor about any illness you have before each treatment. Also tell your 
doctor if you have recently been near anyone who might have tuberculosis. Your doctor will examine you and do 
a test for tuberculosis, before you have IMULDOSA. If your doctor thinks you are at risk of tuberculosis, you 
may be given medicines to treat it. 
 
 
Look out for serious side effects 
IMULDOSA can cause serious side effects, including allergic reactions and infections. You must look out for 
certain signs of illness while you are taking IMULDOSA. See ‘Serious side effects’ in section 
4 for a full list of these side effects. 
 
Before you use IMULDOSA tell your doctor: 
•  
If you ever had an allergic reaction to IMULDOSA. Ask your doctor if you are not sure. 
•  
If you have ever had any type of cancer – this is because immunosuppressants like IMULDOSA 
weaken part of the immune system. This may increase the risk of cancer. 
•  
If you have been treated for psoriasis with other biologic medicines (a medicine produced from a 
biological source and usually given by injection) – the risk of cancer may be higher. 
•  
If you have or have had a recent infection.  
•  
If you have any new or changing lesions within psoriasis areas or on normal skin. 
•  
If you are having any other treatment for psoriasis and/or psoriatic arthritis – such as another 
immunosuppressant or phototherapy (when your body is treated with a type of ultraviolet (UV) light). 
These treatments may also weaken part of the immune system. Using these therapies together with 
IMULDOSA has not been studied. However it is possible it may increase the chance of diseases related to 
a weaker immune system 
•  
If you are having or have ever had injections to treat allergies – it is not known if IMULDOSA may 
affect these. 
•  
If you are 65 years of age or over – you may be more likely to get infections. 
If you are not sure if any of the above applies to you, talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using 
IMULDOSA. 
Some patients have experienced lupus-like reactions including skin lupus or lupus-like syndrome during 
treatment with ustekinumab. Talk to your doctor right away if you experience a red, raised, scaly rash sometimes 

81 
 
with a darker border, in areas of the skin that are exposed to the sun or with joint pains. 
 
Heart attack and strokes 
Heart attack and strokes have been observed in a study in patients with psoriasis treated with ustekinumab. 
Your doctor will regularly check your risk factors for heart disease and stroke in order to ensure that 
they are appropriately treated. Seek medical attention right away if you develop chest pain, weakness 
or abnormal sensation on one side of your body, facial droop, or speech or visual abnormalities. 
 
Children and adolescents 
IMULDOSA is not recommended for use in children with psoriasis under 6 years of age, children with Crohn’s 
disease who weigh less than 40 kg or for use in children under 18 years of age with psoriatic arthritis 
because it has not been studied in this age group. 
 
 
Other medicines, vaccines and IMULDOSA 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist: 
•  
If you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other medicines. 
•  
If you have recently had or are going to have a vaccination. Some types of vaccines (live vaccines) should 
not be given while using IMULDOSA. 
•  
If you received IMULDOSA while pregnant, tell your baby’s doctor about your IMULDOSA treatment 
before the baby receives any vaccine, including live vaccines, such as the BCG vaccine (used to prevent 
tuberculosis). Live vaccines are not recommended for your baby in the first twelve months after birth if 
you received IMULDOSA during the pregnancy unless your baby’s doctor recommends otherwise. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding 
 
 If you are pregnant, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask your doctor 
for advice before taking this medicine. 
 
A higher risk of birth defects has not been seen in babies exposed to Imudosa in the womb. 
However, there is limited experience with Imuldosa in pregnant women. It is therefore preferable 
to avoid the use of Imuldosa in pregnancy. 
• 
If you are a woman of childbearing potential, you are advised to avoid becoming pregnant and 
must use adequate contraception while using Imuldosa and for at least 15 weeks after the last 
Imuldosa treatment. 
• 
Imuldosa can pass across the placenta to the unborn baby. If you received Imuldosa during your 
pregnancy, your baby may have a higher risk for getting an infection. 
• 
It is important that you tell your baby’s doctors and other health care professionals if you 
received Imuldosa during your pregnancy before the baby receives any vaccine. Live vaccines 
such as the BCG vaccine (used to prevent tuberculosis) are not recommended for your baby in 
the first twelve months after birth if you received Imuldosa during the pregnancy unless your 
baby’s doctor recommends otherwise. 
 
Ustekinumab may pass into breast milk in very small amounts. Talk to your doctor if you are 
breast feeding or are planning to breast feed. You and your doctor should decide if you should 
breast-feed or use Imuldosa - do not do both. 
 
Driving and using machines 
IMULDOSA has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
IMULDOSA contains Polysorbate 80 
IMULDOSA contains 0.04 mg of polysorbate 80 (E433) in each dosage unit, which is equivalent to 
0.04 mg/ml. Polysorbates may cause allergic reactions. Tell your doctor if you have any known 
allergies. 
 
3. How to use IMULDOSA 
 
IMULDOSA is intended for use under the guidance and supervision of a doctor experienced in treating 
conditions for which IMULDOSA is intended. 

82 
 
 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor has told you. Check with your doctor if you are not sure. Talk to 
your doctor about when you will have your injections and follow-up appointments. 
 
How much IMULDOSA is given 
Your doctor will decide how much IMULDOSA you need to use and for how long. 
 
Adults aged 18 years or older 
Psoriasis or Psoriatic Arthritis 
•  
The recommended starting dose is 45 mg IMULDOSA. Patients who weigh more than 100 kilograms (kg) 
may start on a dose of 90 mg instead of 45 mg. 
•  
After the starting dose, you will have the next dose 4 weeks later, and then every 12 weeks. The following 
doses are usually the same as the starting dose. 
 
Crohn’s disease 
•  
During treatment, the first dose of approximately 6 mg/kg IMULDOSA will be given by your doctor 
through a drip in a vein in your arm (intravenous infusion). After the starting dose, you will receive the 
next dose of 90 mg IMULDOSA after 8 weeks, then every 12 weeks thereafter by an injection under the 
skin (‘subcutaneously’). 
•  
In some patients, after the first injection under the skin, 90 mg IMULDOSA may be given every 8 weeks. 
Your doctor will decide when you should receive your next dose. 
 
Children and adolescents aged 6 years or older 
Psoriasis 
 
The doctor will work out the right dose for you, including the amount (volume) of IMULDOSA to be 
injected to give the right dose. The right dose for you will depend on your body weight at the time each 
dose is given. 
 
If you weigh less than 60 kg, there is no dosage form for IMULDOSA for children below 60 kg body 
weight, therefore other ustekinumab products should be used. 
 
If you weigh 60 kg to 100 kg, the recommended dose is 45 mg IMULDOSA. 
 
If you weigh more than 100 kg, the recommended dose is 90 mg IMULDOSA. 
 
 After the starting dose, you will have the next dose 4 weeks later, and then every 12 weeks. 
 
Children who weigh at least 40 kg 
Crohn’s disease 
• 
During treatment, the first dose of approximately 6 mg/kg Imuldosa will be given by your doctor through a 
drip in a vein in your arm (intravenous infusion). After the starting dose, you will receive the next dose of 
90 mg Imuldosa after 8 weeks, then every 12 weeks thereafter by an injection under the skin 
(‘subcutaneously’). 
• 
In some patients, after the first injection under the skin, 90 mg Imuldosa may be given every 8 weeks. Your 
doctor will decide when you should receive your next dose. 
 
How IMULDOSA is given 
•  
IMULDOSA is given as an injection under the skin (‘subcutaneously’). At the start of your treatment, 
medical or nursing staff may inject IMULDOSA. 
•  
However, you and your doctor may decide that you may inject IMULDOSA yourself. In this case you 
will get training on how to inject IMULDOSA yourself. 
•  
For instructions on how to inject IMULDOSA, see ‘Instructions for administration’ at the end of this 
leaflet. 
Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about giving yourself an injection. 
 
If you use more IMULDOSA than you should 
If you have used or been given too much IMULDOSA, talk to a doctor or pharmacist straight away. Always 
have the outer carton of the medicine with you, even if it is empty. 
 
 
If you forget to use IMULDOSA 

83 
 
If you forget a dose, contact your doctor or pharmacist. Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten 
dose. 
 
If you stop using IMULDOSA 
It is not dangerous to stop using IMULDOSA. However, if you stop, your symptoms may come back. 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
4. Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
Serious side effects 
Some patients may have serious side effects that may need urgent treatment. 
 
Allergic reactions – these may need urgent treatment. Tell your doctor or get emergency medical help 
straight away if you notice any of the following signs. 
•  
Serious allergic reactions (‘anaphylaxis’) are rare in people taking IMULDOSA (may affect up to 1 in 
1,000 people). Signs include: 
o 
difficulty breathing or swallowing 
o 
low blood pressure, which can cause dizziness or light-headedness 
o 
swelling of the face, lips, mouth or throat. 
•  
Common signs of an allergic reaction include skin rash and hives (these may affect up to 1 in 100 
people). 
 
In rare cases, allergic lung reactions and lung inflammation have been reported in patients who receive 
ustekinumab. Tell your doctor right away if you develop symptoms such as cough, shortness of breath, 
and fever. 
 
If you have a serious allergic reaction, your doctor may decide that you should not use 
IMULDOSA again. 
 
Infections – these may need urgent treatment. Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the 
following signs. 
•  
Infections of the nose or throat and common cold are common (may affect up to 1 in 10                   
people) 
•  
Infections of the chest are uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
•  
Inflammation of tissue under the skin (‘cellulitis’) is uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
•  
Shingles (a type of painful rash with blisters) are uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
 
IMULDOSA may make you less able to fight infections. Some infections could become serious and may include 
infections caused by viruses, fungi, bacteria (including tuberculosis), or parasites, including infections that 
mainly occur in people with a weakened immune system (opportunistic infections). Opportunistic infections of 
the brain (encephalitis, meningitis), lungs, and eye have been reported in patients receiving treatment with 
ustekinumab. 
 
You must look out for signs of infection while you are using IMULDOSA. These include: 
•  
fever, flu-like symptoms, night sweats, weight loss 
•  
feeling tired or short of breath; cough which will not go away 
•  
warm, red and painful skin, or a painful skin rash with blisters 
•  
burning when passing water 
•  
diarrhoea 
•  
visual disturbance or vision loss 
•  
headache, neck stiffness, light sensitivity, nausea or confusion. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of these signs of infection. These may be signs of infections such 
as chest infections, skin infections, shingles or opportunistic infections that could have serious complications. 

84 
 
Tell your doctor if you have any kind of infection that will not go away or keeps coming back. Your doctor may 
decide that you should not use IMULDOSA until the infection goes away. Also tell your doctor if you have any 
open cuts or sores as they might get infected. 
 
Shedding of skin – increase in redness and shedding of skin over a larger area of the body may be 
symptoms of erythrodermic psoriasis or exfoliative dermatitis, which are serious skin conditions. You 
should tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of these signs. 
 
Other side effects 
 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
•  
Diarrhoea 
•  
Nausea 
•  
Vomiting 
•  
Feeling tired 
•  
Feeling dizzy 
•  
Headache 
•  
Itching (‘pruritus’) 
•  
Back, muscle or joint pain 
•  
Sore throat 
•  
Redness and pain where the injection is given 
•  
Sinus infection 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
•  
Tooth infections 
•  
Vaginal yeast infection 
•  
Depression 
•  
Blocked or stuffy nose 
•  
Bleeding, bruising, hardness, swelling and itching where the injection is given 
•  
Feeling weak 
•  
Drooping eyelid and sagging muscles on one side of the face (‘facial palsy’ or ‘Bell’s palsy’), which is 
usually temporary 
•  
A change in psoriasis with redness and new tiny, yellow or white skin blisters, sometimes accompanied 
by fever (pustular psoriasis) 
•  
Peeling of the skin (skin exfoliation) 
•  
Acne 
 
Rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 1000 people) 
•  
Redness and shedding of skin over a larger area of the body, which may be itchy or painful (exfoliative 
dermatitis). Similar symptoms sometimes develop as a natural change in the type of psoriasis symptoms 
(erythrodermic psoriasis) 
•  
Inflammation of small blood vessels, which can lead to a skin rash with small red or purple bumps, fever 
or joint pain (vasculitis) 
 
Very rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10,000 people) 
•  
Blistering of the skin that may be red, itchy, and painful (Bullous pemphigoid). 
•  
Skin lupus or lupus-like syndrome (red, raised scaly rash on areas of the skin exposed to the sun possibly 
with joint pains). 
 
Reporting of side effects 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects not listed in 
this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting system listed in Appendix V. By 
reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the safety of this medicine. 
 
 

85 
 
5. 
How to store IMULDOSA 
•  
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
•  
Store in a refrigerator (2°C–8°C). Do not freeze. 
•  
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
•  
If needed, individual IMULDOSA pre-filled syringes may also be stored at room temperature up to 30°C 
for a maximum single period of up to 30 days in the original carton in order to protect from light. Record 
the date when the pre-filled syringe is first removed from the refrigerator and the discard date in the space 
provided on the outer carton. The discard date must not exceed the original expiry date printed on the 
carton. Once a syringe has been stored at room temperature (up to 30°C), it should not be returned to the 
refrigerator. Discard the syringe if not used within 30 days at room temperature storage or by the original 
expiry date, whichever is earlier. 
•  
Do not shake the IMULDOSA pre-filled syringes. Prolonged vigorous shaking may damage the 
medicine. 
 
Do not use this medicine: 
•  
After the expiry date which is stated on the label and the carton after ‘EXP’. The expiry date refers to the 
last day of that month. 
•  
If the liquid is discoloured, cloudy or you can see other foreign particles floating in it (see section 6 ‘What 
IMULDOSA looks like and contents of the pack’). 
•  
If you know, or think that it may have been exposed to extreme temperatures (such as accidentally frozen 
or heated). 
•  
If the product has been shaken vigorously. 
 
IMULDOSA is for single use only. Any unused product remaining in the syringe should be thrown away. Do not 
throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to throw away 
medicines you no longer use. These measures will help protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What IMULDOSA contains 
•  
The active substance is ustekinumab. Each pre-filled syringe contains 90 mg ustekinumab in 1 mL. 
•  
The other ingredients are L-histidine, L-histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, polysorbate 80 (E433), 
sucrose and water for injection. 
 
What IMULDOSA looks like and contents of the pack 
IMULDOSA is a colourless to slightly yellow and clear to slightly opalescent solution. It is supplied as a carton 
pack containing 1 single-dose, glass 1 mL pre-filled syringe. Each pre-filled syringe contains 90 mg ustekinumab 
in 1 mL of solution for injections. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U. 
World Trade Center, Moll De Barcelona, s/n 
Edifici Est, 6a Planta 
08039 Barcelona 
Spain 
 
Manufacturer 
Accord Healthcare Polska Sp. z.o.o. 
ul. Lutomierska 50, 
95-200, Pabianice, Poland 
Accord Healthcare B.V. 
Winthontlaan 200, 
3526 KV Utrecht, Netherlands 
 

86 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
AT / BE / BG / CY / CZ / DE / DK / EE / ES / FI / FR / HR / HU / IE / IS / IT / LT / LV / LU / MT / 
NL / NO / PL / PT / RO / SE / SI / SK  
 
Accord Healthcare S.L.U.  
Tel: +34 93 301 00 64  
 
EL  
Win Medica Α.Ε. 
Τηλ: +30 210 74 88 821 
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in {MM/YYYY}. 
 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu. 

87 
 
Instructions for administration 
 
At the start of treatment, your healthcare provider will assist you with your first injection. However, you and 
your doctor may decide that you may inject IMULDOSA yourself. If this happens, you will get training on how 
to inject IMULDOSA. Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about giving yourself an injection. 
•  
Do not mix IMULDOSA with other liquids for injection 
•  
Do not shake IMULDOSA pre-filled syringes. This is because strong shaking may damage the medicine. 
Do not use the medicine if it has been shaken strongly. 
 
Figure 1 shows what the pre-filled syringe looks like. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 
 
1. Check the number of pre-filled syringes and prepare the materials: 
Preparing for use of the pre-filled syringe 
•  
Take the pre-filled syringe(s) out of the refrigerator. Let the pre-filled syringe stand outside the box for 
about half an hour. This will let the liquid come to a comfortable temperature for injection (room 
temperature). Do not remove the syringe’s needle cover while allowing it to reach room temperature 
•  
Hold the pre-filled syringe by the body of the syringe with the covered needle pointing upward 
•  
Do not hold by the plunger head, plunger, needle guard wings, or needle cover 
•  
Do not pull back on the plunger at any time 
•  
Do not remove the needle cover from the pre-filled syringe until instructed to do so 
•  
Do not touch the needle guard activation clips to prevent prematurely covering the needle with the needle 
guard. 
 
Check the pre-filled syringe(s) to make sure 
•  
the number of pre-filled syringes and strength is correct 
o 
If your dose is 90 mg you will get one 90 mg pre-filled syringe of IMULDOSA 
•  
it is the right medicine 
•  
it has not passed its expiry date 
•  
the pre-filled syringe is not damaged 
•  
the solution in the pre-filled syringe is colourless to slightly yellow and clear to slightly opalescent 
•  
the solution in the pre-filled syringe is not discoloured or cloudy and does not contain any foreign 
particles 
•  
the solution in the pre-filled syringe is not frozen. 
 
Get everything together that you need and lay out on a clean surface. This includes antiseptic wipes, a cotton ball 
or gauze, and a sharps container. 

88 
 
2. Choose and prepare the injection site: 
Choose an injection site (see Figure 2) 
•  
IMULDOSA is given by injection under the skin (subcutaneously) 
•  
Good places for the injection are the upper thigh or around the belly (abdomen) at least 5 cm away from 
the navel (belly button) 
•  
If possible, do not use areas of skin that show signs of psoriasis 
•  
If someone will assist in giving you the injection, then he or she may also choose the upper arms as an 
injection site 
 
 
*Areas in gray are recommended injection sites. 
 
Figure 2 
 
 
Prepare the injection site 
•  
Wash your hands very well with soap and warm water 
•  
Wipe the injection site on the skin with an antiseptic wipe 
•  
Do not touch this area again before giving the injection 
 
3. Remove the needle cover (see Figure 3): 
•  
The needle cover should not be removed until you are ready to inject the dose 
•  
Pick up the pre-filled syringe, hold the body of the syringe with one hand 
•  
Pull the needle cover straight off and throw it away. Do not touch the plunger while you do this 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 
 
•  
You may notice an air bubble in the pre-filled syringe or a drop of liquid at the end of the needle. These 
are both normal and do not need to be removed 
•  
Do not touch the needle or allow it to touch any surface 
•  
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if it is dropped without the needle cover in place. If this happens, please 
contact your doctor or pharmacist 

89 
 
•  
Inject the dose promptly after removing the needle cover. 
 
4. Inject the dose: 
•  
Hold the pre-filled syringe with one hand between the middle and index fingers and place the thumb on 
top of the plunger head and use the other hand to gently pinch the cleaned skin between your thumb and 
index finger. Do not squeeze it tightly 
•  
Do not pull back on the plunger at any time 
•  
In a single and swift motion, insert the needle through the skin as far as it will go (see Figure 4) 
 
 
 
Figure 4 
 
•  
Inject all of the medication by pushing in the plunger until the plunger head is completely between the 
needle guard wings (see Figure 5) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 
 
 
•  
When the plunger is pushed as far as it will go, continue to keep the pressure on the plunger head, take 
out the needle and let go of the skin (see Figure 6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 

90 
 
•  
Slowly take your thumb off the plunger head to allow the empty syringe to move up until the entire needle 
is covered by the needle guard, as shown by Figure 7: 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 
 
5. After the injection: 
•  
Press an antiseptic wipe over the injection site for a few seconds after the injection. 
•  
There may be a small amount of blood or liquid at the injection site. This is normal. 
•  
You can press a cotton ball or gauze over the injection site and hold for 10 seconds. 
•  
Do not rub the skin at the injection site. You may cover the injection site with a small adhesive bandage, 
if necessary. 
 
6. Disposal: 
•  
Used syringes should be placed in a puncture-resistant container, like a sharps container (see Figure 8). 
Never re-use a syringe, for your safety and health and for the safety of others. Dispose of your sharps 
container according to your local regulations 
•  
Antiseptic wipes and other supplies can be disposed of in your garbage. 
 
 
 
Figure 8 
 
