1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 

2 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Jubbonti 60 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each pre-filled syringe contains 60 mg of denosumab in 1 mL of solution (60 mg/mL). 
 
Denosumab is a human monoclonal IgG2 antibody produced in a mammalian cell line (Chinese 
hamster ovary cells) by recombinant DNA technology. 
 
Excipient with known effect 
 
This medicinal product contains 47 mg sorbitol in each mL of solution. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Solution for injection (injection). 
 
Clear to slightly opalescent, colourless to slightly yellowish or slightly brownish solution with a pH 
between 4.9 and 5.5 and an osmolality of 245 – 345 mOsmol/kg.  
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women and in men at increased risk of fractures. In 
postmenopausal women denosumab significantly reduces the risk of vertebral, non-vertebral and hip 
fractures. 
 
Treatment of bone loss associated with hormone ablation in men with prostate cancer at increased risk 
of fractures (see section 5.1). In men with prostate cancer receiving hormone ablation, denosumab 
significantly reduces the risk of vertebral fractures. 
 
Treatment of bone loss associated with long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy in adult patients at 
increased risk of fracture (see section 5.1). 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Posology 
 
The recommended dose is 60 mg denosumab administered as a single subcutaneous injection once 
every 6 months into the thigh, abdomen or upper arm. 
 
Patients must be adequately supplemented with calcium and vitamin D (see section 4.4). 
 
Patients treated with Jubbonti should be given the package leaflet and the patient reminder card. 

3 
 
The optimal total duration of antiresorptive treatment for osteoporosis (including both denosumab and 
bisphosphonates) has not been established. The need for continued treatment should be re-evaluated 
periodically based on the benefits and potential risks of denosumab on an individual patient basis, 
particularly after 5 or more years of use (see section 4.4). 
 
Elderly (age ≥ 65) 
No dose adjustment is required in elderly patients. 
 
Renal impairment 
No dose adjustment is required in patients with renal impairment (see section 4.4 for recommendations 
relating to monitoring of calcium). 
 
No data is available in patients with long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy and severe renal 
impairment (glomerular filtration rate, GFR < 30 mL/min). 
 
Hepatic impairment 
The safety and efficacy of denosumab have not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment (see 
section 5.2). 
 
Paediatric population 
Jubbonti should not be used in children aged < 18 years because of safety concerns of serious 
hypercalcaemia, and potential inhibition of bone growth and lack of tooth eruption (see sections 4.4 
and 5.3). Currently available data for children aged 2 to 17 years are described in sections 5.1 and 5.2. 
 
Method of administration 
 
For subcutaneous use. 
 
Administration should be performed by an individual who has been adequately trained in injection 
techniques. 
 
The instructions for use, handling and disposal are given in section 6.6. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
Hypocalcaemia (see section 4.4). 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the name and the batch number 
of the administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Calcium and vitamin D supplementation 
 
Adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is important in all patients. 
 
Precautions for use 
 
Hypocalcaemia 
It is important to identify patients at risk for hypocalcaemia. Hypocalcaemia must be corrected by 
adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D before initiating therapy. Clinical monitoring of calcium 
levels is recommended before each dose and, in patients predisposed to hypocalcaemia within two 

4 
weeks, after the initial dose. If any patient presents with suspected symptoms of hypocalcaemia during 
treatment (see section 4.8 for symptoms) calcium levels should be measured. Patients should be 
encouraged to report symptoms indicative of hypocalcaemia. 
 
In the post-marketing setting, severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia (resulting in hospitalisation, life-
threatening events, and fatal cases) have been reported. While most cases occurred in the first few 
weeks of initiating therapy, it has also occurred later. 
 
Concomitant glucocorticoid treatment is an additional risk factor for hypocalcaemia. 
 
Renal impairment 
Patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min) or receiving dialysis are at 
greater risk of developing hypocalcaemia. The risks of developing hypocalcaemia and accompanying 
parathyroid hormone elevations increase with increasing degree of renal impairment. Severe and fatal 
cases have been reported. Adequate intake of calcium, vitamin D and regular monitoring of calcium is 
especially important in these patients, see above. 
 
Skin infections 
Patients receiving denosumab may develop skin infections (predominantly cellulitis) leading to 
hospitalisation (see section 4.8). Patients should be advised to seek prompt medical attention if they 
develop signs or symptoms of cellulitis. 
 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) 
ONJ has been reported rarely in patients receiving denosumab for osteoporosis (see section 4.8). 
 
The start of treatment/new treatment course should be delayed in patients with unhealed open soft 
tissue lesions in the mouth. A dental examination with preventive dentistry and an individual benefit-
risk assessment is recommended prior to treatment with denosumab in patients with concomitant risk 
factors. 
 
The following risk factors should be considered when evaluating a patient’s risk of developing ONJ: 
• 
potency of the medicinal product that inhibits bone resorption (higher risk for highly potent 
compounds), route of administration (higher risk for parenteral administration) and cumulative 
dose of bone resorption therapy. 
• 
cancer, co-morbid conditions (e.g. anaemia, coagulopathies, infection), smoking. 
• 
concomitant therapies: corticosteroids, chemotherapy, angiogenesis inhibitors, radiotherapy to 
head and neck. 
• 
poor oral hygiene, periodontal disease, poorly fitting dentures, history of dental disease, invasive 
dental procedures (e.g. tooth extractions). 
 
All patients should be encouraged to maintain good oral hygiene, receive routine dental check-ups, 
and immediately report any oral symptoms such as dental mobility, pain or swelling or non-healing of 
sores or discharge during treatment with denosumab. While on treatment, invasive dental procedures 
should be performed only after careful consideration and be avoided in close proximity to denosumab 
administration. 
 
The management plan of the patients who develop ONJ should be set up in close collaboration 
between the treating physician and a dentist or oral surgeon with expertise in ONJ. Temporary 
interruption of treatment should be considered until the condition resolves and contributing risk factors 
are mitigated where possible. 
 
Osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal 
Osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal has been reported with denosumab. Possible risk factors 
for osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal include steroid use and chemotherapy and/or local risk 
factors such as infection or trauma. The possibility of osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal 
should be considered in patients receiving denosumab who present with ear symptoms including 
chronic ear infections. 

5 
 
Atypical fractures of the femur 
Atypical femoral fractures have been reported in patients receiving denosumab (see section 4.8). 
Atypical femoral fractures may occur with little or no trauma in the subtrochanteric and diaphyseal 
regions of the femur. Specific radiographic findings characterise these events. Atypical femoral 
fractures have also been reported in patients with certain co-morbid conditions (e.g. vitamin D 
deficiency, rheumatoid arthritis, hypophosphatasia) and with use of certain medicinal products (e.g. 
bisphosphonates, glucocorticoids, proton pump inhibitors). These events have also occurred without 
antiresorptive therapy. Similar fractures reported in association with bisphosphonates are often 
bilateral; therefore, the contralateral femur should be examined in denosumab-treated patients who 
have sustained a femoral shaft fracture. Discontinuation of denosumab therapy in patients suspected to 
have an atypical femur fracture should be considered pending evaluation of the patient based on an 
individual benefit-risk assessment. During denosumab treatment, patients should be advised to report 
new or unusual thigh, hip, or groin pain. Patients presenting with such symptoms should be evaluated 
for an incomplete femoral fracture. 
 
Long-term antiresorptive treatment 
Long-term antiresorptive treatment (including both denosumab and bisphosphonates) may contribute 
to an increased risk for adverse outcomes such as osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femur fractures 
due to significant suppression of bone remodelling (see section 4.2). 
 
Treatment discontinuation 
Following denosumab discontinuation, decrease in bone mineral density (BMD) is expected (see 
section 5.1), leading to an increased risk for fractures. Monitoring of BMD is recommended, and 
alternative treatment should be considered according to clinical guidelines. 
 
Concomitant treatment with other denosumab-containing medicinal products 
Patients being treated with Jubbonti should not be treated concomitantly with other denosumab-
containing medicinal products (for prevention of skeletal related events in adults with bone metastases 
from solid tumours). 
 
Hypercalcaemia in paediatric patients 
Jubbonti should not be used in paediatric patients (age < 18). Serious hypercalcaemia has been 
reported. Some clinical study cases were complicated by acute renal injury. 
 
Excipients 
This medicinal product contains 47 mg sorbitol in each mL of solution. The additive effect of 
concomitantly administered products containing sorbitol (or fructose) and dietary intake of sorbitol (or 
fructose) should be taken into account. 
 
This medicinal product contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) in each mL of solution, that is to 
say essentially ‘sodium-free’. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
In an interaction study, denosumab did not affect the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, which is 
metabolised by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). This indicates that denosumab should not alter the 
pharmacokinetics of medicinal products metabolised by CYP3A4. 
 
There are no clinical data on the co-administration of denosumab and hormone replacement therapy 
(oestrogen), however the potential for a pharmacodynamic interaction is considered to be low. 
 
In postmenopausal women with osteoporosis the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
denosumab were not altered by previous alendronate therapy, based on data from a transition study 
(alendronate to denosumab). 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 

6 
 
Pregnancy 
 
There are no or limited amount of data from the use of denosumab in pregnant women. Studies in 
animals have shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). 
 
Jubbonti is not recommended during pregnancy and in women of child-bearing potential not using 
contraception. Women should be advised not to become pregnant during and for at least 5 months 
after treatment with Jubbonti. Any effects of Jubbonti are likely to be greater during the second and 
third trimesters of pregnancy since monoclonal antibodies are transported across the placenta in a 
linear fashion as pregnancy progresses, with the largest amount transferred during the third trimester. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
It is unknown whether denosumab is excreted in human milk. In genetically engineered mice in which 
receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL) has been turned off by gene removal (a 
“knockout mouse”), studies suggest absence of RANKL (the target of denosumab see section 5.1) 
during pregnancy may interfere with maturation of the mammary gland leading to impaired lactation 
post-partum (see section 5.3). A decision must be made whether to discontinue breast-feeding or to 
abstain from Jubbonti therapy  taking into account the benefit of breast-feeding for the child and the 
benefit of  therapy for the woman. 
 
Fertility 
 
No data are available on the effect of denosumab on human fertility. Animal studies do not indicate 
direct or indirect harmful effects with respect to fertility (see section 5.3). 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 
Jubbonti has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
The most common adverse reactions with denosumab (seen in more than one patient in ten) are 
musculoskeletal pain and pain in the extremity. Uncommon cases of cellulitis, rare cases of 
hypocalcaemia, hypersensitivity, osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femoral fractures (see 
sections 4.4 and 4.8 - description of selected adverse reactions) have been observed in patients taking 
denosumab. 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
The data in Table 1 below describe adverse reactions reported from phase II and III clinical studies in 
patients with osteoporosis and breast or prostate cancer patients receiving hormone ablation; and/or 
spontaneous reporting. 
 
The following convention has been used for the classification of the adverse reactions (see table 1): 
very common (≥ 1/10), common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10), uncommon (≥ 1/1 000 to < 1/100), rare 
(≥ 1/10 000 to < 1/1 000), very rare (< 1/10 000) and not known (cannot be estimated from the 
available data). Within each frequency grouping and system organ class, adverse reactions are 
presented in order of decreasing seriousness. 
 

7 
Table 1. Adverse reactions reported in patients with osteoporosis and breast or prostate cancer 
patients receiving hormone ablation 
 
MedDRA system organ class 
Frequency category 
Adverse reactions 
Infections and infestations 
Common 
Urinary tract infection 
Common 
Upper respiratory tract infection 
Uncommon 
Diverticulitis1 
Uncommon 
Cellulitis1 
Uncommon 
Ear infection 
Immune system disorders 
Rare 
Drug hypersensitivity1 
Rare 
Anaphylactic reaction1 
Metabolism and nutrition 
disorders 
Rare 
Hypocalcaemia1 
Nervous system disorders 
Common 
Sciatica 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Common 
Constipation 
Common 
Abdominal discomfort 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
disorders 
Common 
Rash 
Common 
Eczema 
Common 
Alopecia 
Uncommon 
Lichenoid drug eruptions1 
Very rare 
Hypersensitivity vasculitis 
Musculoskeletal and connective 
tissue disorders 
Very common 
Pain in extremity 
Very common 
Musculoskeletal pain1 
Rare 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw1 
Rare 
Atypical femoral fractures1 
Not known 
Osteonecrosis of the external auditory 
canal2 
1 See section Description of selected adverse reactions. 
2 See section 4.4. 
 
In a pooled analysis of data from all phase II and phase III placebo-controlled studies, influenza-like 
illness was reported with a crude incidence rate of 1.2% for denosumab and 0.7% for placebo. 
Although this imbalance was identified via a pooled analysis, it was not identified via a stratified 
analysis. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Hypocalcaemia 
In two phase III placebo-controlled clinical studies in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, 
approximately 0.05% (2 out of 4 050) of patients had declines of serum calcium levels (less than 
1.88 mmol/L) following denosumab administration. Declines of serum calcium levels (less than 
1.88 mmol/L) were not reported in either the two phase III placebo-controlled clinical studies in 
patients receiving hormone ablation or the phase III placebo-controlled clinical study in men with 
osteoporosis. 
 
In the post-marketing setting, rare cases of severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia resulting in 
hospitalisation, life-threatening events, and fatal cases have been reported, predominantly in patients at 
increased risk of hypocalcaemia receiving denosumab, with most cases occurring in the first weeks of 
initiating therapy. Examples of the clinical manifestations of severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia have 
included QT interval prolongation, tetany, seizures and altered mental status (see section 4.4). 
Symptoms of hypocalcaemia in denosumab clinical studies included paraesthesias or muscle stiffness, 
twitching, spasms and muscle cramps. 
 
Skin infections 
In phase III placebo-controlled clinical studies, the overall incidence of skin infections was similar in 
the placebo and the denosumab groups: in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis (placebo [1.2%, 

8 
50 out of 4 041] versus denosumab [1.5%, 59 out of 4 050]); in men with osteoporosis (placebo [0.8%, 
1 out of 120] versus denosumab [0%, 0 out of 120]); in breast or prostate cancer patients receiving 
hormone ablation (placebo [1.7%, 14 out of 845] versus denosumab [1.4%, 12 out of 860]). Skin 
infections leading to hospitalisation were reported in 0.1% (3 out of 4 041) of postmenopausal women 
with osteoporosis receiving placebo versus 0.4% (16 out of 4 050) of women receiving denosumab. 
These cases were predominantly cellulitis. Skin infections reported as serious adverse reactions were 
similar in the placebo (0.6%, 5 out of 845) and the denosumab (0.6%, 5 out of 860) groups in the 
breast and prostate cancer studies. 
 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw 
ONJ has been reported rarely, in 16 patients, in clinical studies in osteoporosis and in breast or 
prostate cancer patients receiving hormone ablation including a total of 23 148 patients (see 
section 4.4). Thirteen of these ONJ cases occurred in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis during 
the phase III clinical study extension following treatment with denosumab for up to 10 years. 
Incidence of ONJ was 0.04% at 3 years, 0.06% at 5 years and 0.44% at 10 years of denosumab 
treatment. The risk of ONJ increased with duration of exposure to denosumab. 
 
The risk of ONJ has also been assessed in a retrospective cohort study among 76 192 postmenopausal 
women newly initiating treatment with denosumab. The incidence of ONJ was 0.32% (95% 
confidence interval [CI]: 0.26, 0.39) among patients using denosumab up to 3 years and 0.51% (95% 
CI: 0.39, 0.65) among patients using denosumab up to 5 years of follow-up. 
 
Atypical fractures of the femur 
In the osteoporosis clinical study programme, atypical femoral fractures were reported rarely in 
patients treated with denosumab (see section 4.4). 
 
Diverticulitis 
In a single phase III placebo-controlled clinical study in patients with prostate cancer receiving 
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), an imbalance in diverticulitis adverse events was observed 
(1.2% denosumab, 0% placebo). The incidence of diverticulitis was comparable between treatment 
groups in postmenopausal women or men with osteoporosis and in women undergoing aromatase 
inhibitor therapy for non-metastatic breast cancer. 
 
Drug-related hypersensitivity reactions 
In the post-marketing setting, rare events of drug-related hypersensitivity, including rash, urticaria, 
facial swelling, erythema, and anaphylactic reactions have been reported in patients receiving 
denosumab. 
 
Musculoskeletal pain 
Musculoskeletal pain, including severe cases, has been reported in patients receiving denosumab in the 
post-marketing setting. In clinical studies, musculoskeletal pain was very common in both denosumab 
and placebo groups. Musculoskeletal pain leading to discontinuation of study treatment was 
uncommon. 
 
Lichenoid drug eruptions 
Lichenoid drug eruptions (e.g. lichen planus-like reactions) have been reported in patients in the post-
marketing setting. 
 
Other special populations 
 
Paediatric population 
Jubbonti should not be used in paediatric patients (age < 18). Serious hypercalcaemia has been 
reported (see section 5.1). Some clinical study cases were complicated by acute renal injury. 
 
Renal impairment 
In clinical studies, patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min) or 
receiving dialysis were at greater risk of developing hypocalcaemia in the absence of calcium 

9 
supplementation. Adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is important in patients with severe renal 
impairment or receiving dialysis (see section 4.4). 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
There is no experience with overdose in clinical studies. Denosumab has been administered in clinical 
studies using doses up to 180 mg every 4 weeks (cumulative doses up to 1 080 mg over 6 months), 
and no additional adverse reactions were observed. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1  
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Drugs for treatment of bone diseases – Other drugs affecting bone 
structure and mineralisation, ATC code: M05BX04 
 
Jubbonti is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the 
European Medicines Agency http://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Denosumab is a human monoclonal antibody (IgG2) that targets and binds with high affinity and 
specificity to RANKL, preventing activation of its receptor, RANK, on the surface of osteoclast 
precursors and osteoclasts. Prevention of the RANKL/RANK interaction inhibits osteoclast formation, 
function and survival, thereby decreasing bone resorption in cortical and trabecular bone. 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
 
Denosumab treatment rapidly reduced the rate of bone turnover, reaching a nadir for the bone 
resorption marker serum type 1 C-telopeptides (CTX) (85% reduction) by 3 days, with reductions 
maintained over the dosing interval. At the end of each dosing interval, CTX reductions were partially 
attenuated from maximal reduction of ≥ 87% to approximately ≥ 45% (range 45 – 80%), reflecting the 
reversibility of the effects of denosumab on bone remodelling once serum levels diminish. These 
effects were sustained with continued treatment. Bone turnover markers generally reached pre-
treatment levels within 9 months after the last dose. Upon re-initiation, reductions in CTX by 
denosumab were similar to those observed in patients initiating primary denosumab treatment. 
 
Immunogenicity 
 
Anti-denosumab antibodies may develop during denosumab treatment. No apparent correlation of 
antibody development with pharmacokinetics, clinical response or adverse event has been observed. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab administered once every 6 months for 3 years were investigated in 
postmenopausal women (7 808 women aged 60 – 91 years, of which 23.6% had prevalent vertebral 
fractures) with baseline bone mineral density (BMD) T-scores at the lumbar spine or total hip 
between -2.5 and -4.0 and a mean absolute 10-year fracture probability of 18.60% (deciles: 
7.9 – 32.4%) for major osteoporotic fracture and 7.22% (deciles: 1.4 – 14.9%) for hip fracture. 

10 
Women with other diseases or on therapies that may affect bone were excluded from this study. 
Women received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 400 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
Effect on vertebral fractures 
Denosumab significantly reduced the risk of new vertebral fractures at 1, 2 and 3 years (p < 0.0001) 
(see Table 2). 
 
Table 2. The effect of denosumab on the risk of new vertebral fractures 
 
Proportion of women with fracture (%) 
Absolute risk 
reduction (%) 
(95% CI) 
Relative risk 
reduction (%) 
(95% CI) 
Placebo 
n = 3 906 
Denosumab 
n = 3 902 
0-1 year 
2.2 
0.9 
1.4 (0.8, 1.9) 
61 (42, 74)** 
0-2 years 
5.0 
1.4 
3.5 (2.7, 4.3) 
71 (61, 79)** 
0-3 years 
7.2 
2.3 
4.8 (3.9, 5.8) 
68 (59, 74)* 
*p < 0.0001, **p < 0.0001 – exploratory analysis 
 
Effect on hip fractures 
Denosumab demonstrated a 40% relative reduction (0.5% absolute risk reduction) in the risk of hip 
fracture over 3 years (p < 0.05). The incidence of hip fracture was 1.2% in the placebo group 
compared to 0.7% in the denosumab group at 3 years. 
 
In a post-hoc analysis in women > 75 years, a 62% relative risk reduction was observed with 
denosumab (1.4% absolute risk reduction, p < 0.01). 
 
Effect on all clinical fractures 
Denosumab significantly reduced fractures across all fracture types/groups (see Table 3). 
 
Table 3. The effect of denosumab on the risk of clinical fractures over 3 years 
 
Proportion of women with 
fracture (%)+ 
Absolute risk 
reduction 
(%) 
(95% CI) 
Relative risk 
reduction 
(%) 
(95% CI) 
Placebo 
n = 3 906 
Denosumab 
n = 3 902 
Any clinical fracture1 
10.2 
7.2 
2.9 (1.6, 4.2) 
30 (19, 41)*** 
Clinical vertebral fracture 
2.6 
0.8 
1.8 (1.2, 2.4) 
69 (53, 80)*** 
Non-vertebral fracture2 
8.0 
6.5 
1.5 (0.3, 2.7) 
20 (5, 33)** 
Major non-vertebral fracture3 
6.4 
5.2 
1.2 (0.1, 2.2) 
20 (3, 34)* 
Major osteoporotic fracture4 
8.0 
5.3 
2.7 (1.6, 3.9) 
35 (22, 45)*** 
*p ≤ 0.05, **p = 0.0106 (secondary endpoint included in multiplicity adjustment), ***p ≤ 0.0001 
+ Event rates based on Kaplan-Meier estimates at 3 years. 
1 Includes clinical vertebral fractures and non-vertebral fractures. 
2 Excludes those of the vertebrae, skull, facial, mandible, metacarpus, and finger and toe phalanges. 
3 Includes pelvis, distal femur, proximal tibia, ribs, proximal humerus, forearm, and hip. 
4 Includes clinical vertebral, hip, forearm, and humerus fractures, as defined by the WHO. 
 
In women with baseline femoral neck BMD ≤ -2.5, denosumab reduced the risk of non-vertebral 
fracture (35% relative risk reduction, 4.1% absolute risk reduction, p < 0.001, exploratory analysis). 
 
The reduction in the incidence of new vertebral fractures, hip fractures and non-vertebral fractures by 
denosumab over 3 years were consistent regardless of the 10-year baseline fracture risk. 
 
Effect on bone mineral density 
Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, versus placebo at 1, 2 and 
3 years. Denosumab increased BMD by 9.2% at the lumbar spine, 6.0% at the total hip, 4.8% at the 
femoral neck, 7.9% at the hip trochanter, 3.5% at the distal 1/3 radius and 4.1% at the total body over 
3 years (all p < 0.0001). 

11 
 
In clinical studies examining the effects of discontinuation of denosumab, BMD returned to 
approximately pre-treatment levels and remained above placebo within 18 months of the last dose. 
These data indicate that continued treatment with denosumab is required to maintain the effect of the 
medicinal product. Re-initiation of denosumab resulted in gains in BMD similar to those when 
denosumab was first administered. 
 
Open-label extension study in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis 
A total of 4 550 women (2 343 denosumab and 2 207 placebo) who missed no more than one dose of 
investigational product in the pivotal study described above and completed the month 36 study visit 
agreed to enrol in a 7-year, multinational, multicentre, open-label, single-arm extension study to 
evaluate the long-term safety and efficacy of denosumab. All women in the extension study were to 
receive denosumab 60 mg every 6 months, as well as daily calcium (at least 1 g) and vitamin D (at 
least 400 IU). A total of 2 626 subjects (58% of the women included in the extension study i.e. 34% of 
the women included in the pivotal study) completed the extension study. 
 
In patients treated with denosumab for up to 10 years, BMD increased from the pivotal study baseline 
by 21.7% at the lumbar spine, 9.2% at the total hip, 9.0% at the femoral neck, 13.0% at the trochanter 
and 2.8% at the distal 1/3 radius. The mean lumbar spine BMD T-score at the end of the study 
was -1.3 in patients treated for 10 years. 
 
Fracture incidence was evaluated as a safety endpoint but efficacy in fracture prevention cannot be 
estimated due to high number of discontinuations and open-label design. The cumulative incidence of 
new vertebral and non-vertebral fractures were approximately 6.8% and 13.1% respectively, in 
patients who remained on denosumab treatment for 10 years (n = 1 278). Patients who did not 
complete the study for any reason had higher on-treatment fracture rates. 
 
Thirteen adjudicated cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) and two adjudicated cases of atypical 
fractures of the femur occurred during the extension study. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in men with osteoporosis 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab once every 6 months for 1 year were investigated in 242 men aged 
31 – 84 years. Subjects with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 were 
excluded from the study. All men received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 800 IU) 
supplementation daily. 
 
The primary efficacy variable was percent change in lumbar spine BMD, fracture efficacy was not 
evaluated. Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, relative to placebo 
at 12 months: 4.8% at lumbar spine, 2.0% at total hip, 2.2% at femoral neck, 2.3% at hip trochanter, 
and 0.9% at distal 1/3 radius (all p < 0.05). Denosumab increased lumbar spine BMD from baseline in 
94.7% of men at 1 year. Significant increases in BMD at lumbar spine, total hip, femoral neck and hip 
trochanter were observed by 6 months (p < 0.0001). 
 
Bone histology in postmenopausal women and men with osteoporosis 
 
Bone histology was evaluated in 62 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis or with low bone mass 
who were either naïve to osteoporosis therapies or had transitioned from previous alendronate therapy 
following 1 – 3 years treatment with denosumab. Fifty nine women participated in the bone biopsy 
sub-study at month 24 (n = 41) and/or month 84 (n = 22) of the extension study in postmenopausal 
women with osteoporosis. Bone histology was also evaluated in 17 men with osteoporosis following 
1 year treatment with denosumab. Bone biopsy results showed bone of normal architecture and quality 
with no evidence of mineralisation defects, woven bone or marrow fibrosis. Histomorphometry 
findings in the extension study in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis showed that the 
antiresorptive effects of denosumab, as measured by activation frequency and bone formation rates, 
were maintained over time. 
 

12 
Clinical efficacy and safety in patients with bone loss associated with androgen deprivation 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab once every 6 months for 3 years were investigated in men with 
histologically confirmed non-metastatic prostate cancer receiving ADT (1 468 men aged 
48 – 97 years) who were at increased risk of fracture (defined as > 70 years, or < 70 years with a BMD 
T-score at the lumbar spine, total hip, or femoral neck < -1.0 or a history of an osteoporotic fracture). 
All men received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 400 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, relative to treatment with 
placebo at 3 years: 7.9% at the lumbar spine, 5.7% at the total hip, 4.9% at the femoral neck, 6.9% at 
the hip trochanter, 6.9% at the distal 1/3 radius and 4.7% at the total body (all p < 0.0001). In a 
prospectively planned exploratory analysis, significant increases in BMD were observed at the lumbar 
spine, total hip, femoral neck and the hip trochanter 1 month after the initial dose. 
 
Denosumab demonstrated a significant relative risk reduction of new vertebral fractures: 85% (1.6% 
absolute risk reduction) at 1 year, 69% (2.2% absolute risk reduction) at 2 years and 62% (2.4% 
absolute risk reduction) at 3 years (all p < 0.01). 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in patients with bone loss associated with adjuvant aromatase inhibitor 
therapy 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab once every 6 months for 2 years were investigated in women with 
non-metastatic breast cancer (252 women aged 35 – 84 years) and baseline BMD T-scores 
between -1.0 to -2.5 at the lumbar spine, total hip or femoral neck. All women received calcium (at 
least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 400 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
The primary efficacy variable was percent change in lumbar spine BMD, fracture efficacy was not 
evaluated. Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, relative to treatment 
with placebo at 2 years: 7.6% at lumbar spine, 4.7% at total hip, 3.6% at femoral neck, 5.9% at hip 
trochanter, 6.1% at distal 1/3 radius and 4.2% at total body (all p < 0.0001). 
 
Treatment of bone loss associated with systemic glucocorticoid therapy 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab were investigated in 795 patients (70% women and 30% men) aged 
20 to 94 years treated with ≥ 7.5 mg daily oral prednisone (or equivalent). 
 
Two subpopulations were studied: glucocorticoid-continuing (≥ 7.5 mg daily prednisone or its 
equivalent for ≥ 3 months prior to study enrolment; n = 505) and glucocorticoid-initiating (≥ 7.5 mg 
daily prednisone or its equivalent for < 3 months prior to study enrolment; n = 290). Patients were 
randomised (1:1) to receive either denosumab 60 mg subcutaneously once every 6 months or oral 
risedronate 5 mg once daily (active control) for 2 years. Patients received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) 
and vitamin D (at least 800 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
Effect on Bone Mineral Density (BMD) 
In the glucocorticoid-continuing subpopulation, denosumab demonstrated a greater increase in lumbar 
spine BMD compared to risedronate at 1 year (denosumab 3.6%, risedronate 2.0%; p < 0.001) and 
2 years (denosumab 4.5%, risedronate 2.2%; p < 0.001). In the glucocorticoid-initiating subpopulation, 
denosumab demonstrated a greater increase in lumbar spine BMD compared to risedronate at 1 year 
(denosumab 3.1%, risedronate 0.8%; p < 0.001) and 2 years (denosumab 4.6%, risedronate 1.5%; 
p < 0.001). 
 
In addition, denosumab demonstrated a significantly greater mean percent increase in BMD from 
baseline compared to risedronate at the total hip, femoral neck, and hip trochanter. 
 
The study was not powered to show a difference in fractures. At 1 year, the subject incidence of new 
radiological vertebral fracture was 2.7% (denosumab) versus 3.2% (risedronate). The subject 
incidence of non-vertebral fracture was 4.3% (denosumab) versus 2.5% (risedronate). At 2 years, the 

13 
corresponding numbers were 4.1% versus 5.8% for new radiological vertebral fractures and 5.3% 
versus 3.8% for non-vertebral fractures. Most of the fractures occurred in the GC-C subpopulation. 
 
Paediatric population 
 
A single-arm phase III study evaluated the efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics was conducted in 
children with osteogenesis imperfecta, aged 2 to 17 years, 52.3% male, 88.2% Caucasian. A total of 
153 subjects initially received subcutaneous (SC) denosumab 1 mg/kg, up to a maximum of 60 mg, 
every 6 months for 36 months. Sixty subjects transitioned to every 3 months dosing. 
 
At month 12 of every 3 months dosing, the least squares (LS) mean (standard error, SE) change from 
baseline in lumbar spine BMD Z-score was 1.01 (0.12). 
 
The most common adverse events reported during every 6 months dosing were arthralgia (45.8%), 
pain in extremity (37.9%), back pain (32.7%), and hypercalciuria (32.0%). Hypercalcaemia was 
reported during every 6 months (19%) and every 3 months (36.7%) dosing. Serious adverse events of 
hypercalcaemia (13.3%) were reported during every 3 months dosing. 
 
In an extension study (N = 75), serious adverse events of hypercalcaemia (18.5%) were observed 
during every 3 months dosing. 
 
The studies were terminated early due to the occurrence of life-threatening events and hospitalisations 
due to hypercalcaemia (see section 4.2). 
 
In one multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study conducted in 
24 paediatric patients with glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis, aged 5 to 17 years, evaluating change 
from baseline in lumbar spine BMD Z-score, safety and effectiveness were not established hence 
denosumab should not be used for this indication. 
 
The European Medicines Agency has deferred the obligation to submit the results of studies with the 
reference medicinal product containing denosumab in one or more subsets of the paediatric population 
in the treatment of bone loss associated with sex hormone ablative therapy, and in subsets of the 
paediatric population below the age of 2 in the treatment of osteoporosis (see section 4.2 for 
information on paediatric use). 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
Absorption 
 
Following subcutaneous administration of a 1.0 mg/kg dose, which approximates the approved 60 mg 
dose, exposure based on AUC (area under the curve) was 78% as compared to intravenous 
administration at the same dose level. For a 60 mg subcutaneous dose, maximum serum denosumab 
concentrations (Cmax) of 6 mcg/mL (range 1 – 17 mcg/mL) occurred in 10 days (range 2 – 28 days). 
 
Biotransformation 
 
Denosumab is composed solely of amino acids and carbohydrates as native immunoglobulin and is 
unlikely to be eliminated via hepatic metabolic mechanisms. Its metabolism and elimination are 
expected to follow the immunoglobulin clearance pathways, resulting in degradation to small peptides 
and individual amino acids. 
 
Elimination 
 
After Cmax, serum levels declined with a half-life of 26 days (range 6 – 52 days) over a period of 
3 months (range 1.5 – 4.5 months). Fifty-three percent (53%) of patients had no measurable amounts 
of denosumab detected at 6 months post-dose. 
 

14 
No accumulation or change in denosumab pharmacokinetics with time was observed upon 
subcutaneous multiple-dosing of 60 mg once every 6 months. Denosumab pharmacokinetics were not 
affected by the formation of binding antibodies to denosumab and were similar in men and women. 
 
Age (28 – 87 years), race and disease state (low bone mass or osteoporosis; prostate or breast cancer) 
do not appear to significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of denosumab. 
 
A trend was observed between higher body weight and lower exposure based on AUC and Cmax. 
However, the trend is not considered clinically important, since pharmacodynamic effects based on 
bone turnover markers and BMD increases were consistent across a wide range of body weight. 
 
Linearity/non-linearity 
 
In dose ranging studies, denosumab exhibited non-linear, dose-dependent pharmacokinetics, with 
lower clearance at higher doses or concentrations, but approximately dose-proportional increases in 
exposures for doses of 60 mg and greater. 
 
Renal impairment 
 
In a study of 55 patients with varying degrees of renal function, including patients on dialysis, the 
degree of renal impairment had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of denosumab. 
 
Hepatic impairment 
 
No specific study in patients with hepatic impairment was performed. In general, monoclonal 
antibodies are not eliminated via hepatic metabolic mechanisms. The pharmacokinetics of denosumab 
is not expected to be affected by hepatic impairment. 
 
Paediatric population 
 
Jubbonti should not be used in paediatric populations (see sections 4.2 and 5.1). 
 
In a phase III study of paediatric patients with osteogenesis imperfecta (N = 153), maximum serum 
denosumab concentrations were observed on day 10 across all age groups. For every 3 months and 
every 6 months dosing, mean serum denosumab trough concentrations were observed to be higher for 
children 11 to 17 years of age, while children 2 to 6 years of age had the lowest mean trough 
concentrations. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
In single and repeated dose toxicity studies in cynomolgus monkeys, denosumab doses resulting in 
100 to 150 times greater systemic exposure than the recommended human dose had no impact on 
cardiovascular physiology, male or female fertility, or produced specific target organ toxicity. 
 
Standard tests to investigate the genotoxicity potential of denosumab have not been evaluated, since 
such tests are not relevant for this molecule. However, due to its character it is unlikely that 
denosumab has any potential for genotoxicity. 
 
The carcinogenic potential of denosumab has not been evaluated in long-term animal studies. 
 
In preclinical studies conducted in knockout mice lacking RANK or RANKL, impairment of lymph 
node formation was observed in the foetus. An absence of lactation due to inhibition of mammary 
gland maturation (lobulo-alveolar gland development during pregnancy) was also observed in 
knockout mice lacking RANK or RANKL. 
 

15 
In a study of cynomolgus monkeys dosed with denosumab during the period equivalent to the first 
trimester at AUC exposures up to 99-fold higher than the human dose (60 mg every 6 months), there 
was no evidence of maternal or foetal harm. In this study, foetal lymph nodes were not examined. 
 
In another study of cynomolgus monkeys dosed with denosumab throughout pregnancy at AUC 
exposures 119-fold higher than the human dose (60 mg every 6 months), there were increased 
stillbirths and postnatal mortality; abnormal bone growth resulting in reduced bone strength, reduced 
haematopoiesis, and tooth malalignment; absence of peripheral lymph nodes; and decreased neonatal 
growth. A no observed adverse effect level for reproductive effects was not established. Following a 
6 month period after birth, bone related changes showed recovery and there was no effect on tooth 
eruption. However, the effects on lymph nodes and tooth malalignment persisted, and minimal to 
moderate mineralisation in multiple tissues was seen in one animal (relation to treatment uncertain). 
There was no evidence of maternal harm prior to labour; adverse maternal effects occurred 
infrequently during labour. Maternal mammary gland development was normal. 
 
In preclinical bone quality studies in monkeys on long-term denosumab treatment, decreases in bone 
turnover were associated with improvement in bone strength and normal bone histology. Calcium 
levels were transiently decreased and parathyroid hormone levels transiently increased in 
ovariectomised monkeys treated with denosumab. 
 
In male mice genetically engineered to express huRANKL (knock-in mice), which were subjected to a 
transcortical fracture, denosumab delayed the removal of cartilage and remodelling of the fracture 
callus compared to control, but biomechanical strength was not adversely affected. 
 
Knockout mice (see section 4.6) lacking RANK or RANKL exhibited decreased body weight, reduced 
bone growth and lack of tooth eruption. In neonatal rats, inhibition of RANKL (target of denosumab 
therapy) with high doses of a construct of osteoprotegerin bound to Fc (OPG-Fc) was associated with 
inhibition of bone growth and tooth eruption. These changes were partially reversible in this model 
when dosing with RANKL inhibitors was discontinued. Adolescent primates dosed with denosumab at 
27 and 150 times (10 and 50 mg/kg dose) the clinical exposure had abnormal growth plates. Therefore, 
treatment with denosumab may impair bone growth in children with open growth plates and may 
inhibit eruption of dentition. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
Acetic acid, glacial* 
Sorbitol (E 420) 
Polysorbate 20 
Sodium hydroxide (for pH adjustment)* 
Hydrochloric acid (for pH adjustment) 
Water for injections 
* Acetate buffer is formed by mixing acetic acid with sodium hydroxide 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal 
products. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
3 years. 
 
Once removed from the refrigerator, Jubbonti may be stored at room temperature (up to 25 °C) for up 
to 30 days in the outer carton in order to protect from light. It must be used within this 30 day period. 

16 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2 °C – 8 °C). 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
One mL solution in a single use pre-filled syringe made from type I glass with a stainless steel 
29 gauge needle with safety guard, a rubber needle cap (thermoplastic elastomer), a rubber plunger 
stopper (bromobutyl rubber) and a plastic plunger rod. 
 
Pack size of one pre-filled syringe with safety guard. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
• 
Before administration, the solution should be inspected. Do not inject the solution if it is cloudy or 
contains visible particles. 
• 
Do not shake. 
• 
To avoid discomfort at the site of injection, allow the pre-filled syringe to reach room temperature 
(up to 25 °C) before injecting and inject slowly. 
• 
Inject the entire contents of the pre-filled syringe. 
 
Full instructions for use are given in the package leaflet, section 7, "Instructions for Use". 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Sandoz GmbH 
Biochemiestr. 10 
6250 Kundl 
Austria 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/24/1813/001 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 16 May 2024 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency http://www.ema.europa.eu. 

17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE 
SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR 
BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO 
THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT 

18 
A. 
MANUFACTURER OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer of the biological active substance 
 
Novartis Pharmaceutical Manufacturing LLC 
Kolodvorska cesta 27 
1234 Menges 
Slovenia 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release 
 
Novartis Pharmaceutical Manufacturing GmbH 
Biochemiestr. 10 
6336 Langkampfen 
Austria 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription. 
 
 
C.  
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union 
reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any 
subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance activities 
and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the marketing authorisation 
and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of 
an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 
 
• 
Additional risk minimisation measures 
 
The MAH shall ensure that a patient reminder card regarding osteonecrosis of the jaw is implemented. 

19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 

21 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE CARTON 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Jubbonti 60 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
denosumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
 
1 mL pre-filled syringe containing 60 mg of denosumab (60 mg/mL). 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
Excipients: Acetic acid, glacial, sorbitol (E 420), hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, polysorbate 20, 
water for injections. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
solution for injection 
1 pre-filled syringe with safety guard. 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Subcutaneous use. 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Do not shake. 
Do not use if safety seals are broken. 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 
Store in a refrigerator. 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 

22 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Sandoz GmbH 
Biochemiestr. 10 
6250 Kundl 
Austria 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/24/1813/001 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
Jubbonti 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 

23 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS 
 
BLISTER TEXT 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Jubbonti 60 mg injection 
denosumab 
 
 
2. 
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
OTHER 
 
SC 
 
 
 

24 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
SYRINGE LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Jubbonti 60 mg injection 
denosumab 
SC 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
 
 
6. 
OTHER 
 
 

25 
CALENDAR CARD TEXT (included in pack) 
 
 
 
Jubbonti 60 mg injection 
denosumab 
 
SC 
 
Next injection in 6 months: 
 
Use Jubbonti for as long as your doctor prescribes it for you. 
 
 

26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET 

27 
Package leaflet: Information for the user 
 
Jubbonti 60 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
denosumab 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
- 
Your doctor will give you a patient reminder card, which contains important safety information 
you need to be aware of before and during your treatment with Jubbonti. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
1. 
What Jubbonti is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Jubbonti 
3. 
How to use Jubbonti 
4. 
Possible side effects  
5. 
How to store Jubbonti 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
7. 
Instructions for Use 
 
 
1. 
What Jubbonti is and what it is used for 
 
What Jubbonti is and how it works 
 
Jubbonti contains denosumab, a protein (monoclonal antibody) that interferes with the action of 
another protein, in order to treat bone loss and osteoporosis. Treatment with Jubbonti makes bone 
stronger and less likely to break. 
 
Bone is a living tissue and is renewed all the time. Oestrogen helps keep bones healthy. After the 
menopause, oestrogen level drops which may cause bones to become thin and fragile. This can 
eventually lead to a condition called osteoporosis. Osteoporosis can also occur in men due to a number 
of causes including ageing and/or a low level of the male hormone, testosterone. It can also occur in 
patients receiving glucocorticoids. Many patients with osteoporosis have no symptoms, but they are 
still at risk of breaking bones, especially in the spine, hips and wrists. 
 
Surgery or medicines that stop the production of oestrogen or testosterone used to treat patients with 
breast or prostate cancer can also lead to bone loss. The bones become weaker and break more easily. 
 
What Jubbonti is used for 
 
Jubbonti is used to treat: 
• 
osteoporosis in women after the menopause (postmenopausal) and men who have an increased 
risk of fracture (broken bones), reducing the risk of spinal, non-spinal and hip fractures. 
• 
bone loss that results from a reduction in hormone (testosterone) level caused by surgery or 
treatment with medicines in patients with prostate cancer. 
• 
bone loss that results from long-term treatment with glucocorticoids in patients who have an 
increased risk of fracture. 

28 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Jubbonti 
 
Do not use Jubbonti 
 
• 
if you have low calcium levels in the blood (hypocalcaemia). 
• 
if you are allergic to denosumab or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in 
section 6). 
 
Warnings and precautions 
 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using Jubbonti. 
 
Whilst being treated with Jubbonti you may develop a skin infection with symptoms such as a 
swollen, red area of skin, most commonly in the lower leg, that feels hot and tender (cellulitis), and 
possibly with symptoms of fever. Please tell your doctor immediately if you develop any of these 
symptoms. 
 
You should also take calcium and vitamin D supplements while being on treatment with Jubbonti. 
Your doctor will discuss this with you. 
 
You may have low levels of calcium in your blood while receiving Jubbonti. Please tell your doctor 
immediately if you notice any of the following symptoms: spasms, twitches, or cramps in your muscle, 
and/or numbness or tingling in your fingers, toes or around your mouth, and/or seizures, confusion, or 
loss of consciousness. 
 
Severe low blood calcium levels leading to hospitalisation and even life-threatening reactions have 
been reported in rare cases. Before each dose and in patients predisposed to hypocalcaemia within two 
weeks after initial dose, the calcium levels in your blood will therefore be checked (via blood test). 
 
Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had severe kidney problems, kidney failure or have needed 
dialysis or are taking medicines called glucocorticoids (such as prednisolone or dexamethasone), 
which may increase your risk of getting low blood calcium if you do not take calcium supplements. 
 
Problems with your mouth, teeth or jaw 
A side effect called osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) (bone damage in the jaw) has been reported rarely 
(may affect up to 1 in 1 000 people) in patients receiving denosumab for osteoporosis. The risk of ONJ 
increases in patients treated for a long time (may affect up to 1 in 200 people if treated for 10 years). 
ONJ can also occur after stopping treatment. It is important to try to prevent ONJ developing as it may 
be a painful condition that can be difficult to treat. In order to reduce the risk of developing ONJ, take 
the following precautions: 
 
Before receiving treatment, tell your doctor or nurse (health care professional) if you: 
 
• 
have any problems with your mouth or teeth such as poor dental health, gum disease, or a planned 
tooth extraction. 
• 
don’t receive routine dental care or have not had a dental check-up for a long time. 
• 
are a smoker (as this may increase the risk of dental problems). 
• 
have previously been treated with a bisphosphonate (used to treat or prevent bone disorders). 
• 
are taking medicines called corticosteroids (such as prednisolone or dexamethasone). 
• 
have cancer. 
 
Your doctor may ask you to undergo a dental examination before you start treatment with Jubbonti. 
 
While being treated, you should maintain good oral hygiene and receive routine dental check-ups. If 
you wear dentures you should make sure these fit properly. If you are under dental treatment or will 

29 
undergo dental surgery (e.g. tooth extractions), inform your doctor about your dental treatment and tell 
your dentist that you are being treated with Jubbonti. 
 
Contact your doctor and dentist immediately if you experience any problems with your mouth or teeth 
such as loose teeth, pain or swelling, or non-healing of sores or discharge, as these could be signs of 
ONJ. 
 
Unusual thigh bone fractures 
Some people have developed unusual fractures in their thigh bone while being treated with 
denosumab. Contact your doctor if you experience new or unusual pain in your hip, groin, or thigh. 
 
Children and adolescents 
 
Jubbonti should not be used in children and adolescents under 18 years of age. 
 
Other medicines and Jubbonti 
 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other 
medicines. It is especially important that you tell your doctor if you are being treated with another 
medicine containing denosumab. 
 
You should not take Jubbonti together with another medicine containing denosumab. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding 
 
Denosumab has not been tested in pregnant women. It is important to tell your doctor if you are 
pregnant; think you may be pregnant; or plan to get pregnant. Jubbonti is not recommended for use if 
you are pregnant. Women of child-bearing potential should use effective methods of contraception 
while being treated with Jubbonti and for at least 5 months after stopping treatment with Jubbonti. 
 
If you become pregnant during treatment with Jubbonti or less than 5 months after stopping treatment 
with Jubbonti, please inform your doctor. 
 
It is unknown whether denosumab is excreted in human milk. It is important to tell your doctor if you 
are breast-feeding or plan to do so. Your doctor will then help you decide whether to stop breast-
feeding, or whether to stop taking Jubbonti, considering the benefit of breast-feeding to the baby and 
the benefit of Jubbonti to the mother. 
 
If you are pregnant or breast-feeding, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask 
your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking this medicine. 
 
Driving and using machines 
 
Jubbonti has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
 
Jubbonti contains sorbitol 
 
This medicine contains 47 mg sorbitol in each mL of solution. 
 
Jubbonti contains sodium 
 
This medicine contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) in each mL of solution, that is to say 
essentially ‘sodium- free’. 
 
 
3. 
How to use Jubbonti 
 

30 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor has told you. Check with your doctor or pharmacist if 
you are not sure. 
 
The recommended dose is one pre-filled syringe of 60 mg administered once every 6 months, as a 
single injection under the skin (subcutaneous). The best places to inject are the top of your thighs and 
the abdomen. Your caregiver can also use the outer area of your upper arm. Please consult your doctor 
on the date for a potential next injection. Each pack of Jubbonti contains a calendar card with a sticker 
that can be used to keep a record of the next injection date. 
 
You should also take calcium and vitamin D supplements while being on treatment with Jubbonti. 
Your doctor will discuss this with you. 
 
Your doctor may decide that it is best for you or a caregiver to inject Jubbonti. Your doctor or 
healthcare provider will show you or your caregiver how to use Jubbonti.  
For instructions on how to inject Jubbonti, please read section 7 “Instructions for Use” at the 
end of this leaflet. 
 
Do not shake. 
 
If you forget to use Jubbonti 
 
If a dose of Jubbonti is missed, the injection should be administered as soon as possible. Thereafter, 
injections should be scheduled every 6 months from the date of the last injection. 
 
If you stop using Jubbonti 
 
To get the most benefit from your treatment in reducing the risk of fractures, it is important to use 
Jubbonti for as long as your doctor prescribes it for you. Do not stop your treatment without contacting 
your doctor. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
Uncommonly, patients receiving denosumab may develop skin infections (predominantly cellulitis). 
Please tell your doctor immediately if you develop any of these symptoms while being on treatment 
with Jubbonti: swollen, red area of skin, most commonly in the lower leg, that feels hot and tender, and 
possibly with symptoms of fever. 
 
Rarely, patients receiving denosumab may develop pain in the mouth and/or jaw, swelling or non-
healing of sores in the mouth or jaw, discharge, numbness or a feeling of heaviness in the jaw, or 
loosening of a tooth. These could be signs of bone damage in the jaw (osteonecrosis). Tell your 
doctor and dentist immediately if you experience such symptoms while being treated with Jubbonti 
or after stopping treatment. 
 
Rarely, patients receiving Jubbonti may have low calcium levels in the blood (hypocalcaemia); 
severely low blood calcium levels may lead to hospitalisation and may even be life-threatening. 
Symptoms include spasms, twitches, or cramps in your muscles, and/or numbness or tingling in your 
fingers, toes or around your mouth and/or seizures, confusion, or loss of consciousness. If any of these 
apply to you, tell your doctor immediately. Low calcium in the blood may also lead to a change in 
heart rhythm called QT prolongation which is seen by electrocardiogram (ECG). 
 
Rarely unusual fractures of the thigh bone may occur in patients receiving Jubbonti. Contact your 
doctor if you experience new or unusual pain in your hip, groin or thigh as this may be an early 
indication of a possible fracture of the thigh bone. 
 

31 
Rarely, allergic reactions may occur in patients receiving denosumab. Symptoms include swelling of 
the face, lips, tongue, throat or other parts of the body; rash, itching or hives on the skin, wheezing or 
difficulty breathing. Please tell your doctor if you develop any of these symptoms while being treated 
with Jubbonti. 
 
Very common side effects (may affect more than 1 in 10 people): 
• 
bone, joint, and/or muscle pain which is sometimes severe, 
• 
arm or leg pain (pain in extremity). 
 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
• 
painful urination, frequent urination, blood in the urine, inability to hold your urine, 
• 
upper respiratory tract infection, 
• 
pain, tingling or numbness that moves down your leg (sciatica), 
• 
constipation, 
• 
abdominal discomfort, 
• 
rash, 
• 
skin condition with itching, redness and/or dryness (eczema), 
• 
hair loss (alopecia). 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
• 
fever, vomiting and abdominal pain or discomfort (diverticulitis), 
• 
ear infection, 
• 
rash that may occur on the skin or sores in the mouth (lichenoid drug eruptions). 
 
Very rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 000 people): 
• 
allergic reaction that can damage blood vessels mainly in the skin (e.g. purple or brownish-red 
spots, hives or skin sores) (hypersensitivity vasculitis). 
 
Not known (frequency cannot be estimated from the available data): 
• 
talk to your doctor if you have ear pain, discharge from the ear and/or an ear infection. These 
could be signs of bone damage in the ear. 
 
Reporting of side effects 
 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects 
not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the safety of 
this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store Jubbonti 
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the label and carton after EXP. The 
expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2 °C – 8 °C). 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
Your pre-filled syringe may be left outside the refrigerator to reach room temperature (up to 25 °C) 
before injection. This will make the injection more comfortable. Once your syringe has been left to 
reach room temperature (up to 25 °C), it must be used within 30 days. Detailed information is given in 
section 7 “Instructions for Use” at the end of this leaflet. 
 

32 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to 
throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What Jubbonti contains  
 
- 
The active substance is denosumab. Each 1 mL pre-filled syringe with safety guard contains 
60 mg of denosumab (60 mg/mL). 
- 
The other ingredients are acetic acid, glacial, sorbitol (E 420), polysorbate 20, sodium 
hydroxide, hydrochloric acid and water for injections. 
 
What Jubbonti looks like and contents of the pack 
 
Jubbonti is a clear to slightly opalescent, colourless to slightly yellowish or slightly brownish solution 
for injection. Jubbonti is provided in a pre-filled, ready to use clear type I glass syringe with a stainless 
steel 29 gauge needle with safety guard, a rubber needle cap (thermoplastic elastomer), a rubber 
plunger stopper (bromobutyl rubber) and a plastic plunger rod. 
 
Each pack contains one pre-filled syringe with safety guard. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Sandoz GmbH 
Biochemiestr. 10 
6250 Kundl 
Austria 
 
Manufacturer 
Novartis Pharmaceutical Manufacturing GmbH 
Biochemiestr. 10 
6336 Langkampfen 
Austria 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
 
België/Belgique/Belgien 
Sandoz nv/sa 
Tél/Tel: +32 2 722 97 97 
 
Lietuva 
Sandoz Pharmaceuticals d.d filialas 
Tel: +370 5 2636 037 
България 
Сандоз България КЧТ 
Тел.: +359 2 970 47 47 
 
Luxembourg/Luxemburg 
Sandoz nv/sa (Belgique/Belgien) 
Tél/Tel: +32 2 722 97 97 
 
Česká republika 
Sandoz s.r.o. 
Tel: +420 234 142 222 
 
Magyarország 
Sandoz Hungária Kft. 
Tel.: +36 1 430 2890 
 
Danmark/Norge/Ísland/Sverige 
Sandoz A/S 
Tlf/Sími/Tel: +45 63 95 10 00 
 
Malta 
Sandoz Pharmaceuticals d.d. 
Tel: +35699644126 
Deutschland 
Hexal AG 
Tel: +49 8024 908 0 
 
Nederland 
Sandoz B.V. 
Tel: +31 36 52 41 600 
 

33 
Eesti 
Sandoz d.d. Eesti filiaal 
Tel: +372 665 2400 
 
Österreich 
Sandoz GmbH 
Tel: +43 5338 2000 
Ελλάδα 
SANDOZ HELLAS ΜΟΝΟΠΡΟΣΩΠΗ Α.Ε. 
Τηλ: +30 216 600 5000 
 
Polska 
Sandoz Polska Sp. z o.o. 
Tel.: +48 22 209 70 00 
 
España 
Sandoz Farmacéutica, S.A. 
Tel: +34 900 456 856 
 
Portugal 
Sandoz Farmacêutica Lda. 
Tel: +351 21 000 86 00 
 
France 
Sandoz SAS 
Tél: +33 1 49 64 48 00 
 
România 
Sandoz Pharmaceuticals SRL 
Tel: +40 21 407 51 60 
 
Hrvatska 
Sandoz d.o.o. 
Tel: +385 1 23 53 111  
 
Slovenija 
Sandoz farmacevtska družba d.d. 
Tel: +386 1 580 29 02 
Ireland 
Rowex Ltd. 
Tel: +353 27 50077 
 
Slovenská republika 
Sandoz d.d. - organizačná zložka 
Tel: +421 2 48 200 600 
 
Italia 
Sandoz S.p.A. 
Tel: +39 02 81280696 
 
Suomi/Finland 
Sandoz A/S 
Puh/Tel: +358 10 6133 400 
 
Κύπρος 
SANDOZ HELLAS ΜΟΝΟΠΡΟΣΩΠΗ Α.Ε. 
Τηλ: +30 216 600 5000 
 
United Kingdom (Northern Ireland) 
Sandoz GmbH (Austria) 
Tel: +43 5338 2000 
Latvija 
Sandoz d.d. Latvia filiāle 
Tel: +371 67 892 006 
 
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in  
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
http://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 
7. 
Instructions for Use 
 
These “Instructions for Use” contain information on how to inject Jubbonti. 
If your doctor decides that you or your caregiver may be able to give your injections of Jubbonti at 
home, ensure that your doctor or nurse shows you or your caregiver how to prepare and inject with the 
Jubbonti pre-filled syringe before you use it for the first time.  
Be sure that you read and understand these Instructions for Use before injecting with the Jubbonti pre-
filled syringe. Talk to your doctor if you have any questions. 

34 
 
Important information you need to know before injecting Jubbonti 
• 
Jubbonti is for subcutaneous injection only (inject directly into fatty layer under the skin). 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if any of the safety seals on the outer carton or the seal of the 
plastic tray is broken.  
• 
Do not shake the pre-filled syringe at any time. 
• 
Do not use if the pre-filled syringe has been dropped onto a hard surface or dropped after 
removing the needle cap. 
• 
The pre-filled syringe has a safety guard that activates to cover the needle after the injection is 
finished. The safety guard helps to prevent needle stick injuries to anyone who handles the 
pre-filled syringe after injection. 
• 
Be careful not to touch the safety guard wings before use. Touching them may cause the 
safety guard to activate too early. 
• 
Do not attempt to re-use or disassemble the pre-filled syringe. 
• 
Do not pull back on the plunger. 
Store Jubbonti 
• 
Store in a refrigerator between 2 °C and 8 °C. 
• 
Do not freeze. 
• 
If needed, you may store the pre-filled syringe at room temperature up to 25 °C for up to 
30 days. 
• 
Throw away the pre-filled syringe that has been stored at room temperature after 30 days.  
• 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the original carton until ready to use in order to protect from 
light. 
• 
Keep out of sight and reach of children. 

35 
Prepare to inject Jubbonti 
Step 1. Bring to room temperature 
Take the carton containing the pre-filled syringe 
out of the refrigerator and leave it unopened for 
about 15 to 30 minutes so that it reaches room 
temperature. 
Step 2. Gather supplies 
Ensure that you have the following (not included 
in the carton): 
• 
Alcohol wipe 
• 
Cotton ball or gauze pad 
• 
Sharps disposal container 
• 
Adhesive plaster 
Step 3. Unpack  
Open the plastic tray by peeling away the cover. 
Remove the pre-filled syringe by holding it in the 
middle as shown. 
Do not remove the needle cap until you are 
ready to inject. 
Step 4. Perform safety checks 
Look through the viewing window of the pre-
filled syringe. The liquid inside should be a clear 
to slightly opalescent, colourless to slightly 
yellowish or slightly brownish solution. You 
may see air bubbles in the liquid, which is 
normal.  
Do not attempt to remove the air.  
• 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if liquid is 
cloudy or contains visible particles. 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if it 
appears to be damaged or if it has leaked. 
• 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe after the 
expiry date (EXP), which is printed on the 
pre-filled syringe label and carton. 
In all of these cases, contact your doctor, nurse 
or pharmacist. 

36 
Step 5. Choose injection site 
You should inject into the front of the thighs or 
the lower stomach area but not the area 5 cm 
around the belly button. 
Do not inject into skin that is tender, bruised, 
red, scaly, hard or into areas with scars or 
stretch marks. 
If your caregiver, doctor or nurse is giving you 
the injection, they may also inject into the upper 
arm. 
 
Inject with Jubbonti 
Step 6. Clean injection site 
Wash your hands with soap and water. 
Clean the chosen injection site with an alcohol 
wipe. Leave it to dry before injecting. 
Do not touch or blow on the cleaned area before 
injecting. 
Step 7. Remove needle cap 
Firmly pull straight to remove the needle cap 
from the pre-filled syringe. You may see a drop 
of liquid at the end of the needle. This is normal. 
Do not put the needle cap back on. Throw away 
the needle cap. 
Step 8. Insert needle 
Gently pinch the skin at the injection site and 
hold the pinch throughout the injection. With the 
other hand insert the needle into the skin at an 
angle of approximately 45 degrees as shown. 
Do not press the plunger while inserting the 
needle. 
Step 9. Start injection 
Continue to pinch the skin. Slowly press the 
plunger as far as it will go. This will ensure 
that a full dose is injected. 

37 
Step 10. Complete injection 
Confirm that the plunger head is between the 
safety guard wings as shown. This will ensure 
that the safety guard has been activated and will 
cover the needle after the injection is finished. 
Step 11. Release plunger 
Keeping the pre-filled syringe at the injection 
site, slowly release the plunger until the needle is 
covered by the safety guard.  
Remove the pre-filled syringe from the injection 
site and release the pinch.  
There may be a small amount of blood at the 
injection site. You can press a cotton ball or 
gauze pad over the injection site until any 
bleeding stops.  
Do not rub the injection site. If needed, cover the 
injection site with a small adhesive plaster. 
 
After the injection 
 
Step 12. Dispose of the pre-filled syringe 
Put the pre-filled syringe in a sharps disposal 
container immediately after use. Do not throw 
away the pre-filled syringe into household waste. 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about proper 
disposal of the sharps disposal container. There 
may be local regulations for disposal. 
 
