1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 

2 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
KRAZATI 200 mg film-coated tablets 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each film-coated tablet contains 200 mg adagrasib. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Film-coated tablet. 
 
White to off-white, oval shaped, film-coated tablet, approximately 8 x 16 mm, with a stylised “M” on 
one side and “200” marked on the other side. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
KRAZATI as monotherapy is indicated for the treatment of adult patients with advanced non-small 
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with KRAS G12C mutation and disease progression after at least one prior 
systemic therapy. 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Treatment with KRAZATI should be initiated by a physician experienced in the use of anti-cancer 
medicinal products. 
 
The presence of a KRAS G12C mutation must be confirmed using a validated test prior to initiation of 
therapy with KRAZATI. 
 
Posology 
 
The recommended dose of KRAZATI is 600 mg (three 200 mg tablets) twice daily. 
 
Duration of treatment 
Treatment with KRAZATI is recommended until disease progression or unacceptable toxicity. 
 
Delayed or missed doses 
Patients should be advised that if less than 4 hours have passed since the scheduled time of dosing, the 
patient should take the dose as normal. If a dose is missed by more than 4 hours, the dose should be 
skipped, and dosing should resume at the next scheduled dose. If vomiting occurs after taking a dose, 
patients should be advised not to take an additional dose. The next dose should be taken as prescribed. 
 
Dose adjustments during treatment 
The recommended dose reduction levels for the management of adverse reactions are outlined in 
Table 1. 

3 
 
Table 1: 
Recommended dose reduction levels for adverse reactions 
 
Dose reduction level 
Reduced dosage 
First dose reduction 
Two 200 mg tablets (400 mg) twice daily 
Second dose reduction 
Three 200 mg tablets (600 mg) once daily 
 
The recommended dose modifications for adverse reactions are provided in Table 2. Severe (e.g., 
Grade 3) or intolerable adverse reactions require interruption of KRAZATI until sufficient 
improvement is observed before dosing is resumed. 
 
Table 2: 
Recommended dosage modifications for adverse reactions 
 
Adverse reaction 
Severitya 
Treatment modification 
Nausea or vomiting despite 
appropriate supportive care 
(including anti-emetic therapy) 
Grade 3 or 4 
Withhold KRAZATI until recovery to 
≤ Grade 1 or return to baseline 
Resume KRAZATI at the next lower 
dose level 
Diarrhoea despite appropriate 
supportive care (including 
anti-diarrhoeal therapy) 
Grade 3 or 4 
Withhold KRAZATI until recovery to 
≤ Grade 1 or return to baseline 
Resume KRAZATI at the next lower 
dose level 
Hepatotoxicity 
Grade 2 AST or ALT (3 to 
5 times the ULN) 
Decrease KRAZATI to the next lower 
level 
Grade 3 or 4 AST or ALT 
(> 5 times the ULN) 
Withhold KRAZATI until recovery to 
≤ Grade 1 or return to baseline 
Resume KRAZATI at the next lower 
dose level 
AST or ALT > 3 × ULN 
with total bilirubin 
> 2 × ULN in the absence of 
alternative causes 
Permanently discontinue KRAZATI 
QTc Prolongation 
Grade 3 
(QTc ≥ 501 ms or > 60 ms 
change from baseline) 
Withhold KRAZATI until recovery to 
≤ Grade 1 or return to baseline 
Resume KRAZATI at the next lower 
dose level 
Grade 4 (ventricular 
arrhythmia) 
Permanently discontinue KRAZATI 
Other adverse reactions 
Grade 3 or 4 
Withhold KRAZATI until recovery to 
≤ Grade 1 or return to baseline 
Resume KRAZATI at the next lower 
dose level 
ALT = alanine aminotransferase; AST = aspartate aminotransferase; ULN = upper limit of normal 
a Grading defined by National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (NCI CTCAE) version 5.0 
 
Special populations 
 
Elderly population 
No clinically relevant difference was observed among patients older and younger than 65 years of age. 
There are limited safety and efficacy data in patients 75 years or older. No dose adjustment is 
recommended (see Special populations in section 4.8). 
 
Hepatic impairment 
No clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of adagrasib are expected in patients with 
mild to severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh classes A to C). No dose adjustment is recommended 
in patients with mild, moderate, or severe hepatic impairment (see section 5.2). 
 

4 
Renal impairment 
No dose adjustment is recommended in patients with mild, moderate, or severe renal impairment (see 
section 5.2). 
 
Paediatric population 
The safety and efficacy of adagrasib in children aged 0 to 18 years have not been established. No data 
are available (see section 5.1). 
 
Method of administration 
 
KRAZATI is for oral use. The tablets can be taken with or without food and should be swallowed 
whole with water. Administration with food may improve tolerability. 
 
Administration to patients who have difficulty swallowing solids 
Patients may disperse tablets in 120 mL of non-carbonated, room-temperature water, without crushing 
them. Other liquids must not be used. Patients should stir until the tablets are dispersed and drink 
immediately. The appearance of the mixture may be white with small pieces of the tablets that should 
not be chewed. The container must be rinsed with an additional 120 mL of water, which should be 
taken immediately. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
Concomitant use of CYP3A substrates with a narrow therapeutic index (see sections 4.4 and 4.5). 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Gastrointestinal adverse reactions 
 
Gastrointestinal (GI) adverse reactions including diarrhoea, nausea, and vomiting can occur with 
adagrasib (see section 4.8). 
 
Patients should be monitored and managed using supportive care, including anti-diarrhoeals, 
antiemetics, or fluid replacement, as indicated. Based on the severity of the adverse reaction, the dose 
of KRAZATI should either be reduced, temporarily withheld until a return to ≤ Grade 1 or return to 
baseline then resumed at a reduced dose (see section 4.2). 
 
Hepatotoxicity 
 
Increased transaminases occurred in patients treated with adagrasib (see section 4.8). 
 
Liver laboratory tests, including AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, and blood bilirubin should be 
monitored prior to the start of treatment and monthly for 3 months after starting treatment with 
KRAZATI and as clinically indicated, with more frequent testing in patients who develop 
transaminase and/or alkaline phosphatase elevations. Based on the severity of the adverse reaction, the 
adagrasib dose should either be reduced, temporarily withheld until a return to ≤ Grade 1 or return to 
baseline then resumed at a reduced dose or permanently discontinued. Specific guidance regarding 
dose management of KRAZATI in patients with increased transaminases is provided in section 4.2. 
 
QT Prolongation 
 
QTc interval prolongation can occur in patients treated with adagrasib (see section 4.8). It is 
recommended that a baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) prior to treatment initiation be performed in all 
patients and repeated during treatment. 
 

5 
When possible, the use of KRAZATI should be avoided in patients with congenital long QT 
syndrome, in patients with concurrent QTc prolongation and in patients who have experienced 
torsades de pointes arrhythmia in the past. Periodic monitoring with electrocardiograms and 
electrolytes should be considered in patients with congestive heart failure, electrolyte abnormalities, or 
those who are taking medicinal products that are known to prolong the QTc interval. Based on the 
severity of the adverse reaction, and after correction of any possible electrolyte disturbances, treatment 
with KRAZATI can be continued with a reduced dose or temporarily discontinued followed by 
resumption at a reduced dose after a return to ≤ Grade 1 or return to baseline. In patients who develop 
QTc interval prolongation with signs or symptoms of life-threatening arrhythmia, KRAZATI should 
be permanently discontinued (see sections 4.2, 4.5 and 4.8). The use of medicinal products known to 
prolong the QTc interval should be avoided (see section 4.5). 
 
CYP3A substrates 
 
Adagrasib is a strong CYP3A4 inhibitor. Co-administration of medicinal products that are highly 
dependent on CYP3A for clearance and for which elevated plasma concentrations are associated with 
serious and/or life-threatening events is contraindicated (e.g., alfuzosin, amiodarone, cisapride, 
pimozide, quinidine, ergotamine, dihydroergotamine, quetiapine, lovastatin, simvastatin, sildenafil, 
sirolimus, midazolam, triazolam, ticagrelor and tacrolimus). 
 
Severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) 
 
Severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) including Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS), toxic 
epidermal necrolysis (TEN), and drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), 
which can be life-threatening or fatal, have been reported in association with KRAZATI. 
 
Patients should be advised of the signs and symptoms and be monitored closely for skin reactions. If a 
SCAR is suspected, KRAZATI should be withheld, and the patient should be referred to a specialised 
unit for assessment and treatment. If SJS, TEN or DRESS related to adagrasib is confirmed, 
KRAZATI should be permanently discontinued. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
In vitro studies showed that adagrasib is metabolised primarily by CYP3A4 and is a reversible 
inhibitor of CYP2B6, CYP2C9, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, as well as a time-dependent inhibitor of 
CYP3A4. In vitro, adagrasib is a substrate of BCRP and inhibits P-gp, BCRP, MATE-1/MATE-2K, 
OATP1B1, and OCT1. 
 
Effects of other medicinal products on adagrasib 
 
Strong CYP3A inducers 
Co-administration of multiple doses of rifampicin 600 mg QD (strong CYP3A4 inducer) with a single 
600 mg dose of adagrasib decreased adagrasib Cmax by 88% and AUC by 95% in healthy subjects. 
Concomitant use of strong CYP3A inducers should be avoided. 
 
Strong CYP3A inhibitors 
Adagrasib Cmax increased by 2.4-fold and AUC increased by 4-fold following concomitant use of a 
single dose of 200 mg (0.33 times the approved recommended dose) with itraconazole (a strong 
CYP3A inhibitor). Concomitant use of strong CYP3A inhibitors should be avoided. 
 
Effects of adagrasib on other medicinal products 
 
Substrates of cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes 
CYP3A4 substrates: Co-administration of oral midazolam (a sensitive CYP3A4 substrate) with 
multiple doses of adagrasib (400 mg BID) increased midazolam AUC by approximately 21-fold in 
healthy subjects. Administration of multiple doses of adagrasib at 600 mg BID in patients is predicted 

6 
to increase oral midazolam AUC by 31-fold. Avoid concomitant use of adagrasib with sensitive 
CYP3A substrates unless otherwise recommended in the SmPC for these substrates. 
 
CYP2C9 substrates: In vitro, adagrasib inhibits CYP2C9. Avoid concomitant use of adagrasib with 
sensitive CYP2C9 substrates where minimal concentration changes may lead to serious adverse 
reactions unless otherwise recommended in the SmPC for these substrates. 
 
CYP2D6 substrates: Co-administration of dextromethorphan (a sensitive CYP2D6 substrate) with 
multiple doses of adagrasib (400 mg BID) increased dextromethorphan AUC by 1.8-fold in healthy 
subjects. Administration of adagrasib at 600 mg BID in patients is predicted to increase 
dextromethorphan AUC by 2.4-fold. Avoid concomitant use of adagrasib with sensitive CYP2D6 
substrates where minimal concentration changes may lead to serious adverse reactions unless 
otherwise recommended in the SmPC for these substrates. 
 
Transporter systems 
 
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) substrates 
Administration of adagrasib 600 mg single dose increased digoxin (a P-gp substrate) Cmax and AUC by 
1.1-fold and 1.4-fold, respectively, in healthy subjects. Avoid concomitant use of adagrasib with P-gp 
substrates where minimal concentration changes may lead to serious adverse reactions unless 
otherwise recommended in the SmPC for these substrates. 
 
Breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) or organic anion-transporting polypeptides 1B1 (OATP1B1) 
substrates 
No clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of rosuvastatin (a BCRP/OATP1B1 
substrate) were observed when co-administered with adagrasib. 
 
Medicinal products that prolong the QTc interval 
 
The effect of co-administration of medicinal products known to prolong the QTc interval with 
adagrasib is unknown. The use of medicinal products known to prolong the QTc interval should be 
avoided. If concomitant administration of such medicinal products cannot be avoided, periodic ECG 
monitoring should be conducted (see section 4.4). 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Women of childbearing potential/contraception 
 
Use of adagrasib is not recommended in women of childbearing potential not using contraception. 
Female patients of childbearing potential receiving adagrasib must use an effective contraceptive 
method during treatment and for at least 5 days following the last dose of adagrasib. 
 
Pregnancy 
 
There are no data from the use of adagrasib in pregnant women. Animal studies are insufficient with 
respect to reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). Adagrasib is not recommended during pregnancy. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
There are no data on the presence of adagrasib or its metabolites in human milk, effects of adagrasib 
on the breast-fed child, or on milk production. A risk to breast-fed newborns/infants cannot be 
excluded. Adagrasib should not be used during breast-feeding. 
 
Fertility 
 
No clinical data are available on the possible effects of adagrasib on fertility. 
 

7 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 
Adagrasib has minor influence on the ability to drive and use machines. Dizziness (including vertigo 
and fatigue) may occur following administration of adagrasib (see section 4.8). 
Patients should be advised that dizziness may occur and that, if affected, they should not drive, use 
machines, or take part in other activities where this would put themselves or others at risk. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
The most common adverse reactions are diarrhoea (65.2%), nausea (59.9%), fatigue (54.3%), 
vomiting (50.3%), decreased appetite (32.9%), anaemia (32.4%), blood creatinine increased (31.7%), 
AST increased (29.0%), ALT increased (28.3%), peripheral oedema (23.0%), blood alkaline 
phosphatase increased (18.1%), dizziness (17.1%) and hyponatraemia (17.1%). 
 
The most common severe adverse reactions (NCI CTCAE Grade ≥ 3) are fatigue (9.0%), anaemia 
(7.2%), ALT increased (6.6%), increased lipase (4.8%), AST increased (4.6%), hyponatraemia (4.0%), 
lymphocyte count decreased (3.7%) and electrocardiogram QT prolonged (3.4%). 
 
The most common serious adverse reactions are vomiting (2.8%), nausea (2.1%), acute kidney injury 
(2.2%), diarrhoea (1.3%) and ALT increased (1.0%). 
 
Adverse reactions leading to treatment discontinuation are pneumonitis (< 1%), nausea (< 1%), fatigue 
(< 1%), ALT increased (< 1%) and AST increased (< 1%). 
 
The most common adverse reactions leading to dose reduction or interruption are nausea (14.7%), 
diarrhoea (13.3%), vomiting (13.4%), fatigue (10.2%), ALT increased (10.2%), AST increased 
(7.3%), blood creatinine increased (6.9%), anaemia (3.5%) and electrocardiogram QT prolonged 
(3.4%). 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
Adverse reactions reported in clinical studies are listed by system organ class, preferred terms and by 
frequency. 
 
Adverse reaction frequency estimates are derived from 821 patients exposed at adagrasib 600 mg 
twice-daily for a median duration of 5.2 months in pooled clinical studies involving patients with 
KRAS G12C mutation-positive, for all solid tumours. See section 5.1 for information on the 
characteristics of participants in the main clinical study. 
 
The adverse reaction frequencies from clinical studies are displayed as all-cause adverse event 
frequencies; a proportion of the events included in the frequency estimate for an adverse reaction may 
have other causes, such as the disease being treated, concomitant medicinal products, or other 
unrelated causes. 
 
Frequencies are defined as: very common (≥ 1/10); common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10); uncommon 
(≥ 1/1 000 to < 1/100); rare (≥ 1/10 000 to < 1/1 000); very rare (< 1/10 000); not known (cannot be 
estimated from the available data). Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are presented in 
the order of decreasing seriousness. 
 

8 
Table 3: 
Adverse reactions reported in patients treated with adagrasib 
 
 
All subjects treated with adagrasib 600 mg twice daily in clinical 
studies 
N = 821 
System organ class 
Adverse reaction 
Frequency 
category 
All Grades 
% 
Grade ≥ 3 
% 
Blood and lymphatic system disorders 
 
 
 
Anaemia 
Very common 
32.4 
7.2 
Lymphocyte count decreased1 
Common 
9.9 
3.7 
Metabolism and nutrition disorders 
 
 
 
Hyponatraemia 
Very common 
17.1 
4.0 
Decreased appetite 
Very common 
32.9 
2.7 
Nervous system disorders 
 
 
 
Dizziness2 
Very common 
17.1 
1.5 
Cardiac disorders 
 
 
 
Electrocardiogram QT prolonged 
Very common 
11.0 
3.4 
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal 
disorders 
 
 
 
Pneumonitis 
Common 
3.9 
1.1 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
 
 
 
Diarrhoea 
Very common 
65.2 
5.1 
Nausea 
Very common 
59.9 
4.6 
Vomiting 
Very common 
50.3 
3.3 
Lipase increased 
Very common 
12.9 
4.8 
Amylase increased 
Very common 
10.7 
1.7 
Hepatobiliary disorders 
 
 
 
Hepatotoxicity3 
Very common 
41.1 
11.3 
Renal and urinary disorders 
 
 
 
Blood creatinine increased 
Very common 
31.7 
< 1 
General disorders and administration 
site conditions 
 
 
 
Fatigue4 
Very common 
54.3 
9.0 
Peripheral oedema 
Very common 
23.0 
< 1 
1 Includes lymphocyte count decreased and lymphocytopenia 
2 Includes dizziness and vertigo 
3 Includes AST increased, ALT increased, blood alkaline phosphatase increased, blood bilirubin increased, Gamma-
glutamyltransferase increased, hepatic enzyme increased, liver function test increased, bilirubin conjugated increased, drug-
induced liver injury, hepatic cytolysis, hepatic failure, hepatitis, hepatotoxicity, hyperbilirubinaemia, hypertransaminasaemia, 
liver injury, and transaminases increased and mixed liver injury 
4 Includes fatigue and asthenia 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Gastrointestinal adverse reactions 
Gastrointestinal (GI) adverse reactions occur in 85.3% of patients taking adagrasib and include 
diarrhoea (65.2%, ≥ G3 5.1%), nausea (59.9%, ≥ G3 4.6%), and vomiting (50.3%, ≥ G3 3.3%). These 
events may lead to potential consequences such as dehydration, hyponatraemia, blood creatinine 
increased, and acute kidney injury. 
 
Diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting resulted in dose interruption or reduction in 13.3%, 14.7% and 13.4% 
of patients respectively. Discontinuations due to nausea was 0.4%, diarrhoea was 0.2% and vomiting 
was 0.1%. 
 

9 
Hepatotoxicity 
Hepatotoxicity-related reactions were reported in 41.0% (all grades) and 11.3% (Grade ≥ 3) of patients 
treated with adagrasib. Elevations of ALT occurred in 28.3% of patients and elevations of AST in 
29.0% of patients. Grade ≥ 3 elevations of ALT and AST each occurred in 6.6% and 4.6% of patients, 
respectively. Liver injury has been reported in < 1% of patients. Median time to first onset of adverse 
reactions was 22 days for ALT and AST increased, 63 days for blood bilirubin increased and 22 days 
for blood alkaline phosphatase increased, with a median duration of 22, 13 and 35 days, respectively. 
 
Elevations of ALT resulted in dose interruption and/or reduction in 10.2% of patients, and elevations 
of AST resulted in dose interruption and/or reduction in 7.3% of patients. Discontinuations due to 
elevations of AST or ALT was 0.1% and 0.5% respectively. 
 
QT prolongation 
Any grade increase in QTcF interval from baseline occurred in 43.9% of patients. Increase in QTcF to 
grade 3 from baseline occurred in 5.2% of patients. The median time to first onset of QT interval 
prolongation reported as a severe adverse event (CTCAE grade 3 and above) was 13 days with a 
median duration of 7 days. 
 
QT interval prolongation resulted in dose interruption and/or reduction in 3.4% of patients (see 
sections 4.2 and 4.4). No QT interval prolongation leading to treatment discontinuation was observed. 
 
Anaemia 
Anaemia of any grade was reported in 32.4% of patients, with 7.2% of patients with grade ≥ 3 events. 
Median time to the first onset from first dose was 27 days, with a median duration of 28 days. 
Anaemia led to dose reduction or interruption in 3.5% of patients. No treatment discontinuation due to 
anaemia was reported. 
 
Increased blood creatinine 
Increased blood creatinine of any grade was reported 31.7% of patients, with < 1% of patients with 
grade ≥ 3 events. Median time to the first onset from first dose was 22 days, with a median duration of 
19 days. Most cases were laboratory findings that did require intervention, and it remains unknown if 
these increases reflect a decrease in glomerular filtration rate. Blood creatinine may have also resulted 
from gastrointestinal fluid losses that may also be associated with dehydration and/or hyponatraemia. 
 
Blood creatinine increased led to dose reduction or interruption in 6.9% of patients. Blood creatinine 
increased led to treatment discontinuation in 0.1% of patients. 
 
Hyponatraemia 
Hyponatraemia was reported in 17.1% (all grades) and 4.0% (grade ≥ 3) of patients treated with 
adagrasib. Hyponatraemia led to dose reduction or interruption in 1.9% of patients. Median time to the 
first onset from first dose was 22 days, with a median duration of 15 days. No hyponatraemia leading 
to treatment discontinuation was observed. 
 
Lymphocyte count decreased 
Lymphocyte count decreased (which represents the incidence of laboratory findings, not of reported 
adverse events) of any worsening from baseline was reported in 62.4% of patients, with 21.1% of 
patients with grade ≥ 3 events worsening from baseline. Lymphocyte count decreased led to dose 
reduction or interruption in 0.4% of patients. No treatment discontinuation due to lymphocyte count 
decreased was reported. 
 
Special populations 
 
Elderly 
Adagrasib has been studied in 396 patients aged ≥ 65-year-old. When compared to those < 65 years, 
no clinically relevant difference in safety profile was observed, except for fatigue (46.0% vs. 41.4%); 
decreased appetite (37.4% vs. 28.7%); blood creatine increased (36.1% vs. 27.5%), peripheral oedema 
(27.8% vs. 18.6%); and dizziness (18.2% vs. 13.2%). 

10 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
In case of overdose, treatment should be interrupted, and general supportive measures initiated as 
appropriate. There is no specific antidote or treatment for adagrasib overdose. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Other antineoplastic agents, ATC code: L01XX77 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Adagrasib is a selective, irreversible inhibitor of KRAS (Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog) 
G12C that covalently binds to the mutant cysteine in KRAS G12C and locks the mutant KRAS protein 
in its inactive, GDP-bound conformation, which prevents KRAS-dependent downstream signalling. 
Adagrasib inhibits tumour cell growth and viability in cells harbouring KRAS G12C mutations and 
results in regression in KRAS G12C-positive nonclinical tumour models with minimal off-target 
activity. 
 
Cardiac electrophysiology 
Based on the concentration-QTcF relationship, the mean (90% CI) QTcF change from baseline 
(ΔQTcF) was 17.93 ms (15.13 – 20.73 ms) at the population geometric mean steady-state maximum 
concentration (Cmax,ss) in patients after administration of adagrasib 600 mg twice daily. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety 
 
The efficacy of adagrasib was evaluated in KRYSTAL-1 (Study 849-001), a multicentre, single arm, 
open-label multiple expansion cohort study. Patients with locally advanced or metastatic NSCLC with 
KRAS G12C mutation who previously received treatment with a platinum-based regimen and an 
immune checkpoint inhibitor were enrolled into the pivotal efficacy cohort, Cohort A. Identification of 
a KRAS G12C mutation was prospectively determined in tumour tissue by local laboratories using next 
generation sequencing (NGS), polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or Sanger sequencing. Patients with 
active brain metastases, carcinomatous meningitis, history of recent significant haemoptysis or 
haemorrhage, or prior treatment with a KRAS G12C inhibitor were excluded from the pivotal cohort. 
Patients received adagrasib 600 mg orally twice daily as monotherapy until unacceptable toxicity or 
disease progression. 
 
The primary efficacy endpoint for Cohort A was objective response rate (ORR) in accordance with 
RECIST v1.1, and duration of response (DOR), was a secondary endpoint. Both endpoints were 
evaluated using blinded independent central review. 
 
A total of 116 patients were enrolled and treated with adagrasib for a median of 5.7 months and a 
mean of 7.0 months. 
 
The median age was 64.0 years (range: 25 to 89 years); 56.0% were female; 83.6% were White; 7.8% 
were Black; 4.3% were Asian, and 4.3% were other. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 
performance status was 0 (15.5%) or 1 (83.6%). Tumour histology was adenocarcinoma for 97.4% of 

11 
patients, and 88.8% of patients had metastatic disease. Patients received a median of 2 prior systemic 
therapies (range: 1 to 7); 43.1% received 1 line, 34.5% received 2 lines, 10.3% received 3 lines, and 
12.1% received 4 or more lines; 98.3% received both prior platinum and prior anti-PD-1/PD-L1 
therapy. Sites of disease included lung 86.2%, lymph node 58.6%, bone 43.1%, brain 29.3%, liver 
20.7%, adrenals 19.8%, and other 30.2%. 
 
Efficacy results are summarised in Table 4. 
 
Table 4: 
Efficacy results for patients with advanced KRAS G12C-mutant NSCLC 
previously treated with platinum chemotherapy and an immune checkpoint 
inhibitor in KRYSTAL-1 
 
Endpoint 
Adagrasib 
(n = 116) 
Objective response rate (95% CI)a,b 
41.4 (32.3, 50.9) 
Complete response rate, % 
0.9 
Partial response rate, % 
40.5 
Duration of responsea,b 
 
Number of patients with an objective response 
48 
Median in months (95% CI) 
8.5 (6.2, 13.8) 
Proportion of responses ≥ 6 months, %c 
58.3 
CI = Confidence interval 
a Assessed by Blinded Independent Central Review (BICR) 
b Based on 15 October 2021 data cut 
c Observed proportion of patients with duration of response beyond landmark time 
 
Paediatric population 
 
The European Medicines Agency has waived the obligation to submit the results of studies with 
adagrasib in all subsets of the paediatric population for treatment of all solid and haematological 
malignancies (see section 4.2 for information on paediatric use). 
 
Conditional marketing authorisation 
 
This medicinal product has been authorised under the ‘conditional approval’ scheme. This means that 
further evidence on this medicinal product is awaited. 
 
The European Medicines Agency will review new information on this medicinal product at least every 
year and this SmPC will be updated as necessary. 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
The pharmacokinetics of adagrasib have been characterised in healthy subjects and in patients with 
KRAS G12C-mutation. Adagrasib AUC and Cmax increase dose proportionally over the dose range of 
400 mg to 600 mg. With a 600 mg twice daily dosing regimen in patients, adagrasib steady state was 
reached within 8 days of dosing, and adagrasib accumulated approximately 6-fold relative to a single 
dose. 
 
Absorption 
 
The absolute oral bioavailability of adagrasib is unknown. The median Tmax of adagrasib is 
approximately 6 hours. 
 
Effect of food 
No clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of adagrasib were observed following 
administration of a high-fat and high-calorie meal. 
 

12 
Distribution 
 
The geometric mean (CV%) apparent volume of distribution of adagrasib (Vz/F) in healthy subjects is 
942 L (57%). Human plasma protein binding of adagrasib is approximately 99%. 
 
Elimination 
 
Based on a population PK analysis, the estimated terminal elimination half-life (t1/2) and apparent oral 
clearance (CL/F) at steady state in patients are approximately 29 hours and 25.8 L/h, respectively. 
 
Metabolism 
 
Adagrasib is metabolised primarily by CYP3A4 and inhibits its own CYP3A4 metabolism. 
 
Excretion 
 
Following a single oral dose of radiolabelled adagrasib, approximately 75% of the dose was recovered 
in faeces and 4.5% recovered in urine. 
 
Special populations 
 
Based on a population pharmacokinetic analysis, no clinically meaningful differences in the 
pharmacokinetics of adagrasib were observed based on age (19 to 89 years), sex, race (White, Black 
and Asian), body weight (36 to 139 kg), ECOG PS (0, 1), or tumour burden. No clinically significant 
differences in the pharmacokinetics of adagrasib are expected in patients with mild to severe renal 
impairment (CLcr 15 to < 90 mL/min estimated by Cockcroft-Gault equation) or in patients with mild 
to severe hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh classes A to C). 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
Repeat dose toxicity 
 
In repeat dose non-clinical safety studies with adagrasib, early deaths occurred in rats at dose 
≥ 300 mg/kg/day (human equivalent dose of 2 900 mg/day). In animals that survived, the primary 
finding in rats and dogs was reversible phospholipidosis in multiple organs. In the rat, the target 
tissues included lung, trachea, heart, skeletal muscle, bone marrow, spleen, pancreas and female sex 
organs. In the dog, target tissues included bone marrow, lung, heart and spleen. The extent of 
vacuolation and the presence of foamy macrophages were more prominent in the rat as compared to 
dog, and these effects occurred at systemic exposures (based on AUC) below those in humans 
administered adagrasib at 600 mg twice daily in both species. The no observed adverse effect level in 
the 13-week rat and dog study was 150 mg/kg/day (human equivalent dose of 1 450 mg/day) and 
15 mg/kg (human equivalent dose of 600 mg/day), respectively. 
 
Genotoxicity / Carcinogenicity 
 
Adagrasib was not mutagenic or genotoxic in a battery of in vitro and in vivo assays. Carcinogenicity 
studies have not been conducted with adagrasib. 
 
Reproductive toxicity 
 
Dedicated fertility studies with adagrasib have not been conducted in animals. In the general 
toxicology studies conducted in rats and dogs, there was evidence of vacuolation in female sex organs 
that was suggestive of phospholipidosis, which reversed after cessation of dosing and was not 
considered adverse. 
 
Adagrasib administration to pregnant rats at doses up to 270 mg/kg/day (human equivalent dose of 
2 600 mg/day) during periods of organogenesis led to maternal toxicities, however at 90 mg/kg/day 

13 
(human equivalent dose of 870 mg/day) there were no adverse effects on maternal or foetal 
development. In rabbits, at doses of 30 mg/kg/day (human equivalent dose of 580 mg/day) there were 
no adverse effects on dams and foetuses. Higher doses in rabbits led to maternal toxicities and 
embryofoetal lethality. In both the rat and rabbit studies, the exposures associated with no adverse 
effect dose levels were lower (less than 1-fold) compared to those obtained in humans at the clinical 
dose of 600 mg twice daily. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
Tablet core 
Microcrystalline cellulose (E 460) 
Mannitol (E 421) 
Crospovidone 
Silica, colloidal anhydrous (E 551) 
Magnesium stearate (vegetable) 
 
Film-coating 
Hypromellose 
Titanium dioxide (E 171) 
Polydextrose (E 1200) 
Talc (E 553b) 
Maltodextrin 
Medium chain triglycerides (vegetable) 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
Not applicable. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
2 years. 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
This medicinal product does not require any special temperature storage conditions. Store in the 
original package in order to protect from moisture. 
Keep the bottle tightly closed. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
Each carton contains one white opaque HDPE bottle with a white, child resistant polypropylene 
closure and an aluminium foil heat induction seal. Each HDPE bottle contains two 1 g of silica gel 
desiccant containers. 
 
Pack sizes: bottles with 120 and 180 film-coated tablets. 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 

14 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharma EEIG 
Plaza 254 
Blanchardstown Corporate Park 2 
Dublin 15, D15 T867 
Ireland 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/23/1744/001 
EU/1/23/1744/002 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 05 January 2024 
Date of renewal: 18 November 2024 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu/. 
 

15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO 
THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT 
 
E. 
SPECIFIC OBLIGATION TO COMPLETE POST-
AUTHORISATION MEASURES FOR THE CONDITIONAL 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 

16 
A. 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release 
 
Swords Laboratories Unlimited Company T/A Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Operations 
External Manufacturing 
Plaza 254 
Blanchardstown Corporate Park 2 
Dublin 15, D15 T867 
Ireland 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (see Annex I: Summary of Product 
Characteristics, section 4.2). 
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in Article 9 of 
Regulation (EC) No 507/2006 and, accordingly, the marketing authorisation holder (MAH) 
shall submit PSURs every 6 months. 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union 
reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any 
subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall submit the first PSUR for this medicinal product 
within 6 months following authorisation. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance 
activities and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the 
marketing authorisation and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• 
At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• 
Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of 
an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 
 
 

17 
E. 
SPECIFIC OBLIGATION TO COMPLETE POST-AUTHORISATION MEASURES 
FOR THE CONDITIONAL MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
This being a conditional marketing authorisation and pursuant to Article 14-a of Regulation (EC) 
No 726/2004, the MAH shall complete, within the stated timeframe, the following measures: 
 
Description 
Due date 
In order to further confirm the efficacy and safety of adagrasib in the treatment of 
patients with KRAS G12C-mutated NSCLC, the MAH should submit the final 
clinical study report including the final OS analysis for the phase 3 clinical study 
KRYSTAL-12, comparing adagrasib versus docetaxel for the treatment of 
previously treated patients with KRAS G12C mutated NSCLC. 
The clinical study report will be submitted by: 
Q3/2026 
 

18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 

19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 

20 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING AND THE IMMEDIATE 
PACKAGING 
 
CARTON AND BOTTLE LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
KRAZATI 200 mg film-coated tablets 
adagrasib 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
 
Each film-coated tablet contains 200 mg adagrasib. 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
120 film-coated tablets 
180 film-coated tablets 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Oral use. 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 
Store in the original package in order to protect from moisture. Keep the bottle tightly closed. 
 
 

21 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharma EEIG 
Plaza 254 
Blanchardstown Corporate Park 2 
Dublin 15, D15 T867 
Ireland 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/23/1744/001 120 film-coated tablets 
EU/1/23/1744/002 180 film-coated tablets 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
KRAZATI 200 mg [Outer packaging only] 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. [Outer packaging only] 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN [Outer packaging only] 
 

22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET 

23 
Package leaflet: Information for the patient 
 
KRAZATI 200 mg film-coated tablets 
adagrasib 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What KRAZATI is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you take KRAZATI 
3. 
How to take KRAZATI 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store KRAZATI 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What KRAZATI is and what it is used for 
 
KRAZATI contains the active substance adagrasib and belongs to a group of medicines known as 
antineoplastic agents, cancer medicines. 
 
KRAZATI is used to treat adults with a type of lung cancer called non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) when it is advanced or has spread to other parts of the body. 
 
KRAZATI is used when previous treatments were not effective in stopping the growth of the cancer, 
and when the cancer cells have mutations (changes) that allow them to produce an abnormal form of a 
protein called KRAS G12C. Your doctor will test for this change in your cancer cells beforehand to 
make sure that KRAZATI is right for you. 
 
How does KRAZATI work? 
 
The abnormal KRAS G12C protein makes the cancer cells grow out of control. The active substance 
in KRAZATI, adagrasib, attaches to this abnormal protein and stops it from working, which may slow 
down or stop the growth of the cancer. 
 
If you have any questions about how this medicine works or why this medicine has been prescribed 
for you, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you take KRAZATI 
 
Do not take KRAZATI 
- 
if you are allergic to adagrasib or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in 
section 6). 

24 
- 
if you are taking any of the following medicines as they may cause serious and/or life-
threatening side effects: 
- 
alfuzosin (used to treat benign prostatic hyperplasia) 
- 
amiodarone (used to treat heart problems) 
- 
cisapride (used to treat symptoms of night time heartburn and other gastrointestinal 
disorders 
- 
pimozide, quetiapine (antipsychotic medicines) 
- 
quinidine (used to treat malaria and heart problems) 
- 
ergotamine, dihydroergotamine (used to treat migraines) 
- 
lovastatin, simvastatin (used to lower cholesterol levels) 
- 
sildenafil (for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension) 
- 
triazolam (used to treat insomnia) 
- 
sirolimus, tacrolimus (used to prevent rejection of transplanted organs) 
- 
ticagrelor (used to prevent heart attack and stroke) 
 
Warnings and precautions 
 
Talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before taking KRAZATI. 
 
KRAZATI may affect your liver. Your doctor may carry out some tests before you begin taking 
KRAZATI, once a month for the first 3 months of your treatment and as considered necessary by your 
doctor. Based on the results of these tests, your dose of KRAZATI may be either reduced, interrupted, 
or stopped. 
 
Talk to your doctor before you take KRAZATI if you: 
- 
have heart or circulatory problems, 
- 
experience or have experienced abnormal electrical activity of the heart that affects its rhythm 
or 
- 
take any heart medicines that carry a risk of heart rhythm problems, see “Other medicines and 
KRAZATI” 
 
Your doctor will decide if this medicine is suitable for you and may monitor your heart with an 
electrocardiogram (ECG; a test which measures the electrical activity of the heart) and adjust your 
dose of KRAZATI accordingly. 
 
Talk to your doctor during your treatment if you: 
- 
develop problems such as diarrhoea, feeling sick (nausea), and vomiting. Your doctor may 
decide to reduce or interrupt the dose or stop treatment with KRAZATI. 
- 
feel dizzy or develop any heart problems such as a fast or irregular heartbeat. 
 
Serious and potentially fatal skin reactions (such as Stevens–Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal 
necrolysis and drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms) have been reported in 
association with KRAZATI. 
 
Stop using KRAZATI and seek medical attention immediately if you notice any of the symptoms 
related to these serious skin reactions (which may include reddish non-elevated, target-like or circular 
patches on the trunk, often with central blisters, skin peeling, ulcers of mouth, throat, nose, genitals 
and eyes, widespread rash, and enlarged lymph nodes. These serious skin rashes can be preceded by 
fever and flu-like symptoms). 
 
Children and adolescents 
 
KRAZATI has not been studied in children or adolescents. Treatment with KRAZATI is not 
recommended in persons under 18 years of age. 
 

25 
Other medicines and KRAZATI 
 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other 
medicines. This includes herbal supplements and medicines obtained without prescription. This is 
because KRAZATI can affect how some other medicines work, and some other medicines can affect 
how KRAZATI works. 
 
See ‘Do not take KRAZATI’ if you are taking any medicines that might interact with KRAZATI. 
 
Certain medicines and herbal supplements may reduce how well KRAZATI works by decreasing the 
amount of KRAZATI in the blood. These medicines include: 
• 
Rifampicin (used to treat tuberculosis and other infections) 
• 
Carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin (used to treat epilepsy) 
• 
St John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum; available as either a medicine or a herbal supplement 
and is used to treat depression) 
 
Certain medicines may increase the risk of side effects of KRAZATI by increasing the levels of 
KRAZATI in the blood. These medicines include: 
• 
Itraconazole, ketoconazole. posaconazole, or voriconazole (used to treat fungal infections) 
• 
Clarithromycin, telithromycin, or troleandomycin (used to treat bacterial infections) 
• 
Ritonavir (used with other medications to treat HIV infection) 
 
KRAZATI may increase the side effects of some medicines by increasing the amount of these 
medicines in the blood. Examples of these medicines include: 
• 
Warfarin (used to treat blood clots). Your doctor may need to monitor the time your blood takes 
to clot (prothrombin time or INR test). 
 
Some medicines may cause a change in the electrical conduction in your heart, particularly when taken 
with KRAZATI. Examples include: 
• 
some medicines for heart rhythm disorders (e.g. amiodarone, disopyramide, dofetilide, 
dronedarone, flecainide, hydroquinidine, ibutilide, nifekalant, procainamide, quinidine, sotalol) 
• 
some medicines to treat bacterial or fungal infections (e.g. azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, 
clarithromycin, erythromycin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, roxithromycin, fluconazole) or 
malaria (e.g. chloroquine, halofantrine, hydroxychloroquine) 
• 
some medicines used to treat gastrointestinal disorders (e.g., chlorpromazine, domperidone, 
droperidol, and ondansetron for nausea; loperamide for diarrhoea) 
• 
some medicines used to treat schizophrenia and mood disorders (e.g. chlorprothixene, 
citalopram, escitalopram, haloperidol, sulpiride) 
• 
others (e.g. anagrelide and cilostazol to prevent blood clots; bepridil for high blood pressure; 
donepezil for Alzheimer’s disease; methadone for pain and opioid addiction; pimozide for tics 
associated with Tourette’s Disorder; terfenadine for allergic rhinitis; terodiline for bladder 
incontinence) 
 
Talk with your doctor if you are taking these or any other medicines. 
 
KRAZATI with food and drink 
 
Drinking certain brands of grapefruit juice and in large amounts whilst you start taking KRAZATI 
may increase your chance of getting side effects by increasing the levels of KRAZATI in the blood. 
 
Pregnancy 
 
If you are pregnant or breast-feeding, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask 
your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking this medicine. 
 

26 
Do not take KRAZATI if you are pregnant, or suspect you are pregnant, unless advised by your 
doctor. The effects of KRAZATI in pregnant women are not known. 
 
Contraception 
 
Women who can become pregnant must use an effective method of contraception to avoid becoming 
pregnant during treatment with KRAZATI and for at least 5 days following the last dose. Talk to your 
doctor about the most suitable contraception for you. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
Do not breast-feed your baby whilst you are being treated with KRAZATI. It is not known if this 
medicine passes to the baby via breast milk. 
 
Driving and using machines 
 
KRAZATI has a minor influence on the ability to drive and use machines. If you feel dizzy, a spinning 
sensation or tiredness do not drive, use machines or take part in activities where this puts yourself or 
others at risk. 
 
 
3. 
How to take KRAZATI 
 
You will be prescribed this medicine by a doctor experienced in the use of anti-cancer medicines. 
Always take this medicine exactly as your doctor or pharmacist has told you. Check with your doctor 
or pharmacist if you are not sure. 
 
How much to take 
 
The recommended dose is three 200 mg tablets (600 mg in total) taken twice daily. 
 
Do not change your dose unless your doctor or pharmacist tells you to. 
Your doctor may decrease the dose or stop your medicine depending on how well you tolerate it. 
 
How to take 
 
Take the medicine at the same time each day. 
You can take the medicine with or without food. 
Swallow the tablets whole with water. 
 
If you cannot swallow tablets whole: 
- 
Place your dose of KRAZATI in half a glass (not less than 120 mL) of still, room temperature 
drinking water, without crushing the tablets. Do not use any other liquids, including acidic 
beverages (e.g. fruit juices). 
- 
Swirl gently until the mixture looks white with small pieces of tablet. Do not to chew the pieces. 
- 
Drink the mixture immediately. 
- 
Rinse the glass with an additional half a glass of water and drink it immediately to make sure 
that you have taken the full dose of KRAZATI. 
 
If you take more KRAZATI than you should 
 
Contact your doctor, pharmacist or nurse immediately if you take more tablets than recommended. 
 
If you vomit after taking KRAZATI 
 
If you vomit after taking a dose, do not take an extra dose. Take your next dose at your next scheduled 
time. 

27 
 
If you forget to take KRAZATI 
 
If you miss a dose, take it as soon as possible. If you miss your dose by more than 4 hours, skip that 
dose and take your usual dose at the next scheduled time. Do not take a double dose to make up for a 
forgotten dose. 
 
If you stop taking KRAZATI 
 
Do not stop taking this medicine. Talk to your doctor first. It is important to take this medicine every 
day, for as long as your doctor tells you to. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) and serious possible side effects of 
KRAZATI are: 
 
• 
QT prolongation, a heart conduction abnormality that can lead to a life-threatening heart rhythm 
 
Tell your doctor immediately if you develop: 
• 
chest pain 
• 
shortness of breath 
• 
a fast heart rate or pounding heartbeat. 
 
Your doctor may monitor your heart with an ECG (electrocardiogram) and may decide to either 
reduce the dose of KRAZATI or stop your treatment (see section 2). 
 
• 
Increased levels of certain liver enzymes (ALT, AST) and bilirubin (a substance in the liver that 
can cause yellowing of the skin and eyes) are signs of liver problems. Your doctor should do 
blood tests to check how well your liver is working and may decide to either reduce or interrupt 
the dose or stop treatment with KRAZATI (see section 2). 
 
Other possible side effects of KRAZATI may include: 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
• 
low levels of red blood cell counts (anaemia) which can cause tiredness and pale skin 
• 
low blood sodium levels which can cause headache, tiredness, fits and coma 
• 
loss of appetite 
• 
feeling dizzy, a spinning sensation 
• 
a sign of worsening kidney problems (creatinine increased) 
• 
feeling sick (nausea) 
• 
diarrhoea 
• 
vomiting 
• 
abnormal blood test results indicate high levels of lipase and/or amylase in your blood stream 
• 
tiredness, weakness 
• 
swelling especially of the ankles and feet due to fluid retention 
 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
• 
inflammation in the lungs causing shortness of breath and cough (pneumonitis) 
• 
low levels of lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell; lymphocytopenia) 
 

28 
Reporting of side effects 
 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects, you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store KRAZATI 
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the bottle label and carton after EXP. 
The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
This medicinal product does not require any special temperature storage conditions. Store in the 
original package in order to protect from moisture. Keep the bottle tightly closed. 
 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to 
throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What KRAZATI contains 
- 
The active substance is adagrasib. Each film-coated tablet contains 200 mg adagrasib. 
- 
The other ingredients are: 
Tablet core 
Microcrystalline cellulose (E 460), mannitol (E 421), crospovidone, silica colloidal anhydrous 
(E 551), magnesium stearate (vegetable). 
Film-coating 
Hypromellose, titanium dioxide (E 171), polydextrose (E 1200), talc (E 553b), maltodextrin, 
medium chain triglycerides (vegetable). 
 
What KRAZATI looks like and contents of the pack 
 
KRAZATI film-coated tablets are white to off-white and oval shaped, with a stylised ‘M’ on one side 
and ‘200’ marked on the other side. 
 
The medicine comes in white opaque plastic bottles with white, child resistant lid and a heat-induction 
seal. Each bottle contains two silica gel desiccant packets which must be kept in the bottle to help 
protect your tablets from moisture. They must not be swallowed. 
 
The pack sizes are bottles with either 120 or 180 film-coated tablets. 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharma EEIG 
Plaza 254 
Blanchardstown Corporate Park 2 
Dublin 15, D15 T867 
Ireland 
 

29 
Manufacturer 
Swords Laboratories Unlimited Company T/A Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Operations 
External Manufacturing 
Plaza 254 
Blanchardstown Corporate Park 2 
Dublin 15, D15 T867 
Ireland 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
 
Belgique/België/Belgien 
N.V. Bristol-Myers Squibb Belgium S.A. 
Tél/Tel: + 32 2 352 76 11 
medicalinfo.belgium@bms.com 
Lietuva 
Swixx Biopharma UAB 
Tel: + 370 52 369140 
medinfo.lithuania@swixxbiopharma.com 
България 
Swixx Biopharma EOOD 
Teл.: + 359 2 4942 480 
medinfo.bulgaria@swixxbiopharma.com 
Luxembourg/Luxemburg 
N.V. Bristol-Myers Squibb Belgium S.A. 
Tél/Tel: + 32 2 352 76 11 
medicalinfo.belgium@bms.com 
Česká republika 
Bristol-Myers Squibb spol. s r.o. 
Tel: + 420 221 016 111 
medinfo.czech@bms.com 
Magyarország 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Kft. 
Tel.: + 36 1 301 9797 
Medinfo.hungary@bms.com 
Danmark 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Denmark 
Tlf: + 45 45 93 05 06 
medinfo.denmark@bms.com 
Malta 
A.M. Mangion Ltd 
Tel: + 356 23976333 
pv@ammangion.com 
Deutschland 
Bristol-Myers Squibb GmbH & Co. KGaA 
Tel: 0800 0752002 (+ 49 89 121 42 350) 
medwiss.info@bms.com 
Nederland 
Bristol-Myers Squibb B.V. 
Tel: + 31 (0)30 300 2222 
medischeafdeling@bms.com 
Eesti 
Swixx Biopharma OÜ 
Tel: + 372 640 1030 
medinfo.estonia@swixxbiopharma.com 
Norge 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Norway AS 
Tlf: + 47 67 55 53 50 
medinfo.norway@bms.com 
Ελλάδα 
Bristol-Myers Squibb A.E. 
Τηλ: + 30 210 6074300 
medinfo.greece@bms.com 
Österreich 
Bristol-Myers Squibb GesmbH 
Tel: + 43 1 60 14 30 
medinfo.austria@bms.com 
España 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, S.A. 
Tel: + 34 91 456 53 00 
informacion.medica@bms.com 
Polska 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Polska Sp. z o.o. 
Tel.: + 48 22 2606400 
informacja.medyczna@bms.com 
France 
Bristol-Myers Squibb SAS 
Tél: + 33 (0)1 58 83 84 96 
infomed@bms.com 
Portugal 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Farmacêutica Portuguesa, 
S.A. 
Tel: + 351 21 440 70 00 
portugal.medinfo@bms.com 

30 
Hrvatska 
Swixx Biopharma d.o.o. 
Tel: + 385 1 2078 500 
medinfo.croatia@swixxbiopharma.com 
România 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Marketing Services S.R.L. 
Tel: + 40 (0)21 272 16 19 
medinfo.romania@bms.com 
Ireland 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceuticals uc 
Tel: 1 800 749 749 (+ 353 (0)1 483 3625) 
medical.information@bms.com 
Slovenija 
Swixx Biopharma d.o.o. 
Tel: + 386 1 2355 100 
medinfo.slovenia@swixxbiopharma.com 
Ísland 
Vistor ehf. 
Sími: + 354 535 7000 
medical.information@bms.com 
Slovenská republika 
Swixx Biopharma s.r.o. 
Tel: + 421 2 20833 600 
medinfo.slovakia@swixxbiopharma.com 
Italia 
Bristol-Myers Squibb S.r.l. 
Tel: + 39 06 50 39 61 
medicalinformation.italia@bms.com 
Suomi/Finland 
Oy Bristol-Myers Squibb (Finland) Ab 
Puh/Tel: + 358 9 251 21 230 
medinfo.finland@bms.com 
Κύπρος 
Bristol-Myers Squibb A.E. 
Τηλ: 800 92666 (+ 30 210 6074300) 
medinfo.greece@bms.com 
Sverige 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Aktiebolag 
Tel: + 46 8 704 71 00 
medinfo.sweden@bms.com 
Latvija 
Swixx Biopharma SIA 
Tel: + 371 66164750 
medinfo.latvia@swixxbiopharma.com 
 
This leaflet was last revised in month YYYY. 
 
This medicine has been given ‘conditional approval’. This means that there is more evidence to come 
about this medicine. 
 
The European Medicines Agency will review new information on this medicine at least every year and 
this leaflet will be updated as necessary. 
 
Other sources of information 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency website: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/. 
 
This leaflet is available in all EU/EEA languages on the European Medicines Agency website. 
 
