1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 

2 
 
▼This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. See section 
4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Obodence 60 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each pre-filled syringe contains 60 mg of denosumab in 1 mL of solution (60 mg/mL). 
 
Denosumab is a human monoclonal IgG2 antibody produced in a mammalian cell line (Chinese hamster 
ovary cells) by recombinant DNA technology. 
 
Excipient with known effect 
 
This medicine contains 44 mg sorbitol (E420) in each mL of solution. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Solution for injection (injection). 
 
Clear, colourless to slightly yellow solution with a pH between 4.9 and 5.5 and an osmolality of 266 – 
326 mOsmol/kg. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women and in men at increased risk of fractures. In 
postmenopausal women denosumab significantly reduces the risk of vertebral, non-vertebral and hip 
fractures. 
 
Treatment of bone loss associated with hormone ablation in men with prostate cancer at increased risk of 
fractures (see section 5.1). In men with prostate cancer receiving hormone ablation, denosumab 
significantly reduces the risk of vertebral fractures. 
 
Treatment of bone loss associated with long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy in adult patients at 
increased risk of fracture (see section 5.1). 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Posology 
 
The recommended dose is 60 mg denosumab administered as a single subcutaneous injection once every 6 
months into the thigh, abdomen or upper arm. 
 
Patients must be adequately supplemented with calcium and vitamin D (see section 4.4).  
 
Patients treated with Obodence should be given the package leaflet and the patient reminder card. 
 

3 
 
The optimal total duration of antiresorptive treatment for osteoporosis (including both denosumab and 
bisphosphonates) has not been established. The need for continued treatment should be re-evaluated 
periodically based on the benefits and potential risks of denosumab on an individual patient basis, 
particularly after 5 or more years of use (see section 4.4). 
 
Elderly (age ≥ 65) 
No dose adjustment is required in elderly patients. 
 
Renal impairment 
No dose adjustment is required in patients with renal impairment (see section 4.4 for recommendations 
relating to monitoring of calcium). 
 
No data is available in patients with long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy and severe renal impairment 
(Glomerular filtration rate, GFR < 30 mL/min). 
 
Hepatic impairment 
The safety and efficacy of denosumab have not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment (see section 
5.2). 
 
Paediatric population 
Obodence should not be used in children aged < 18 years because of safety concerns of serious 
hypercalcaemia, and potential inhibition of bone growth and lack of tooth eruption (see sections 4.4 and 
5.3). Currently available data for children aged 2 to 17 years are described in sections 5.1 and 5.2. 
 
Method of administration 
 
For subcutaneous use. 
 
Administration should be performed by an individual who has been adequately trained in injection 
techniques. 
 
The instructions for use, handling and disposal are given in section 6.6. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
Hypocalcaemia (see section 4.4). 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the name and the batch number of the 
administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Calcium and vitamin D supplementation 
 
Adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is important in all patients. 
 
Precautions for use 
 
Hypocalcaemia 
It is important to identify patients at risk for hypocalcaemia. Hypocalcaemia must be corrected by adequate 
intake of calcium and vitamin D before initiating therapy. Clinical monitoring of calcium levels is 
recommended before each dose and, in patients predisposed to hypocalcaemia within two weeks, after the 
initial dose. If any patient presents with suspected symptoms of hypocalcaemia during treatment (see 
section 4.8 for symptoms) calcium levels should be measured. Patients should be encouraged to report 

4 
 
symptoms indicative of hypocalcaemia. 
In the post-marketing setting, severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia (resulting in hospitalisation, life-
threatening events, and fatal cases) have been reported. While most cases occurred in the first few weeks of 
initiating therapy, it has also occurred later. 
 
Concomitant glucocorticoid treatment is an additional risk factor for hypocalcaemia. 
 
Renal impairment 
Patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min) or receiving dialysis are at greater 
risk of developing hypocalcaemia. The risks of developing hypocalcaemia and accompanying parathyroid 
hormone elevations increase with increasing degree of renal impairment. Severe and fatal cases have been 
reported. Adequate intake of calcium, vitamin D and regular monitoring of calcium is especially important in 
these patients, see above. 
 
Skin infections 
Patients receiving denosumab may develop skin infections (predominantly cellulitis) leading to 
hospitalisation (see section 4.8). Patients should be advised to seek prompt medical attention if they develop 
signs or symptoms of cellulitis. 
 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) 
ONJ has been reported rarely in patients receiving denosumab for osteoporosis (see section 4.8). 
 
The start of treatment/new treatment course should be delayed in patients with unhealed open soft tissue 
lesions in the mouth. A dental examination with preventive dentistry and an individual benefit-risk 
assessment is recommended prior to treatment with denosumab in patients with concomitant risk factors. 
 
The following risk factors should be considered when evaluating a patient’s risk of developing ONJ: 
 
potency of the medicinal product that inhibits bone resorption (higher risk for highly potent 
compounds), route of administration (higher risk for parenteral administration) and cumulative dose 
of bone resorption therapy. 
 
cancer, co-morbid conditions (e.g. anaemia, coagulopathies, infection), smoking. 
 
concomitant therapies: corticosteroids, chemotherapy, angiogenesis inhibitors, radiotherapy to head 
and neck. 
 
poor oral hygiene, periodontal disease, poorly fitting dentures, history of dental disease, invasive 
dental procedures (e.g. tooth extractions). 
 
All patients should be encouraged to maintain good oral hygiene, receive routine dental check-ups, and 
immediately report any oral symptoms such as dental mobility, pain or swelling or non-healing of sores or 
discharge during treatment with denosumab. While on treatment, invasive dental procedures should be 
performed only after careful consideration and be avoided in close proximity to denosumab administration. 
 
The management plan of the patients who develop ONJ should be set up in close collaboration between the 
treating physician and a dentist or oral surgeon with expertise in ONJ. Temporary interruption of treatment 
should be considered until the condition resolves and contributing risk factors are mitigated where possible. 
 
Osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal 
Osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal has been reported with denosumab. Possible risk factors for 
osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal include steroid use and chemotherapy and/or local risk factors 
such as infection or trauma. The possibility of osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal should be 
considered in patients receiving denosumab who present with ear symptoms including chronic ear 
infections. 
 
Atypical fractures of the femur 
Atypical femoral fractures have been reported in patients receiving denosumab (see section 4.8). Atypical 
femoral fractures may occur with little or no trauma in the subtrochanteric and diaphyseal regions of the 
femur. Specific radiographic findings characterise these events. Atypical femoral fractures have also been 
reported in patients with certain co-morbid conditions (e.g. vitamin D deficiency, rheumatoid arthritis, 
hypophosphatasia) and with use of certain medicinal products (e.g. bisphosphonates, glucocorticoids, proton 

5 
 
pump inhibitors). These events have also occurred without antiresorptive therapy. Similar fractures reported 
in association with bisphosphonates are often bilateral; therefore, the contralateral femur should be 
examined in denosumab-treated patients who have sustained a femoral shaft fracture. Discontinuation of 
denosumab therapy in patients suspected to have an atypical femur fracture should be considered pending 
evaluation of the patient based on an individual benefit-risk assessment. During denosumab treatment, 
patients should be advised to report new or unusual thigh, hip, or groin pain. Patients presenting with such 
symptoms should be evaluated for an incomplete femoral fracture. 
 
Long-term antiresorptive treatment 
Long-term antiresorptive treatment (including both denosumab and bisphosphonates) may contribute to an 
increased risk for adverse outcomes such as osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femur fractures due to 
significant suppression of bone remodelling (see section 4.2). 
 
Treatment discontinuation 
Following denosumab discontinuation, decrease in bone mineral density (BMD) is expected (see section 
5.1), leading to an increased risk for fractures. Thus, monitoring of BMD is recommended, and alternative 
treatment should be considered according to clinical guidelines. 
 
Concomitant treatment with other denosumab-containing medicinal products 
Patients being treated with denosumab should not be treated concomitantly with other denosumab-
containing medicinal products (for prevention of skeletal related events in adults with bone metastases from 
solid tumours). 
 
Hypercalcaemia in paediatric patients 
Denosumab should not be used in paediatric patients (age < 18). Serious hypercalcaemia has been reported. 
Some clinical trial cases were complicated by acute renal injury. 
 
Warnings for excipients 
This medicine contains 44 mg sorbitol in each mL of solution. The additive effect of concomitantly 
administered products containing sorbitol (or fructose) and dietary intake of sorbitol (or fructose) should be 
taken into account. 
 
This medicinal product contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per 60 mg that is to say essentially 
‘sodium-free’. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
In an interaction study, denosumab did not affect the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, which is metabolised 
by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). This indicates that denosumab should not alter the pharmacokinetics 
of medicinal products metabolised by CYP3A4. 
 
There are no clinical data on the co-administration of denosumab and hormone replacement therapy 
(oestrogen), however the potential for a pharmacodynamic interaction is considered to be low. 
 
In postmenopausal women with osteoporosis the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of denosumab 
were not altered by previous alendronate therapy, based on data from a transition study (alendronate to 
denosumab). 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Pregnancy 
 
There are no or limited amount of data from the use of denosumab in pregnant women. Studies in animals 
have shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). 
 
Obodence is not recommended for use in pregnant women and women of child-bearing potential not using 
contraception. Women should be advised not to become pregnant during and for at least 5 months after 
treatment with Obodence. Any effects of Obodence are likely to be greater during the second and third 

6 
 
trimesters of pregnancy since monoclonal antibodies are transported across the placenta in a linear fashion 
as pregnancy progresses, with the largest amount transferred during the third trimester. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
It is unknown whether denosumab is excreted in human milk. In genetically engineered mice in which 
RANKL has been turned off by gene removal (a “knockout mouse”), studies suggest absence of RANKL 
(the target of denosumab see section 5.1) during pregnancy may interfere with maturation of the mammary 
gland leading to impaired lactation post-partum (see section 5.3). A decision on whether to abstain from 
breast-feeding or to abstain from therapy with Obodence should be made, taking into account the benefit of 
breast-feeding to the newborn/infant and the benefit of Obodence therapy to the woman. 
 
Fertility 
 
No data are available on the effect of denosumab on human fertility. Animal studies do not indicate direct or 
indirect harmful effects with respect to fertility (see section 5.3). 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 
Obodence has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
The most common side effects with denosumab (seen in more than one patient in ten) are musculoskeletal 
pain and pain in the extremity. Uncommon cases of cellulitis, rare cases of hypocalcaemia, hypersensitivity, 
osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femoral fractures (see sections 4.4 and 4.8 - description of selected 
adverse reactions) have been observed in patients taking denosumab. 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
The data in table 1 below describe adverse reactions reported from phase II and III clinical trials in patients 
with osteoporosis and breast or prostate cancer patients receiving hormone ablation; and/or spontaneous 
reporting. 
 
The following convention has been used for the classification of the adverse reactions (see table 1): very 
common (≥ 1/10), common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10), uncommon (≥ 1/1 000 to < 1/100), rare (≥ 1/10 000 to < 
1/1 000), very rare (< 1/10 000) and not known (cannot be estimated from the available data). Within each 
frequency grouping and system organ class, adverse reactions are presented in order of decreasing 
seriousness. 
 
Table 1. Adverse reactions reported in patients with osteoporosis and breast or prostate cancer patients 
receiving hormone ablation 
 
MedDRA system organ class 
Frequency category 
Adverse reactions 
Infections and infestations 
Common 
Urinary tract infection 
Common 
Upper respiratory tract infection 
Uncommon 
Diverticulitis1 
Uncommon 
Cellulitis1 
Uncommon 
Ear infection 
Immune system disorders 
Rare 
Drug hypersensitivity1 
Rare 
Anaphylactic reaction1 
Metabolism and nutrition disorders 
Rare 
Hypocalcaemia1 
Nervous system disorders 
Common 
Sciatica 
Common 
Constipation 

7 
 
MedDRA system organ class 
Frequency category 
Adverse reactions 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Common 
Abdominal discomfort 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders Common 
Rash 
Common 
Eczema 
Common 
Alopecia 
Uncommon 
Lichenoid drug eruptions1 
Very rare 
Hypersensitivity vasculitis 
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue 
disorders 
Very common 
Pain in extremity 
Very common 
Musculoskeletal pain1 
Rare 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw1 
Rare 
Atypical femoral fractures1 
Not Known 
Osteonecrosis of the external 
auditory 
canal2 
1 See section Description of selected adverse reactions. 
2 See section 4.4. 
 
In a pooled analysis of data from all phase II and phase III placebo-controlled studies, influenza-like illness 
was reported with a crude incidence rate of 1.2% for denosumab and 0.7% for placebo. Although this 
imbalance was identified via a pooled analysis, it was not identified via a stratified analysis. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Hypocalcaemia 
In two phase III placebo-controlled clinical trials in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, 
approximately 0.05% (2 out of 4 050) of patients had declines of serum calcium levels (less than 1.88 
mmol/L) following denosumab administration. Declines of serum calcium levels (less than 1.88 mmol/L) 
were not reported in either the two phase III placebo-controlled clinical trials in patients receiving hormone 
ablation or the phase III placebo-controlled clinical trial in men with osteoporosis. 
 
In the post-marketing setting, rare cases of severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia resulting in hospitalisation, 
life-threatening events, and fatal cases have been reported, predominantly in patients at increased risk of 
hypocalcaemia receiving denosumab, with most cases occurring in the first weeks of initiating therapy. 
Examples of the clinical manifestations of severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia have included QT interval 
prolongation, tetany, seizures and altered mental status (see section 4.4). Symptoms of hypocalcaemia in 
denosumab clinical studies included paraesthesias or muscle stiffness, twitching, spasms and muscle 
cramps. 
 
Skin infections 
In phase III placebo-controlled clinical trials, the overall incidence of skin infections was similar in the 
placebo and the denosumab groups: in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis (placebo [1.2%, 50 out of 
4 041] versus denosumab [1.5%, 59 out of 4 050]); in men with osteoporosis (placebo [0.8%, 1 out of 120] 
versus denosumab [0%, 0 out of 120]); in breast or prostate cancer patients receiving hormone ablation 
(placebo [1.7%, 14 out of 845] versus denosumab [1.4%, 12 out of 860]). Skin infections leading to 
hospitalisation were reported in 0.1% (3 out of 4 041) of postmenopausal women with osteoporosis 
receiving placebo versus 0.4% (16 out of 4 050) of women receiving denosumab. These cases were 
predominantly cellulitis. Skin infections reported as serious adverse reactions were similar in the placebo 
(0.6%, 5 out of 845) and the denosumab (0.6%, 5 out of 860) groups in the breast and prostate cancer 
studies. 
 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw 
ONJ has been reported rarely, in 16 patients, in clinical trials in osteoporosis and in breast or prostate cancer 
patients receiving hormone ablation including a total of 23 148 patients (see section 4.4). Thirteen of these 
ONJ cases occurred in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis during the phase III clinical trial extension 
following treatment with denosumab for up to 10 years. Incidence of ONJ was 0.04% at 3 years, 0.06% at 5 
years and 0.44% at 10 years of denosumab treatment. The risk of ONJ increased with duration of exposure 
to denosumab. 
 

8 
 
The risk of ONJ has also been assessed in a retrospective cohort study among 76 192 postmenopausal 
women newly initiating treatment with denosumab. The incidence of ONJ was 0.32% (95% confidence 
interval [CI]: 0.26, 0.39) among patients using denosumab up to 3 years and 0.51% (95% CI: 0.39, 0.65) 
among patients using denosumab up to 5 years of follow-up. 
 
Atypical fractures of the femur 
In the osteoporosis clinical trial programme, atypical femoral fractures were reported rarely in patients 
treated with denosumab (see section 4.4). 
 
Diverticulitis 
In a single phase III placebo-controlled clinical trial in patients with prostate cancer receiving androgen 
deprivation therapy (ADT), an imbalance in diverticulitis adverse events was observed (1.2% denosumab, 
0% placebo). The incidence of diverticulitis was comparable between treatment groups in postmenopausal 
women or men with osteoporosis and in women undergoing aromatase inhibitor therapy for non-metastatic 
breast cancer. 
 
Drug-related hypersensitivity reactions 
In the post-marketing setting, rare events of drug-related hypersensitivity, including rash, urticaria, facial 
swelling, erythema, and anaphylactic reactions have been reported in patients receiving denosumab. 
 
Musculoskeletal pain 
Musculoskeletal pain, including severe cases, has been reported in patients receiving denosumab in the 
post-marketing setting. In clinical trials, musculoskeletal pain was very common in both denosumab and 
placebo groups. Musculoskeletal pain leading to discontinuation of study treatment was uncommon. 
 
Lichenoid drug eruptions 
Lichenoid drug eruptions (e.g. lichen planus-like reactions) have been reported in patients in the post- 
marketing setting. 
 
Other special populations 
 
Paediatric population 
Denosumab should not be used in paediatric patients (age < 18). Serious hypercalcaemia has been reported 
(see section 5.1). Some clinical trial cases were complicated by acute renal injury. 
 
Renal impairment 
In clinical studies, patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min) or receiving 
dialysis were at greater risk of developing hypocalcaemia in the absence of calcium supplementation. 
Adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is important in patients with severe renal impairment or receiving 
dialysis (see section 4.4). 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It allows 
continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare professionals are 
asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
There is no experience with overdose in clinical studies. Denosumab has been administered in clinical 
studies using doses up to 180 mg every 4 weeks (cumulative doses up to 1 080 mg over 6 months), and no 
additional adverse reactions were observed. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 

9 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Drugs for treatment of bone diseases – Other drugs affecting bone structure and 
mineralisation, ATC code: M05BX04 
 
Obodence is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the 
European Medicines Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
Mechanism of action 
Denosumab is a human monoclonal antibody (IgG2) that targets and binds with high affinity and specificity 
to RANKL, preventing activation of its receptor, RANK, on the surface of osteoclast precursors and 
osteoclasts. Prevention of the RANKL/RANK interaction inhibits osteoclast formation, function and 
survival, thereby decreasing bone resorption in cortical and trabecular bone. 
 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
 
Denosumab treatment rapidly reduced the rate of bone turnover, reaching a nadir for the bone resorption 
marker serum type 1 C-telopeptides (CTX) (85% reduction) by 3 days, with reductions maintained over the 
dosing interval. At the end of each dosing interval, CTX reductions were partially attenuated from maximal 
reduction of ≥ 87% to approximately ≥ 45% (range 45-80%), reflecting the reversibility of denosumab’s 
effects on bone remodelling once serum levels diminish. These effects were sustained with continued 
treatment. Bone turnover markers generally reached pre-treatment levels within 9 months after the last dose. 
Upon re-initiation, reductions in CTX by denosumab were similar to those observed in patients initiating 
primary denosumab treatment. 
 
Immunogenicity 
 
Anti-denosumab antibodies may develop during denosumab treatment. No apparent correlation of antibody 
development with pharmacokinetics, clinical response or adverse event has been observed. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab administered once every 6 months for 3 years were investigated in 
postmenopausal women (7 808 women aged 60-91 years, of which 23.6% had prevalent vertebral fractures) 
with baseline bone mineral density (BMD) T-scores at the lumbar spine or total hip between –2.5 and –4.0 
and a mean absolute 10-year fracture probability of 18.60% (deciles: 7.9-32.4%) for major osteoporotic 
fracture and 7.22% (deciles: 1.4-14.9%) for hip fracture. Women with other diseases or on therapies that 
may affect bone were excluded from this study. Women received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D 
(at least 400 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
Effect on vertebral fractures 
Denosumab significantly reduced the risk of new vertebral fractures at 1, 2 and 3 years (p < 0.0001) (see 
table 2). 
 
Table 2. The effect of denosumab on the risk of new vertebral fractures 
 
Proportion of women with fracture (%) 
Absolute risk 
reduction (%) 
(95% CI) 
Relative risk 
reduction (%)  
(95% CI) 
Placebo  
n = 3 906 
Denosumab  
n = 3 902 
0-1 year 
2.2 
0.9 
1.4 (0.8, 1.9) 
61 (42, 74)** 
0-2 years 
5.0 
1.4 
3.5 (2.7, 4.3) 
71 (61, 79)** 
0-3 years 
7.2 
2.3 
4.8 (3.9, 5.8) 
68 (59, 74)* 
*p < 0.0001, **p < 0.0001 – exploratory analysis 
 
Effect on hip fractures 
Denosumab demonstrated a 40% relative reduction (0.5% absolute risk reduction) in the risk of hip fracture 
over 3 years (p < 0.05). The incidence of hip fracture was 1.2% in the placebo group compared to 0.7% in 
the denosumab group at 3 years. 
 

10 
 
In a post-hoc analysis in women > 75 years, a 62% relative risk reduction was observed with denosumab 
(1.4% absolute risk reduction, p < 0.01). 
 
Effect on all clinical fractures 
Denosumab significantly reduced fractures across all fracture types/groups (see table 3). 
 
Table 3. The effect of denosumab on the risk of clinical fractures over 3 years 
 
 
Proportion of women with fracture 
(%)+ 
Absolute risk 
reduction (%) (95% 
CI) 
Relative risk 
reduction (%) (95% 
CI) 
Placebo  
n = 3 906 
Denosumab 
n = 3 902 
Any clinical fracture1 
10.2 
7.2 
2.9 (1.6, 4.2) 
30 (19, 41)*** 
Clinical vertebral fracture 
2.6 
0.8 
1.8 (1.2, 2.4) 
69 (53, 80)*** 
Non-vertebral fracture2 
8.0 
6.5 
1.5 (0.3, 2.7) 
20 (5, 33)** 
Major non-vertebral fracture3 
6.4 
5.2 
1.2 (0.1, 2.2) 
20 (3, 34)* 
Major osteoporotic fracture4 
8.0 
5.3 
2.7 (1.6, 3.9) 
35 (22, 45)*** 
*p ≤ 0.05, **p = 0.0106 (secondary endpoint included in multiplicity adjustment), ***p ≤ 0.0001 
+ Event rates based on Kaplan-Meier estimates at 3 years. 
1 Includes clinical vertebral fractures and non-vertebral fractures. 
2 Excludes those of the vertebrae, skull, facial, mandible, metacarpus, and finger and toe phalanges. 
3 Includes pelvis, distal femur, proximal tibia, ribs, proximal humerus, forearm, and hip. 
4 Includes clinical vertebral, hip, forearm, and humerus fractures, as defined by the WHO. 
 
In women with baseline femoral neck BMD ≤ -2.5, denosumab reduced the risk of non-vertebral fracture 
(35% relative risk reduction, 4.1% absolute risk reduction, p < 0.001, exploratory analysis). 
 
The reduction in the incidence of new vertebral fractures, hip fractures and non-vertebral fractures by 
denosumab over 3 years were consistent regardless of the 10-year baseline fracture risk. 
 
Effect on bone mineral density 
Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, versus placebo at 1, 2 and 3 years. 
denosumab increased BMD by 9.2% at the lumbar spine, 6.0% at the total hip, 4.8% at the femoral neck, 
7.9% at the hip trochanter, 3.5% at the distal 1/3 radius and 4.1% at the total body over 3 years (all 
p  < 0.0001). 
 
In clinical studies examining the effects of discontinuation of denosumab, BMD returned to approximately 
pre-treatment levels and remained above placebo within 18 months of the last dose. These data indicate that 
continued treatment with denosumab is required to maintain the effect of the medicinal product. Re-
initiation of denosumab resulted in gains in BMD similar to those when denosumab was first administered. 
 
Open-label extension study in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis 
A total of 4 550 women (2 343 denosumab & 2 207 placebo) who missed no more than one dose of 
investigational product in the pivotal study described above and completed the month 36 study visit agreed 
to enrol in a 7-year, multinational, multicentre, open-label, single-arm extension study to evaluate the long-
term safety and efficacy of denosumab. All women in the extension study were to receive denosumab 60 mg 
every 6 months, as well as daily calcium (at least 1 g) and vitamin D (at least 400 IU). A total of 2 626 
subjects (58% of the women included in the extension study i.e. 34% of the women included in the pivotal 
study) completed the extension study. 
 
In patients treated with denosumab for up to 10 years, BMD increased from the pivotal study baseline by 
21.7% at the lumbar spine, 9.2% at the total hip, 9.0% at the femoral neck, 13.0% at the trochanter and 2.8% 
at the distal 1/3 radius. The mean lumbar spine BMD T-score at the end of the study was −1.3 in patients 
treated for 10 years. 
 
Fracture incidence was evaluated as a safety endpoint but efficacy in fracture prevention cannot be 
estimated due to high number of discontinuations and open-label design. The cumulative incidence of new 
vertebral and non-vertebral fractures were approximately 6.8% and 13.1% respectively, in patients who 

11 
 
remained on denosumab treatment for 10 years (n = 1 278). Patients who did not complete the study for 
any reason had higher on-treatment fracture rates. 
 
Thirteen adjudicated cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) and two adjudicated cases of atypical fractures 
of the femur occurred during the extension study. 
 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in men with osteoporosis 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab once every 6 months for 1 year were investigated in 242 men aged 31-84 
years. Subjects with an eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 were excluded from the study. All men received 
calcium (at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 800 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
The primary efficacy variable was percent change in lumbar spine BMD, fracture efficacy was not 
evaluated. Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, relative to placebo at 12 
months: 4.8% at lumbar spine, 2.0% at total hip, 2.2% at femoral neck, 2.3% at hip trochanter, and 0.9% at 
distal 1/3 radius (all p < 0.05). Denosumab increased lumbar spine BMD from baseline in 94.7% of men at 1 
year. Significant increases in BMD at lumbar spine, total hip, femoral neck and hip trochanter were 
observed by 6 months (p < 0.0001). 
 
Bone histology in postmenopausal women and men with osteoporosis 
 
Bone histology was evaluated in 62 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis or with low bone mass who 
were either naïve to osteoporosis therapies or had transitioned from previous alendronate therapy following 
1-3 years treatment with denosumab. Fifty nine women participated in the bone biopsy sub-study at month 
24 (n = 41) and/or month 84 (n = 22) of the extension study in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis. 
Bone histology was also evaluated in 17 men with osteoporosis following 1 year treatment with denosumab. 
Bone biopsy results showed bone of normal architecture and quality with no evidence of mineralisation 
defects, woven bone or marrow fibrosis. Histomorphometry findings in the extension study in 
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis showed that the antiresorptive effects of denosumab, as measured 
by activation frequency and bone formation rates, were maintained over time. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in patients with bone loss associated with androgen deprivation 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab once every 6 months for 3 years were investigated in men with 
histologically confirmed non-metastatic prostate cancer receiving ADT (1 468 men aged 48-97 years) who 
were at increased risk of fracture (defined as > 70 years, or < 70 years with a BMD T-score at the lumbar 
spine, total hip, or femoral neck < -1.0 or a history of an osteoporotic fracture). All men received calcium 
(at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 400 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, relative to treatment with placebo at 
3 years: 7.9% at the lumbar spine, 5.7% at the total hip, 4.9% at the femoral neck, 6.9% at the hip 
trochanter, 6.9% at the distal 1/3 radius and 4.7% at the total body (all p < 0.0001). In a prospectively 
planned exploratory analysis, significant increases in BMD were observed at the lumbar spine, total hip, 
femoral neck and the hip trochanter 1 month after the initial dose. 
 
Denosumab demonstrated a significant relative risk reduction of new vertebral fractures: 85% (1.6% 
absolute risk reduction) at 1 year, 69% (2.2% absolute risk reduction) at 2 years and 62% (2.4% absolute 
risk reduction) at 3 years (all p < 0.01). 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in patients with bone loss associated with adjuvant aromatase inhibitor therapy 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab once every 6 months for 2 years were investigated in women with non-
metastatic breast cancer (252 women aged 35-84 years) and baseline BMD T-scores between –1.0 to –2.5 at 
the lumbar spine, total hip or femoral neck. All women received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D 
(at least 400 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
The primary efficacy variable was percent change in lumbar spine BMD, fracture efficacy was not 

12 
 
evaluated. denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, relative to treatment with 
placebo at 2 years: 7.6% at lumbar spine, 4.7% at total hip, 3.6% at femoral neck, 5.9% at hip trochanter, 
6.1% at distal 1/3 radius and 4.2% at total body (all p < 0.0001). 
 
Treatment of bone loss associated with systemic glucocorticoid therapy 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab were investigated in 795 patients (70% women and 30% men) aged 20 to 
94 years treated with ≥ 7.5 mg daily oral prednisone (or equivalent). 
 
Two subpopulations were studied: glucocorticoid-continuing (≥ 7.5 mg daily prednisone or its equivalent 
for ≥ 3 months prior to study enrolment; n = 505) and glucocorticoid-initiating (≥ 7.5 mg daily prednisone 
or its equivalent for < 3 months prior to study enrolment; n = 290). Patients were randomised (1:1) to 
receive either denosumab 60 mg subcutaneously once every 6 months or oral risedronate 5 mg once daily 
(active control) for 2 years. Patients received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 800 IU) 
supplementation daily. 
 
Effect on Bone Mineral Density (BMD) 
In the glucocorticoid-continuing subpopulation, denosumab demonstrated a greater increase in lumbar spine 
BMD compared to risedronate at 1 year (denosumab 3.6%, risedronate 2.0%; p < 0.001) and 2 years 
(denosumab 4.5%, risedronate 2.2%; p < 0.001). In the glucocorticoid-initiating subpopulation, denosumab 
demonstrated a greater increase in lumbar spine BMD compared to risedronate at 1 year (denosumab 3.1%, 
risedronate 0.8%; p < 0.001) and 2 years (denosumab 4.6%, risedronate 1.5%; p < 0.001). 
 
In addition, denosumab demonstrated a significantly greater mean percent increase in BMD from baseline 
compared to risedronate at the total hip, femoral neck, and hip trochanter. 
 
The study was not powered to show a difference in fractures. At 1 year, the subject incidence of new 
radiological vertebral fracture was 2.7% (denosumab) versus 3.2% (risedronate). The subject incidence of 
non-vertebral fracture was 4.3% (denosumab) versus 2.5% (risedronate). At 2 years, the corresponding 
numbers were 4.1% versus 5.8% for new radiological vertebral fractures and 5.3% versus 3.8% for non-
vertebral fractures. Most of the fractures occurred in the GC-C subpopulation. 
 
Paediatric population 
 
A single-arm phase III study evaluated the efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics was conducted in children 
with osteogenesis imperfecta, aged 2 to 17 years, 52.3% male, 88.2% Caucasian. A total of 153 subjects 
initially received subcutaneous (SC) denosumab 1 mg/kg, up to a maximum of 60 mg, every 6 months for 
36 months. Sixty subjects transitioned to every 3 months dosing. 
 
At month 12 of every 3 months dosing, the least squares (LS) mean (standard error, SE) change from 
baseline in lumbar spine BMD Z-score was 1.01 (0.12). 
 
The most common adverse events reported during every 6 months dosing were arthralgia (45.8%), pain in 
extremity (37.9%), back pain (32.7%), and hypercalciuria (32.0%). Hypercalcaemia was reported during 
every 6 months (19%) and every 3 months (36.7%) dosing. Serious adverse events of hypercalcaemia 
(13.3%) were reported during every 3 months dosing. 
 
In an extension study (N = 75), serious adverse events of hypercalcaemia (18.5%) were observed during 
every 3 months dosing. 
 
The studies were terminated early due to the occurrence of life-threatening events and hospitalisations due 
to hypercalcaemia (see section 4.2). 
 
In one multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study conducted in 24 
paediatric patients with glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis, aged 5 to 17 years, evaluating change from 
baseline in lumbar spine BMD Z -score, safety and effectiveness were not established hence denosumab 
should not be used for this indication. 
 

13 
 
The European Medicines Agency has waived the obligation to submit the results of studies with the 
reference medicinal product containing denosumab in all subsets of the paediatric population in the 
treatment of bone loss associated with sex hormone ablative therapy, and in subsets of the paediatric 
population below the age of 2 in the treatment of osteoporosis (See section 4.2 for information on paediatric 
use). 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
Absorption 
 
Following subcutaneous administration of a 1.0 mg/kg dose, which approximates the approved 60 mg dose, 
exposure based on AUC was 78% as compared to intravenous administration at the same dose level. For a 
60 mg subcutaneous dose, maximum serum denosumab concentrations (Cmax) of 6 mcg/mL (range 1-17 
mcg/mL) occurred in 10 days (range 2-28 days). 
 
Biotransformation 
 
Denosumab is composed solely of amino acids and carbohydrates as native immunoglobulin and is unlikely 
to be eliminated via hepatic metabolic mechanisms. Its metabolism and elimination are expected to follow 
the immunoglobulin clearance pathways, resulting in degradation to small peptides and individual amino 
acids. 
 
Elimination 
 
After Cmax, serum levels declined with a half-life of 26 days (range 6-52 days) over a period of 3 months 
(range 1.5-4.5 months). Fifty-three percent (53%) of patients had no measurable amounts of denosumab 
detected at 6 months post-dose. 
 
No accumulation or change in denosumab pharmacokinetics with time was observed upon subcutaneous 
multiple-dosing of 60 mg once every 6 months. Denosumab pharmacokinetics were not affected by the 
formation of binding antibodies to denosumab and were similar in men and women. Age (28-87 years), race 
and disease state (low bone mass or osteoporosis; prostate or breast cancer) do not appear to significantly 
affect the pharmacokinetics of denosumab. 
 
A trend was observed between higher body weight and lower exposure based on AUC and Cmax. However, 
the trend is not considered clinically important, since pharmacodynamic effects based on bone turnover 
markers and BMD increases were consistent across a wide range of body weight. 
 
Linearity/non-linearity 
 
In dose ranging studies, denosumab exhibited non-linear, dose-dependent pharmacokinetics, with lower 
clearance at higher doses or concentrations, but approximately dose-proportional increases in exposures for 
doses of 60 mg and greater. 
 
Renal impairment 
 
In a study of 55 patients with varying degrees of renal function, including patients on dialysis, the degree of 
renal impairment had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of denosumab. 
 
Hepatic impairment 
 
No specific study in patients with hepatic impairment was performed. In general, monoclonal antibodies are 
not eliminated via hepatic metabolic mechanisms. The pharmacokinetics of denosumab is not expected to be 
affected by hepatic impairment. 
 
Paediatric population 
 
Denosumab should not be used in paediatric populations (see sections 4.2 and 5.1). 

14 
 
 
In a phase III study of paediatric patients with osteogenesis imperfecta (N = 153), maximum serum 
denosumab concentrations were observed on day 10 across all age groups. For every 3 months and every 6 
months dosing, mean serum denosumab trough concentrations were observed to be higher for children 11 to 
17 years of age, while children 2 to 6 years of age had the lowest mean trough concentrations. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
In single and repeated dose toxicity studies in cynomolgus monkeys, denosumab doses resulting in 100 to 
150 times greater systemic exposure than the recommended human dose had no impact on cardiovascular 
physiology, male or female fertility, or produced specific target organ toxicity. 
 
Standard tests to investigate the genotoxicity potential of denosumab have not been evaluated, since such 
tests are not relevant for this molecule. However, due to its character it is unlikely that denosumab has any 
potential for genotoxicity. 
 
The carcinogenic potential of denosumab has not been evaluated in long-term animal studies. 
 
In preclinical studies conducted in knockout mice lacking RANK or RANKL, impairment of lymph node 
formation was observed in the foetus. An absence of lactation due to inhibition of mammary gland 
maturation (lobulo-alveolar gland development during pregnancy) was also observed in knockout mice 
lacking RANK or RANKL. 
 
In a study of cynomolgus monkeys dosed with denosumab during the period equivalent to the first trimester 
at AUC exposures up to 99-fold higher than the human dose (60 mg every 6 months), there was no evidence 
of maternal or foetal harm. In this study, foetal lymph nodes were not examined. 
 
In another study of cynomolgus monkeys dosed with denosumab throughout pregnancy at AUC exposures 
119-fold higher than the human dose (60 mg every 6 months), there were increased stillbirths and postnatal 
mortality; abnormal bone growth resulting in reduced bone strength, reduced haematopoiesis, and tooth 
malalignment; absence of peripheral lymph nodes; and decreased neonatal growth. A no observed adverse 
effect level for reproductive effects was not established. Following a 6 month period after birth, bone 
related changes showed recovery and there was no effect on tooth eruption. However, the effects on lymph 
nodes and tooth malalignment persisted, and minimal to moderate mineralisation in multiple tissues was 
seen in one animal (relation to treatment uncertain). There was no evidence of maternal harm prior to 
labour; adverse maternal effects occurred infrequently during labour. Maternal mammary gland 
development was normal. 
 
In preclinical bone quality studies in monkeys on long-term denosumab treatment, decreases in bone 
turnover were associated with improvement in bone strength and normal bone histology. Calcium levels 
were transiently decreased and parathyroid hormone levels transiently increased in ovariectomised monkeys 
treated with denosumab. 
 
In male mice genetically engineered to express huRANKL (knock-in mice), which were subjected to a 
transcortical fracture, denosumab delayed the removal of cartilage and remodelling of the fracture callus 
compared to control, but biomechanical strength was not adversely affected. 
 
Knockout mice (see section 4.6) lacking RANK or RANKL exhibited decreased body weight, reduced bone 
growth and lack of tooth eruption. In neonatal rats, inhibition of RANKL (target of denosumab therapy) 
with high doses of a construct of osteoprotegerin bound to Fc (OPG-Fc) was associated with inhibition of 
bone growth and tooth eruption. These changes were partially reversible in this model when dosing with 
RANKL inhibitors was discontinued. Adolescent primates dosed with denosumab at 27 and 150 times (10 
and 50 mg/kg dose) the clinical exposure had abnormal growth plates. Therefore, treatment with denosumab 
may impair bone growth in children with open growth plates and may inhibit eruption of dentition. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 

15 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
Histidine 
Histidine hydrochloride monohydrate 
Sorbitol (E420) 
Polysorbate 20 
Water for injections 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal 
products. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
3 years. 
 
Once removed from the refrigerator, Obodence may be stored at temperature up to a maximum of 25°C for 
a single period of up to 60 days, but not exceeding the original expiry date. If not used within this period of 
up to 60 days, Obodence may be returned to the refrigerator for 28 days for future use. 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C – 8°C). 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
One mL solution in a single-dose pre-filled syringe made from type I glass with stainless steel 29 gauge 
needle with needle guard, a rubber needle shield (elastomer), a rubber plunger stopper (bromobutyl rubber) 
and a plastic plunger rod. 
 
Pack size of one pre-filled syringe, presented in unblistered packaging  
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
 
Before administration, the solution should be inspected. Do not inject the solution if it contains 
particles, or is cloudy or discoloured. 
 
Do not shake. 
 
To avoid discomfort at the site of injection, allow the pre-filled syringe to reach room temperature (up 
to 25°C) before injecting and inject slowly. 
 
Inject the entire contents of the pre-filled syringe. 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Samsung Bioepis NL B.V. 
Olof Palmestraat 10 
2616 LR Delft 
The Netherlands 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 

16 
 
EU/1/24/1890/001  
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 12 February 2025 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 

17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. MANUFACTURERS OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE 
SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURERS RESPONSIBLE 
FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO 
THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT 

18 
 
A. MANUFACTURER OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURER 
RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer of the biological active substance 
 
Samsung Biologics Co. Ltd 
300, Songdo bio-daero, Yeonsu-gu 
Incheon, 21987 
Korea, Republic of 
 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release 
 
Samsung Bioepis NL B.V. 
Olof Palmestraat 10 
2616 LR Delft 
Netherlands 
 
The printed package leaflet of the medicinal product must state the name and address of the manufacturer 
responsible for the release of the concerned batch. 
 
 
B. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription. 
 
 
C. OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union 
reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any 
subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
 
D. CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE 
OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance activities and 
interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the marketing authorisation and any 
agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
 
At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
 
Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information being 
received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit-risk profile or as the result of an 
important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 
 
 
Additional risk minimisation measures 
 
The MAH shall ensure that a patient reminder card regarding osteonecrosis of the jaw is implemented. 
 
 
 

19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 

21 
 
 
 
 
Obodence 
60 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
denosumab 
 
 
 
1 mL pre-filled syringe containing 60 mg of denosumab (60 mg/mL). 
 
 
 
Histidine, histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, sorbitol (E420), polysorbate 20, water for injections 
 
 
 
Solution for injection 
One pre-filled syringe with needle guard 
 
 
 
Subcutaneous use. 
Important: read the package leaflet before handling pre-filled syringe. 
Do not shake. 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
Open 
 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
 
 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE CARTON 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT OF 
THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 

22 
 
 
 
Store in a refrigerator. 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
 
 
 
 
Samsung Bioepis NL B.V. 
Olof Palmestraat 10, 2616 LR Delft 
The Netherlands 
 
 
 
EU/1/24/1890/001 
 
 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obodence 
 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
 
PC  
SN  
NN 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS OR 
WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF APPROPRIATE 

23 
 
 
 
 
Obodence 60 mg injection 
denosumab 
SC 
 
 
 
 
 
EXP 
 
 
 
Lot 
 
 
 
1 mL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
PRE-FILLED SYRINGE LABEL (UNBLISTERED) 
6. 
OTHER 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 

24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 
 

25 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user 
 
Obodence 60 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
denosumab 
 
▼This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new safety 
information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 for how to 
report side effects. 
 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains important 
information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, even if 
their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects 
not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
- 
Your doctor will give you a patient reminder card, which contains important safety information you 
need to be aware of before and during your treatment with Obodence. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What Obodence is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Obodence 
3. 
How to use Obodence 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store Obodence 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. What Obodence is and what it is used for  
 
What Obodence is and how it works 
 
Obodence contains denosumab, a protein (monoclonal antibody) that interferes with the action of another 
protein, in order to treat bone loss and osteoporosis. Treatment with Obodence makes bone stronger and less 
likely to break. 
 
Bone is a living tissue and is renewed all the time. Oestrogen helps keep bones healthy. After the 
menopause, oestrogen level drops which may cause bones to become thin and fragile. This can eventually 
lead to a condition called osteoporosis. Osteoporosis can also occur in men due to a number of causes 
including ageing and/or a low level of the male hormone, testosterone. It can also occur in patients receiving 
glucocorticoids. Many patients with osteoporosis have no symptoms, but they are still at risk of breaking 
bones, especially in the spine, hips and wrists. 
 
Surgery or medicines that stop the production of oestrogen or testosterone used to treat patients with breast 
or prostate cancer can also lead to bone loss. The bones become weaker and break more easily. 
 
What Obodence is used for 
 
Obodence is used to treat: 
 
osteoporosis in women after the menopause (postmenopausal) and men who have an increased risk of 
fracture (broken bones), reducing the risk of spinal, non-spinal and hip fractures. 
 
bone loss that results from a reduction in hormone (testosterone) level caused by surgery or treatment 
with medicines in patients with prostate cancer. 
 
bone loss that results from long-term treatment with glucocorticoids in patients who have an 
increased risk of fracture. 

26 
 
2. What you need to know before you use Obodence 
 
Do not use Obodence 
 
if you have low calcium levels in the blood (hypocalcaemia). 
 
if you are allergic to denosumab or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in section 6). 
 
Warnings and precautions 
 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using Obodence. 
 
Whilst being treated with Obodence you may develop a skin infection with symptoms such as a swollen, red 
area of skin, most commonly in the lower leg, that feels hot and tender (cellulitis), and possibly with 
symptoms of fever. Please tell your doctor immediately if you develop any of these symptoms. 
 
You should also take calcium and vitamin D supplements while being on treatment with Obodence. Your 
doctor will discuss this with you. 
 
You may have low levels of calcium in your blood while receiving Obodence. Please tell your doctor 
immediately if you notice any of the following symptoms: spasms, twitches, or cramps in your muscle, 
and/or numbness or tingling in your fingers, toes or around your mouth, and/or seizures, confusion, or loss 
of consciousness. 
 
Severe low blood calcium levels leading to hospitalisation and even life-threatening reactions have been 
reported in rare cases. Before each dose and in patients predisposed to hypocalcaemia within two weeks 
after initial dose, the calcium levels in your blood will therefore be checked (via blood test). 
 
Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had severe kidney problems, kidney failure or have needed dialysis 
or are taking medicines called glucocorticoids (such as prednisolone or dexamethasone), which may 
increase your risk of getting low blood calcium if you do not take calcium supplements. 
 
Problems with your mouth, teeth or jaw 
A side effect called osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) (bone damage in the jaw) has been reported rarely (may 
affect up to 1 in 1 000 people) in patients receiving Obodence for osteoporosis. The risk of ONJ increases in 
patients treated for a long time (may affect up to 1 in 200 people if treated for 10 years). ONJ can also occur 
after stopping treatment. It is important to try to prevent ONJ developing as it may be a painful condition 
that can be difficult to treat. In order to reduce the risk of developing ONJ, take the following precautions: 
 
Before receiving treatment, tell your doctor or nurse (health care professional) if you: 
 
 
have any problems with your mouth or teeth such as poor dental health, gum disease, or a planned 
tooth extraction. 
 
don’t receive routine dental care or have not had a dental check-up for a long time. 
 
are a smoker (as this may increase the risk of dental problems). 
 
have previously been treated with a bisphosphonate (used to treat or prevent bone disorders). 
 
are taking medicines called corticosteroids (such as prednisolone or dexamethasone). 
 
have cancer. 
 
Your doctor may ask you to undergo a dental examination before you start treatment with Obodence. 
 
While being treated, you should maintain good oral hygiene and receive routine dental check-ups. If you 
wear dentures you should make sure these fit properly. If you are under dental treatment or will undergo 
dental surgery (e.g. tooth extractions), inform your doctor about your dental treatment and tell your dentist 
that you are being treated with Obodence. 
 
Contact your doctor and dentist immediately if you experience any problems with your mouth or teeth such 
as loose teeth, pain or swelling, or non-healing of sores or discharge, as these could be signs of ONJ. 
 
Unusual thigh bone fractures 

27 
 
Some people have developed unusual fractures in their thigh bone while being treated with denosumab. 
Contact your doctor if you experience new or unusual pain in your hip, groin, or thigh. 
 
 
Children and adolescents 
 
Obodence should not be used in children and adolescents under 18 years of age. 
 
Other medicines and Obodence 
 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other medicines. It is 
especially important that you tell your doctor if you are being treated with another medicine containing 
denosumab. 
 
You should not take Obodence together with another medicine containing denosumab. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding 
 
Denosumab has not been tested in pregnant women. It is important to tell your doctor if you are pregnant; 
think you may be pregnant; or plan to get pregnant. Obodence is not recommended for use if you are 
pregnant. Women of child-bearing potential should use effective methods of contraception while being 
treated with Obodence and for at least 5 months after stopping treatment with Obodence. 
 
If you become pregnant during treatment with Obodence or less than 5 months after stopping treatment with 
Obodence, please inform your doctor. 
 
It is not known whether denosumab is excreted in breast milk. It is important to tell your doctor if you are 
breast-feeding or plan to do so. Your doctor will then help you decide whether to stop breast-feeding, or 
whether to stop taking Obodence, considering the benefit of breast-feeding to the baby and the benefit of 
Obodence to the mother. 
 
If you are breast-feeding during Obodence treatment, please inform your doctor. 
 
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking any medicine. 
 
Driving and using machines 
 
Obodence has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
 
Sorbitol (E420) 
 
This medicine contains 44 mg sorbitol (E420) in each mL of solution. 
 
Sodium 
 
This medicine contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per 60 mg, that is to say essentially ‘sodium- free’. 
 
 
3. How to use Obodence 
 
The recommended dose is one pre-filled syringe of 60 mg administered once every 6 months, as a single 
injection under the skin (subcutaneous). The best places to inject are the top of your thighs and the abdomen. 
Your carer can also use the outer area of your upper arm. Please consult your doctor on the date for a 
potential next injection. 
 
You should also take calcium and vitamin D supplements while being on treatment with Obodence. Your 
doctor will discuss this with you. 
 

28 
 
Your doctor may decide that it is best for you or a carer to inject Obodence. Your doctor or healthcare 
provider will show you or your carer how to use Obodence. For instructions on how to inject Obodence, 
please read the section at the end of this leaflet. 
 
Do not shake. 
 
If you forget to use Obodence 
 
If a dose of Obodence is missed, the injection should be administered as soon as possible. Thereafter, 
injections should be scheduled every 6 months from the date of the last injection. 
 
If you stop using Obodence 
 
To get the most benefit from your treatment in reducing the risk of fractures, it is important to use 
Obodence for as long as your doctor prescribes it for you. Do not stop your treatment without contacting 
your doctor. 
 
 
4. Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
Uncommonly, patients receiving Obodence may develop skin infections (predominantly cellulitis). Please 
tell your doctor immediately if you develop any of these symptoms while being on treatment with 
Obodence: swollen, red area of skin, most commonly in the lower leg, that feels hot and tender, and 
possibly with symptoms of fever. 
 
Rarely, patients receiving Obodence may develop pain in the mouth and/or jaw, swelling or non-healing of 
sores in the mouth or jaw, discharge, numbness or a feeling of heaviness in the jaw, or loosening of a tooth. 
These could be signs of bone damage in the jaw (osteonecrosis). Tell your doctor and dentist 
immediately if you experience such symptoms while being treated with Obodence or after stopping 
treatment. 
 
Rarely, patients receiving Obodence may have low calcium levels in the blood (hypocalcaemia); severely 
low blood calcium levels may lead to hospitalisation and may even be life-threatening. Symptoms include 
spasms, twitches, or cramps in your muscles, and/or numbness or tingling in your fingers, toes or around 
your mouth and/or seizures, confusion, or loss of consciousness. If any of these apply to you, tell your 
doctor immediately. Low calcium in the blood may also lead to a change in heart rhythm called QT 
prolongation which is seen by electrocardiogram (ECG). 
 
Rarely unusual fractures of the thigh bone may occur in patients receiving Obodence. Contact your doctor 
if you experience new or unusual pain in your hip, groin or thigh as this may be an early indication of a 
possible fracture of the thigh bone. 
 
Rarely, allergic reactions may occur in patients receiving Obodence. Symptoms include swelling of the 
face, lips, tongue, throat or other parts of the body; rash, itching or hives on the skin, wheezing or difficulty 
breathing. Please tell your doctor if you develop any of these symptoms while being treated with 
Obodence. 
 
Very common side effects (may affect more than 1 in 10 people): 
 
 
bone, joint, and/or muscle pain which is sometimes severe, 
 
arm or leg pain (pain in extremity). 
 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
 
 
painful urination, frequent urination, blood in the urine, inability to hold your urine, 

29 
 
 
upper respiratory tract infection, 
 
pain, tingling or numbness that moves down your leg (sciatica), 
 
constipation, 
 
abdominal discomfort, 
 
rash, 
 
skin condition with itching, redness and/or dryness (eczema), 
 
hair loss (alopecia). 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
 
 
fever, vomiting and abdominal pain or discomfort (diverticulitis), 
 
ear infection, 
 
rash that may occur on the skin or sores in the mouth (lichenoid drug eruptions). 
 
Very rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 000 people): 
 
 
allergic reaction that can damage blood vessels mainly in the skin (e.g. purple or brownish-red spots, 
hives or skin sores) (hypersensitivity vasculitis). 
 
Not known (frequency cannot be estimated from the available data): 
 
 
talk to your doctor if you have ear pain, discharge from the ear and/or an ear infection. These could 
be signs of bone damage in the ear. 
 
Reporting of side effects 
 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects not 
listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting system listed in 
Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. How to store Obodence 
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the label and carton after EXP. The expiry 
date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C – 8°C). 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
Your pre-filled syringe may be left outside the refrigerator to reach room temperature (up to 25°C) before 
injection. This will make the injection more comfortable. 
Once your syringe has been left to reach room temperature (up to 25°C), it may be stored at room 
temperature for a single period of up to 60 days, but not exceeding the original expiry date. If not used within 
this period of up to 60 days, your syringe may be returned to the refrigerator for 28 days for future use. Do not 
use your syringe after the expiry date printed on the label. 
 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to throw 
away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help to protect the environment. 
 
 
6. Contents of the pack and other information  
 
What Obodence contains 
 

30 
 
- 
The active substance is denosumab. Each 1 mL pre-filled syringe contains 60 mg of denosumab 
(60 mg/mL). 
- 
The other ingredients are histidine, histidine hydrochloride monohydrate, sorbitol (E420), polysorbate 
20, water for injections. 
 
 
What Obodence looks like and contents of the pack 
 
Obodence is a clear, colourless to slightly yellow solution for injection provided in a ready to use pre-filled 
syringe. 
 
Each pack contains one pre-filled syringe with needle guard. 
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder and Manufacturer 
Samsung Bioepis NL B.V. 
Olof Palmestraat 10 
2616 LR Delft 
The Netherlands 
 
This leaflet was last revised in  
 
Other sources of information 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/ 
 

31 
 
Instructions for use: 
 
Guide to parts 
Before use 
After use 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
Important 
Before you use an Obodence pre-filled syringe with needle guard, read this important information: 
 
It is important that you do not try to give yourself the injection unless you have received training 
from your doctor or healthcare provider. 
 
Obodence is given as an injection into the tissue just under the skin (subcutaneous injection). 
 
Do not remove the needle cap from the pre-filled syringe until you are ready to inject. 
 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if it has been dropped on a hard surface. Use a new pre-filled 
syringe and call your doctor or healthcare provider. 
 
Do not attempt to activate the pre-filled syringe prior to injection. 
 
Do not attempt to remove the clear pre-filled syringe safety guard from the pre-filled syringe. 
Call your doctor or healthcare provider if you have any questions. 
 
Step 1: Prepare 
A 
Grab the pre-filled syringe safety guard to remove the pre-filled syringe from the package and 
gather the supplies needed for your injection: alcohol wipes, a cotton ball or gauze pad, a plaster 
and a sharps disposal container (not included). 
 
Grab here 
 
For safety reasons: 
 
Do not grasp the plunger. 
 
Do not grasp the needle cap. 
For a more comfortable injection, leave the pre-filled syringe at room temperature for about 30 minutes 
before injecting. Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water. 
On a clean, well-lit work surface, place the new pre-filled syringe and the other supplies. 
 
Do not try to warm the syringe by using a heat source such as hot water or microwave. 
 
Do not leave the pre-filled syringe exposed to direct sunlight. 
 
Do not shake the pre-filled syringe. 
 
Keep the pre-filled syringe out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
 

33 
 
B 
Inspect the medicine and pre-filled syringe. 
 
 
Do not use the pre-filled syringe if: 
 
The medicine is cloudy or there are particles in it. It must be a clear, colourless to slightly 
yellow solution. 
 
Any part appears cracked or broken. 
 
The needle cap is missing or not securely attached. 
 
The expiry date printed on the label has passed the last day of the month shown. 
In all cases, call your doctor or healthcare provider. 
 
Step 2: Get ready 
A 
Wash your hands thoroughly. Prepare and clean your injection site. 
 
 
You can use: 
 
Upper part of your thigh. 
 
Belly, except for a 5 cm (2-inch) area right around your belly button. 
 
Outer area of upper arm (only if someone else is giving you the injection). 
Clean the injection site with an alcohol wipe. Let your skin dry. 
 
Do not touch the injection site before injecting. 
Do not inject into areas where the skin is tender, bruised, red, or hard. Avoid injecting into areas 
with scars or stretch marks. 
 
 
 

34 
 
B 
Carefully pull the needle cap straight out and away from your body. 
 
 
C 
Pinch your injection site to create a firm surface. 
 
It is important to keep the skin pinched when injecting. 
 
 
Step 3: Inject 
A 
Hold the pinch. INSERT the needle into skin. 
 
 
Do not touch the cleaned area of the skin. 
 
 
 

35 
 
B 
PUSH the plunger with slow and constant pressure until you feel or hear a “snap”. Push all the 
way down through the snap. 
 
It is important to push down through the “snap” to deliver your full dose. 
 
 
C 
RELEASE your thumb. Then LIFT the syringe off skin. 
 
After releasing the plunger, the pre-filled syringe safety guard will safely cover the injection needle. 
 
Do not put the needle cap back on used pre-filled syringes. 
 
 
 

36 
 
Step 4: Finish 
A 
Discard the used pre-filled syringe and other supplies in a sharps disposal container. 
 
Medicines should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements. Ask your pharmacist how to 
dispose of medicines no longer required. These measures will help to protect the environment. 
 
Keep the syringe and sharps disposal container out of sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not reuse the pre-filled syringe. 
 
Do not recycle pre-filled syringes or throw them into household waste. 
 
B 
Examine the injection site. 
If there is blood, press a cotton ball or gauze pad on your injection site. Do not rub the injection site. 
Apply a plaster if needed. 
 
