1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml eye drops, solution 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
 
1 ml eye drops contains 0.1 mg of atropine sulfate. 
One drop (about 0.03 ml) contains approximately 3 mcg of atropine sulfate. 
 
Excipient with known effect 
 
1 ml of Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml solution contains 0.1 mg benzalkonium chloride.  
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Eye drops, solution (eye drops)  
 
The solution is a clear and colourless liquid with a pH of 5.4 and an osmolality of 280 mOsm/kg. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Ryjunea is indicated for slowing the progression of myopia in paediatric patients. Treatment may be 
initiated in children aged 3-14 years with a progression rate of 0.5 D or more per year and a severity of 
-0.5 D to -6.0 D.  
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Ryjunea should only be initiated by an ophthalmologist or a healthcare professional qualified in 
ophthalmology. 
 
Posology 
 
The recommended dose of Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml is one drop into each eye once daily.  
Administration at bedtime is recommended.  
 
Treatment should be assessed during regular clinical evaluation. Consider tapering and stopping 
treatment once myopia is stabilised (less than 0.5 D progression over 2 years) during adolescence. 
Continue monitoring for one year after cessation of treatment. Consider restarting treatment in case of 
subsequent myopia progression (0.5 D or worse per year, see section 4.4). 
 
Missed dose 
If one dose is missed, treatment should continue with the next dose as normal. 
 
 
 

3 
 
Paediatric population  
The safety and efficacy of Ryjunea in children aged less than 3 years has not been established. No data 
are available.  
 
Method of administration  
 
Ocular use. 
 
It is recommended that the lachrymal sac be compressed at the medial canthus (punctal occlusion) for 
one minute, to reduce possible systemic absorption. This should be performed immediately following 
the instillation of each drop. 
 
Contact lenses should be removed before instillation of the eye drops and may be reinserted after 
fifteen minutes (see section 4.4). 
 
If more than one topical ophthalmic medicinal product is being used, the medicinal products must be 
administered at least fifteen minutes apart. Eye ointments should be used last. 
 
To maintain sterility, contact of the container with the eye or eyelids should be avoided.  
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to atropine sulfate or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1.  
Known hypersensitivity to other anticholinergics like ipratropium and tiotropium.  
Patients with primary glaucoma or angle-closure glaucoma.   
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Photophobia and accommodative dysfunction 
 
After using atropine sulfate, accommodative dysfunction and increased sensitivity to bright light can 
be expected due to mydriasis. The effect could last up to 14 days. Photochromatic lenses may be used 
as needed to reduce discomfort due to photophobia. 
 
Rebound myopia progression upon discontinuation 
 
Discontinuation of atropine sulfate eye drops may lead to rebound myopia progression. Continue 
monitoring for one year after cessation of treatment. Consider restarting treatment in case of rebound 
myopia progression (0.5 D or worse per year, see section 4.2).  
 
Synechiae  
 
Atropine sulfate may increase the risk of adherence of the iris and lens. 
 
Cataract 
 
Depending on the type and opacity of the cataract, visual acuity and refraction may not be accurately 
assessed.   
 
Amblyopia and strabismus 
 
Atropine sulfate can cause blurred vision which may exacerbate these conditions. 
 
 
 

4 
 
Progressive syndromic myopia of childhood 
 
Before starting treatment with atropine, it is important to rule out progressive syndromic myopia of 
childhood, such as glaucoma, retinitis pigmentosa, congenital hemeralopia, and myelinated nerve fiber 
syndrome. These conditions do not evolve the same way as typical progressive myopia and should not 
be treated with atropine. 
 
Patients with cardiac disorders 
 
Atropine sulfate must be used and dosed with special caution in patients with tachycardia, heart 
failure, coronary stenosis and hypertension. Patients who have suffered a recent heart attack may 
experience tachycardic arrhythmias up to ventricular fibrillation while being administered atropine 
sulfate. 
 
Risk of hyperthermia 
 
As the capability for temperature regulation may be affected by inhibition of sweating, atropine sulfate 
must be used with caution in high ambient temperature and in patients with fever due to the risk of 
hyperthermia.   
 
Spastic paralysis  
 
An increased susceptibility to atropine has been reported in children with spastic paralysis; therefore 
Atropine sulfate must be used with special caution in these patients. 
 
Down’s syndrome 
 
An increased susceptibility to atropine has been reported in children with Down’s syndrome; therefore, 
atropine sulfate must be used with special caution in these patients. 
 
Excipients  
 
This medicinal product contains 0.1 mg benzalkonium chloride in each ml. Benzalkonium chloride has 
been reported to cause eye irritation, symptoms of dry eyes and may affect the tear film and corneal 
surface. This medicinal product should be used with caution in dry eye patients and in patients where 
the cornea may be compromised. Such patients should be monitored in case of prolonged use. 
 
Contact lenses should be removed prior to administration and may be reinserted 15 minutes after 
administration. Benzalkonium chloride is known to be absorbed by soft contact lenses and may change 
the colour of contact lenses. 
 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
No interaction studies have been performed. 
 
Sympathomimetics 
 
The possibility for systemic drug-drug interactions is considered low with atropine sulfate eye drops 
but it should be used with precaution when used in combination sympathomimetics like dobutamine, 
dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine or isoproterenol because mydriasis may be enhanced (see 
section 4.4). 
 
 
 

5 
 
Anticholinergics 
  
If significant systemic absorption of ophthalmic atropine sulfate occurs, concurrent use of other 
anticholinergics or medicinal products with anticholinergic activity like antihistamines, 
phenothiazines, tricyclic and tetracyclic antidepressants, amantadine, quinidine, disopyramide and 
metoclopramide may result in potentiated anticholinergic effects. 
 
Carbachol, physostigmine or pilocarpine  
 
Concurrent use with atropine sulfate may interfere with the antiglaucoma action of carbachol, 
physostigmine or pilocarpine (see also section 4.3). Also, concurrent use may counteract the mydriatic 
effect of atropine sulfate.  
 
Antimyasthenic medicinal products like pyridostigmine and neostigmine, potassium citrate, potassium 
supplements  
 
If significant systemic absorption of ophthalmic atropine sulfate occurs, concurrent use may increase 
the chance of toxicity and/or side effects like constipation, nausea and vomiting because of the 
anticholinergic induced slowing of gastrointestinal motility. 
 
CNS depression-producing medical products  
 
If significant absorption of systemic atropine sulfate occurs, concurrent use of medicinal products 
having CNS effects, such as antiemetic agents, phenothiazines, or barbiturates, may result in 
opisthotonos, convulsions, coma, and extrapyramidal symptoms. 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Pregnancy 
 
The safety of this medicinal product for use in human pregnancy has not been established. Animal 
studies are insufficient with respect to reproductive toxicity. A moderate amount of data on pregnant 
women indicates no malformative or feto/neonatal toxicity of atropine sulfate. 
 
Atropine sulfate rapidly crosses the placenta. Since atropine sulfate may be systemically absorbed 
after ocular administration, Ryjunea should only be used if absolutely necessary, especially during the 
last 3 months of pregnancy. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
There is insufficient information on the effects of atropine sulfate in newborns/infants. 
Atropine sulfate is excreted in human milk. A decision must be made whether to discontinue breast-
feeding or to discontinue/abstain from Ryjunea therapy taking into account the benefit of breast-
feeding for the child and the benefit of therapy for the woman.  
 
Fertility 
 
Animal studies do not indicate clinically-relevant effects with respect to male fertility (see 
section 5.3). Animal studies to evaluate effects on female fertility have not been conducted. 
There are no data on the effects of atropine eye drops on human fertility. 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 
Ryjunea has a moderate influence on the ability to ride bikes, drive or use machines. Instillation of 
Ryjunea, may induce temporary blurred vision or other visual disturbances (see section 4.8). Patients 

6 
 
should be advised not to ride bikes, drive or use machines until their vision has cleared. This effect 
may last up to 14 days after stopping treatment (see section 4.4). 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
The most common adverse reactions are photophobia (23.4%), eye irritation (9.9%) and blurred vision 
(7.8%).  
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
Adverse reactions reported in a phase III clinical trial where 282 patients aged 3 to 18 years were 
exposed to Ryjunea 0.1mg/ml are tabulated below by system organ class and by frequency. 
Approximately 0.4% of patients using Ryjunea discontinued due to any adverse event in the 24-month 
study. 
 
The frequencies are as follows: very common (≥1/10), common (≥1/100 to <1/10), uncommon 
(≥1/1 000 to <1/100), rare (≥1/10 000 to <1/1 000) very rare (<1/10 000), not known ( cannot be 
estimated from the available data). 
 
Table 1. Adverse reactions observed in clinical trial specific for Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml 
System organ class 
Very common 
≥1/10 
Common 
≥1/100 to <1/10 
Uncommon 
≥1/1 000 to <1/100 
Nervous system 
disorders 
 
Headache 
 
Eye disorders 
Photophobia 
Vision blurred,  
Eye irritation,  
Eye pain,  
Foreign body sensation in 
eyes,  
Mydriasis 
Accommodation 
disorder, 
Conjunctival 
papillae, 
Punctate keratitis 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Photophobia 
Atropine sulfate causes photophobia by dilating the pupil and paralyzing the ciliary muscle, allowing 
excessive light to enter the eye and impairing its ability to adjust to bright light. Photophobia was the 
most commonly reported adverse reaction in clinical trials, typically presenting as mild to moderate in 
severity. Duration of the photophobia varied from 1 to 1 392 days (average 259 days) and usually 
occurred intermittently (see section 4.4).  
 
Vision blurred 
Mild or moderate blurred vision is associated with atropine sulfate (see sections 4.4 and 4.7). In 
approximately 69% of patients, it resolves by itself during treatment (range of duration 2 to 734 days, 
mean duration days 135). 
 
Eye irritation 
Signs and symptoms of eye irritation associated with atropine sulfate include also eye pruritus and 
ocular discomfort. These are mostly mild or moderate symptoms occurring intermittently. The 
duration of these reactions varied from 1 to 758 days in the clinical trial and were comparable in the 
vehicle group and in the atropine sulfate groups. 
 

7 
 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
Overdose is unlikely to occur after ocular administration.  
 
Symptoms 
 
Possible symptoms of overdose can be flushing and dryness of the skin, dilated pupils with 
photophobia, dry mouth and tongue accompanied by a burning sensation, difficulty in swallowing, 
tachycardia, rapid respiration, hyperpyrexia, nausea, vomiting, hypertension, rash and excitement. 
Symptoms of central nervous system (CNS) stimulation include restlessness, confusion, 
hallucinations, paranoid and psychotic reactions, incoordination, delirium and occasionally 
convulsions. In severe overdose, drowsiness, stupor and CNS depression may occur with coma, 
circulatory and respiratory failure and death. 
 
Treatment 
 
If overdose with atropine sulfate occurs, treatment should be symptomatic and supportive.  In ocular 
overdose, eyes can be rinsed with water or sodium chloride 9 mg/ml (0.9 %) solution for injection. An 
adequate airway should be maintained. Diazepam may be administered to control excitement and 
convulsions, but the risk of CNS depression should be considered. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1  
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Mydriatics and cycloplegics, Anticholinergics. ATC code: S01FA01 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Atropine acts as a competitive and reversible antagonist at all muscarinic acetylcholine receptors. The 
mechanism through which atropine retards myopia progression is not fully understood but is thought 
to involve stimulation of scleral remodelling/strengthening that reduces axial length and vitreous 
chamber depth. Published literature provides evidence that the mechanism of action of atropine in 
myopia and in mydriatic/cycloplegic indications, is not identical. 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
 
Atropine sulfate induces mydriasis by inhibiting the contraction of the circular sphincter muscle of the 
iris, allowing the radial dilator muscle to contract and dilate the pupil. It also blocks cholinergic 
stimulation of the ciliary muscle, leading to cycloplegia by paralyzing the muscle responsible for 
accommodation. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety 
 
The efficacy, safety and tolerability of Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml has been evaluated in a pivotal phase III 
study.  

8 
 
The 48-month double masked vehicle controlled phase III clinical trial (STAR study), enrolled 852 
children aged 3 to 14 years inclusive, with myopia of -0.50 D to -6.0 D, who were randomised to 
receive Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml, 0.3 mg/ml or placebo (vehicle). At Month 36, patients, initially 
randomised to Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml or 0.3 mg/ml  were randomly re-assigned in a double-masked 
manner to either continue with Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml or 0.3 mg/ml or were assigned to vehicle. 
Participants initially randomised to vehicle were assigned to receive Ryjunea 0.3 mg/ml. Treatment 
compliance was greater than 97% in all treatment groups. 
 
The Full Analysis Set (FAS) included 847 participants who received at least 1 dose of study drug. 
Randomisation was stratified according to age [3 to < 6 years (3.1%), 6 to < 9 (21.8%), 9 to < 12 
(39.1%), and 12-14 (36%)] and baseline spherical equivalent (SE) [-0.50 D to -3.0 D (61.9%), >-3.0 D 
to -6.0 D (31.8%)] as measured by cycloplegic autorefraction. 
  
Demographic characteristics were similar in all treatment groups. Overall, the mean age at baseline 
was 10.3 ± 2.44 years, ranging from 3 to 14 years. In all groups, there were more males (55.7%) than 
females (44.3%). Most participants were White (68.5%); Asian participants accounted for 17.5% of 
the FAS. Other baseline characteristics were similar in all treatment groups. The mean participants’ 
baseline spherical equivalent (SE) was -2.69 ± 1.309 D and was similar between the treatment groups. 
Participants enrolled did not suffer from any medical condition that predisposes to degenerative 
myopia (eg, Marfan syndrome, Stickler syndrome) or a condition that may affect visual function or 
development (eg, diabetes mellitus, chromosome anomaly). Additionally, participants with amblyopia, 
strabismus, cataract, or primary open angle and angle closure glaucoma were excluded. 
 
Efficacy 
 
The primary endpoint was the difference in the mean annual progression rate (APR) of myopia 
through 24 months between treatment and vehicle groups in the FAS. For Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml, a 
statistically significant difference of 0.132 D (95% CI: 0.061, 0.204) compared to vehicle was shown. 
 
A higher treatment effect was observed in participants with progression rate of 0.5 D or more per year. 
In this pre-specified subgroup, a difference in mean APR of 0.207 D (95% CI: 0.112, 0.302) was 
observed for 0.1 mg/mL Ryjunea vs. vehicle at 24 months, and a difference in mean APR of 0.154 D 
(95% CI: 0.073, 0.236) was observed for 0.1 mg/mL Ryjunea vs. vehicle at 36 months. A difference in 
mean change from baseline spherical equivalent (SE) of 0.388 D (95% CI: 0.190, 0.585) was observed 
for Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml compared to vehicle at 24 months, and a difference in mean change from baseline 
spherical equivalent of 0.425 D (95% CI 0.170, 0.681) was observed for Ryjunea 0.1 mg/mL compared 
to vehicle at 36 months (Table 2). Figure 1 shows the mean change from baseline in SE through 36 
months between treatment and vehicle groups in patients with progression rate of 0.5 D or more per 
year. 
Larger effect sizes were observed with younger ages. 
 
Table 2: STAR-trial: Change from baseline in spherical equivalent (D) through month 36 in 
patients with progression rate of 0.5 D or more per year 
 
 
Vehicle  
(n=93) 
Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml 
(n=95) 
Baseline to month 24 
-0.862 (-1.00, -0.72) 
-0.474 (-0.61, -0.33) 
Difference to vehicle 
  
0.388 (0.190, 0.585) 
Baseline to month 36 
-1.091 (-1.27, -0.91) 
-0.665 (-0.85, -0.49) 
Difference to vehicle 
  
0.425 (0.170, 0.681) 
 

9 
 
 
Figure 1: STAR-trial: Mean change from baseline in spherical equivalent (D) through month 36 
in patients with progression rate of 0.5 D or more per year 
 
 
In a subset of 44 participants per treatment group, there was no statistically significant improvement in 
axial length for Ryjunea 0.1 mg/mL compared to vehicle at month 24. 
 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
No pharmacokinetic study in paediatric patients has been performed with Ryjunea. PK data are only 
available for adults who received a higher dose of atropine sulfate.  
 
Absorption 
 
In a study of healthy subjects, after topical ocular administration of 30 μL atropine sulfate ophthalmic 
solution, 10 mg/ml the mean (± SD) systemic bioavailability of l-hyoscyamine was reported to be 
approximately 64 ± 29 %, (range 19% to 95%) as compared to intravenous administration of atropine 
sulfate.  The mean (± SD) time to maximum plasma concentration (Tmax) was approximately 28 ± 27 
minutes (range 3 to 60 minutes), and the mean (± SD) peak plasma concentration (Cmax) of l-
hyoscyamine was 288 ± 73 pg/ml.    
 
In a separate study of patients undergoing ocular surgery, after topical ocular administration of 40 μL 
of atropine sulfate ophthalmic solution, 10 mg/ml, the mean (± SD) plasma Cmax of l-hyoscyamine was 
860 ± 402 pg/ml.  
 
Distribution 
 
Atropine is distributed widely throughout the body and crosses the blood brain barrier. Up to 50% of 
the dose is protein bound. 
 
Biotransformation 
 
Atropine is metabolised in the liver by oxidation and conjugation to give inactive metabolites. 
 
 

10 
 
 
Elimination 
 
The elimination half-life is about 2 to 5 hours. About 50% of the dose is excreted within 4 hours and 
90% in 24 hours in the urine, about 30 to 50% as unchanged drug. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
Minimal focal hyperkeratosis of the eyelid was observed at necropsy in three of four rabbits given 
atropine sulfate 0.1 mg/ml eye drops three times daily.  
 
Based of literature data, there is no evidence of mutagenic or tumorigenic effects of atropine sulfate. 
 
Atropine sulfate administered orally reduced fertility in male rats at exposures considered sufficiently 
in excess of the maximum human exposure indicating little relevance to clinical use.  
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
Benzalkonium chloride 
Citric acid (E330) 
Sodium citrate (E331) 
Sodium chloride 
Sodium hydroxide (E524) / hydrochloric acid (E507) (for pH adjustment) 
Deuterium oxide 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
Not applicable. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
Unopened: 2 years. 
After first opening: 4 weeks 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
This medicinal product does not require any special storage conditions. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
White low-density polyethylene (LDPE) 5 ml bottles with white LDPE tips and red high-density 
polyethylene (HDPE) screw caps with a protective tamper-evident ring.  
 
Each multi-dose bottle contains 2.5 ml Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml. 
Pack sizes: 1 or 3 multi-dose bottles. 
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 

11 
 
 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Santen Oy 
Niittyhaankatu 20 
33720 Tampere 
Finland  
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/25/1920/001 
EU/1/25/1920/002 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 
  
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu  
 
 

12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH 
RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO 
THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT 

 
13 
A. 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release 
 
Santen Oy 
Kelloportinkatu 1 
33100 Tampere  
Finland 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (see Annex I: Summary of Product 
Characteristics, section 4.2).  
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union 
reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any 
subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal.  
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE 
AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance activities 
and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the marketing 
authorisation and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of 
an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 
 
•    
Obligation to conduct post-authorisation measures  
 
The MAH shall complete, within the stated timeframe, the below measures: 
 
Description 
Due date 
Post-authorisation efficacy study (PAES): In order to further characterise the 
efficacy and safety of Ryjunea and the rebound effects and progression of myopia 
after treatment cessation, the MAH should submit the 48 months follow-up results 
from the study SYD-101-001. 
Final CSR:  
30.06.2026 
 
 

 
 
 
 14  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 
 

 
 
 
 15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 
 
 

 
 
 
 16  
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
OUTER CARTON BOX 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml eye drops, solution 
atropine sulfate  
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE 
 
1 ml eye drops contains 0.1 mg of atropine sulfate 
One drop (about 0.03 ml) contains approximately 3 mcg of atropine sulfate 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
Benzalkonium chloride, citric acid (E330), sodium citrate (E331), sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide 
(E524) / hydrochloric acid (E507), deuterium oxide. See leaflet for further information. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
Eye drops, solution 
  
1 × 2.5 ml  
3 × 2.5 ml 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Ocular use 
Remove contact lenses before use. 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
Discard 4 weeks after first opening. 
 
For the 1-bottle pack size:  
Open date: __________ 
 

 
 
 
 17  
 
For the 3-bottle pack size:  
Open date (1): __________ 
Open date (2): __________  
Open date (3): __________ 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Santen Oy 
Niittyhaankatu 20 
33720 Tampere 
Finland  
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/25/1920/001 1 bottle 
EU/1/25/1920/002 3 bottles 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 

 
 
 
 18  
SN  
NN

 
19 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
BOTTLE LABEL  
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml eye drops 
atropine sulfate 
ocular use 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
 
2.5 ml 
 
 
6. 
OTHER 
 
 

 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 
 

 
21 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user 
 
Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml eye drops, solution 
atropine sulfate 
 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you or your child start(s) using this medicine because it 
contains important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again.  
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
1. 
What Ryjunea is and what it is used for  
2. 
What you need to know before you use Ryjunea 
3. 
How to use Ryjunea 
4. 
Possible side effects  
5. 
How to store Ryjunea  
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What Ryjunea is and what it is used for 
 
Ryjunea eye drops contain the active substance atropine sulfate. 
 
It is used to slow worsening of myopia (nearsightedness) in children aged 3 to 14, whose myopia is 
between -0.5 and -6 diopters (a measurement of the capacity of the eye to focus) and their progression 
rate is 0.5 diopters per year or more at the beginning of the treatment with Ryjunea.  
 
The benefit of the use of atropine sulfate eye drops in children is to maintain a better eye sight and to 
reduce the risk of future complications.   
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Ryjunea  
 
Do not use Ryjunea 
- 
if you are allergic to atropine sulfate or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in 
section 6).  
- 
if you are allergic to other so-called anticholinergics (substances that block the action of the 
neurotransmitter acetylcholine), like antihistamines, some antidepressants, amantadine, 
quinidine, disopyramide and metoclopramide. 
-  
if you have primary or angle-closure glaucoma (damage to the nerve in the eye caused by high 
pressure inside the eye). 
 
Warnings and precautions  
You or your child may experience photophobia (increased sensitivity of the eyes to bright light) and 
accomodative dysfunction (blurred vision due to difficulty focussing the eyes) when using Ryjunea. 
These effects can last up to 14 days. If your eyes are more sensitive to light, you are advised to wear 
sunglassessto reduce discomfort. 
 
Stopping treatment may cause your myopia to worsen again (see section 3 “If you stop using 
Ryjunea”). After you stop taking this medicine, you should continue your eye checks  for one year. 
Talk to your doctor or the doctor treating your child in case your eye sight worsens (rebound).  

 
22 
 
 
Using this medicine may increase the risk of synechiae (abnormal adhesions of the iris) where the 
coloured part of the eye sticks to the tissue around it. 
 
Ryjunea can cause blurred vision which may make seeing difficult in patients with clouding of the lens 
(cataract), lazy eye (amblyopia) and eye misalignment (strabismus). 
 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using Ryjunea, if the following applies to you or your child: 
 
- 
if you have progressive syndromic nearsightedness of childhood, such as damage to the nerve in 
the eye usually caused by high pressure in the eye (glaucoma), progressive vision loss (retinitis 
pigmentosa), day blindness from birth (congenital hemeralopia), and disorder with nerve fiber of 
the eyes (myelinated nerve fiber syndrome). 
- 
have heart problems such as tachycardia (rapid heartbeat), heart failure (when the heart does not 
pump blood as well as it should), coronary stenosis (narrowing of the blood vessels that supply the 
heart muscle), or hypertension (high blood pressure). Patients who have suffered a recent heart 
attack may experience potentially life-threatening abnormalities in heart rhythm when using this 
medicine. 
- 
may have the capability for temperature regulation affected by inhibition of sweating, as atropine 
must be used with caution in high temperatures, in patients with fever due to the risk of high body 
temperature.   
- 
have spastic paralysis (a muscle condition of the legs). 
- 
have Down’s syndrome. 
Children  
Ryjunea is not recommended in children below 3 years. It is not known if it is safe or effective in this 
age group. 
 
Other medicines and Ryjunea 
Ryjunea may interact with other medicines. Before you or your child take Ryjunea, tell your doctor or 
pharmacist if you are using, have recently used or might use any other medicines, including medicines 
obtained without prescription. Tell your doctor especially: 
 
- 
if you are taking anticholinergics like antihistamines, phenothiazines, tricyclic and tetracyclic 
antidepressants, amantadine, quinidine, disopyramide, metoclopramide. 
- 
if you are taking medicines containing carbachol, pilocarpin or physostigmin to lower your eye 
pressure. 
- 
if you are taking sympathomimetic medicines like dobutamine, dopamine, norepinephrine, 
epinephrine or isoproterenol. 
- 
if you are taking medicines that prevent muscle weakness (antimyasthenics) like pyridostigmine 
and neostigmine, potassium citrate or potassium supplements. 
- 
if you are taking brain or spinal cord (central nervous system) slowing medicines. 
 
If you are not sure if the above applies to you or your child, ask your doctor. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding  
If you are pregnant or breast-feeding, think you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask 
your doctor or pharmacist for advice before using this medicine.  
 
During pregnancy, especially during the last 3 months, Ryjunea should only be used if your doctor 
considers that the use of this medicine is absolutely necessary for you.  
 
It is not recommended to use this medicine during breast-feeding because Ryjunea is passed into 
breast milk. 
 
Driving and using machines 

 
23 
 
Ryjunea has a moderate influence on the ability to drive, ride bikes or scooters, or use machines 
because this medicine may lead to abnormal or blurred vision (see section 4 ‘Possible side effects”). 
Do not drive, ride bikes or scooters or use machines until your vision has cleared. This effect may last 
up to 14 days after stopping treatment. 
 
Ryjunea contains benzalkonium chloride 
This medicine contains 0.1 mg benzalkonium chloride in each ml. Benzalkonium chloride may be 
absorbed by soft contact lenses and may change the colour of the contact lenses. You should remove 
contact lenses before using this medicine and put them back 15 minutes afterwards.   
 
Benzalkonium chloride may also cause eye irritation, especially if you have dry eyes or disorders of 
the cornea (the clear layer at the front of the eye). If you feel abnormal eye sensation, stinging or pain 
in the eye after using this medicine, talk to your doctor. 
 
 
3. 
How to use Ryjunea 
 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor has told you. Check with your doctor or pharmacist if 
you are not sure.  
 
The recommended dose is one drop of Ryjunea 0.1 mg/ml  in each eye daily. It is recommended to use 
right before bed time because this can help reduce the impact of side effects like blurred vision or 
abnormal sensitivity of the eyes to light (see section 4 “Possible side effects”). Your doctor will advise 
you how long to apply the drops.  
 
If you are using other eye drops, wait at least 15 minutes after using them and then use Ryjunea. If 
you use contact lenses, you should remove them before use (see section 2 “Ryjunea contains 
benzalkonium chloride”). If you are using an eye ointment, it should be used after using Ryjunea. This 
helps Ryjunea to get into your eye and to start working. 
 
How to use 
 
 
 
• 
Wash your hands before you start (picture 1). 
• 
Open the bottle. Remove the loose plastic ring from the cap when the bottle is first opened. 
Take special care that the tip of the dropper bottle does not touch your eye, the skin around your 
eye or your fingers.  
• 
Do not use if the tamper evident ring is broken or you notice visible signs of deterioration. 
• 
Twist off the bottle cap, and lie the cap on a clean surface on its side. Continue to hold the 
bottle, ensuring that the tip doesn’t come into contact with anything.  
• 
Hold the bottle, pointing down, between your thumb and fingers. 
• 
Pull down your lower eyelid with a clean finger to form a ‘pocket’ between the eyelid and your 
eye (picture 2). The drop will go in here. 
• 
Tilt your head back. 
• 
Bring the dropper tip close to the eye. Do this in front of a mirror if it helps. 
• 
Do not touch your eye, eyelid, surrounding areas or other surfaces with the dropper tip. It could 
contaminate the eye drops. 
• 
Gently squeeze the bottle to release one drop of Ryjunea into your eye (picture 3). 

 
24 
 
• 
Only put one drop into your eye. If a drop misses your eye, try again. 
• 
Press a finger against the corner of the eye by the nose. Hold for 1 minute whilst keeping the 
eye closed (picture 4). A small duct that drains tears away from your eye and into your nose is 
located here. By pressing at this point, you close down the opening of this drainage duct. This 
helps to stop Ryjunea getting into the rest of the body. 
• 
You need to use the drops in both eyes, repeat the steps for your other eye while you have the 
bottle open. 
• 
Put back the bottle cap to close the bottle. 
 
If you use more Ryjunea than you should 
Rinse your eye with warm water. Do not put in any more drops until it is time for your next regular 
dose. 
 
If you forget to use Ryjunea  
If you forget to use this medicine, skip the dose and use the next dose as you normally would. Do not 
take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose.  
 
If you stop using Ryjunea  
Do not stop using Ryjunea without first speaking to your doctor or the doctor treating your child. 
Stopping of this medicine may lead to a worsening of your myopia (rebound). After you stop taking 
this medicine, you should continue your eye checks for one year. Talk to your doctor or the doctor 
treating your child in case your eye sight worsens (rebound).   
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
The following side effects have been observed with Ryjunea: 
 
• 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
- 
abnormal sensitivity of the eyes to light (photophobia) 
 
• 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
- 
blurred vision  
- 
eye irritation 
- 
dilation of the pupil (mydriasis)  
- 
eye pain 
- 
feeling there is something in your eye (foreign body sensation) 
- 
headache 
 
• 
Uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
- 
difficulty focusing vision (accommodation disorder)  
- 
spots of inflammation in the cornea (punctate keratitis) 
- 
papilla in the membrane that lines the white of the eye and the inside of the eyelid (conjunctival 
papillae) 
 
Reporting of side effects 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects 
not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects, you can help provide more information on the safety 
of this medicine. 
 
 

 
25 
 
5. 
How to store Ryjunea 
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the bottle label and carton after 
“EXP”. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
This medicine does not require any special storage conditions.  
 
Throw away the bottle 4 weeks after first opening to prevent infections and use a new bottle.  
 
Do not use this medicine if you notice that the plastic ring around the cap and neck is missing or 
broken before you start a new bottle.  
 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to 
dispose of medicines you no longer use. These measures will help to protect the environment. 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What Ryjunea contains  
- 
The active substance is atropine sulfate. Each ml of solution contains 0.1 mg of atropine sulfate.  
- 
The other ingredients are benzalkonium chloride, citric acid (E330), sodium citrate (E331), 
sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide (E524)/hydrochloric acid (E507) (for pH adjustment), 
deuterium oxide. See section 2 “Ryjunea contains benzalkonium chloride”. 
 
What Ryjunea looks like and contents of the pack 
Ryjunea eye drops, solution (eye drops) is a clear, colourless liquid in a plastic multidose bottle.  
 
Each bottle contains 2.5 ml of the medicine and each pack contains 1 or 3 bottles with a screw-cap.  
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Santen Oy 
Niittyhaankatu 20,  
33720 Tampere, Finland 
 
Manufacturer 
Santen Oy,  
Kelloportinkatu 1,  
33100 Tampere, Finland 
 
 

 
26 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
 
België/Belgique/Belgien  
Santen Oy  
Tél/Tel: +32 (0) 24019172  
Lietuva  
Santen Oy  
Tel: +370 37 366628  
 
България  
Santen Oy  
Teл.: +359 (0) 888 755 393   
Luxembourg/Luxemburg  
Santen Oy  
Tél/Tel: +352 (0) 27862006  
 
Česká republika  
Santen Oy  
Tel: +358 (0) 3 284 8111  
Magyarország  
Santen Oy  
Tel: +358 (0) 3 284 8111  
 
Danmark  
Santen Oy   
Tlf: +45 898 713 35  
Malta  
Santen Oy   
Tel: +358 (0) 3 284 8111  
 
Deutschland  
Santen GmbH 
Tel: +49 (0) 3030809610 
Nederland  
Santen Oy   
Tel: +31 (0) 207139206  
 
Eesti  
Santen Oy   
Tel: +372 5067559  
Norge  
Santen Oy  
Tlf: +47 21939612  
 
Ελλάδα  
Santen Oy   
Τηλ: +358 (0) 3 284 8111   
 
Österreich  
Santen Oy  
Tel: +43 (0) 720116199  
España  
Santen Pharmaceutical Spain S.L.  
Tel: +34 914 142 485   
 
Polska  
Santen Oy   
Tel.: +48(0) 221042096  
 
France  
Santen  
Tél: +33 (0) 1 70 75 26 84        
 
Portugal  
Santen Oy  
Tel: +351 308 805 912  
 
Hrvatska  
Santen Oy  
Tel: +358 (0) 3 284 8111  
 
Ireland  
Santen Oy   
Tel: +353 (0) 16950008  
 
România  
Santen Oy   
Tel: +358 (0) 3 284 8111  
 
Slovenija  
Santen Oy  
Tel: +358 (0) 3 284 8111  
 
Ísland  
Santen Oy  
Sími: +358 (0) 3 284 8111  
 
Slovenská republika  
Santen Oy   
Tel: +358 (0) 3 284 8111  
Italia  
Santen Italy S.r.l.  
Tel: +39 0236009983   
 
Suomi/Finland  
Santen Oy  
Puh/Tel: +358 (0) 974790211  

 
27 
 
Κύπρος  
Santen Oy   
Τηλ: +358 (0) 3 284 8111  
 
Sverige  
Santen Oy   
Tel: +46 (0) 850598833   
Latvija  
Santen Oy   
Tel: +371 677 917 80  
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in 
 
 
Other sources of information 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu  
 
 
