1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 

2 
 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Stoboclo 60 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each pre-filled syringe contains 60 mg of denosumab in 1 mL of solution (60 mg/mL). 
 
Denosumab is a human monoclonal IgG2 antibody produced in a mammalian cell line (Chinese 
hamster ovary cells) by recombinant DNA technology. 
 
Excipients with known effect 
 
This medicine contains 47 mg sorbitol (E420) and 0.1 mg polysorbate 20 (E432) in each mL of 
solution.  
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Solution for injection (injection). 
 
Clear, colourless to pale yellow solution with pH of 5.2. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women and in men at increased risk of fractures. In 
postmenopausal women denosumab significantly reduces the risk of vertebral, non-vertebral and hip 
fractures. 
 
Treatment of bone loss associated with hormone ablation in men with prostate cancer at increased risk 
of fractures (see section 5.1). In men with prostate cancer receiving hormone ablation, denosumab 
significantly reduces the risk of vertebral fractures. 
 
Treatment of bone loss associated with long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy in adult patients at 
increased risk of fracture (see section 5.1). 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Posology 
 
The recommended dose is 60 mg denosumab administered as a single subcutaneous injection once 
every 6 months into the thigh, abdomen or upper arm. 
 
Patients must be adequately supplemented with calcium and vitamin D (see section 4.4).  
 
Patients treated with denosumab should be given the package leaflet and the patient reminder card. 

3 
 
The optimal total duration of antiresorptive treatment for osteoporosis (including both denosumab and 
bisphosphonates) has not been established. The need for continued treatment should be re-evaluated 
periodically based on the benefits and potential risks of denosumab on an individual patient basis, 
particularly after 5 or more years of use (see section 4.4). 
 
Elderly (age ≥ 65) 
No dose adjustment is required in elderly patients. 
 
Renal impairment 
No dose adjustment is required in patients with renal impairment (see section 4.4 for recommendations 
relating to monitoring of calcium). 
 
No data is available in patients with long-term systemic glucocorticoid therapy and severe renal 
impairment (Glomerular filtration rate, GFR < 30 mL/min). 
 
Hepatic impairment 
The safety and efficacy of denosumab have not been studied in patients with hepatic impairment (see 
section 5.2). 
 
Paediatric population 
Stoboclo should not be used in children aged < 18 years because of safety concerns of serious 
hypercalcaemia, and potential inhibition of bone growth and lack of tooth eruption (see sections 4.4 
and 5.3). Currently available data for children aged 2 to 17 years are described in sections 5.1 and 5.2. 
 
Method of administration 
 
For subcutaneous use. 
 
Administration should be performed by an individual who has been adequately trained in injection 
techniques. 
 
The instructions for use, handling and disposal are given in section 6.6. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1.  
 
Hypocalcaemia (see section 4.4). 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the name and the batch number 
of the administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Calcium and vitamin D supplementation 
 
Adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is important in all patients.  
 
Precautions for use 
 
Hypocalcaemia 
It is important to identify patients at risk for hypocalcaemia. Hypocalcaemia must be corrected by 
adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D before initiating therapy. Clinical monitoring of calcium 
levels is recommended before each dose and, in patients predisposed to hypocalcaemia within 

4 
 
two weeks, after the initial dose. If any patient presents with suspected symptoms of hypocalcaemia 
during treatment (see section 4.8 for symptoms) calcium levels should be measured. Patients should be 
encouraged to report symptoms indicative of hypocalcaemia. 
 
In the post-marketing setting, severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia (resulting in hospitalisation, 
life-threatening events, and fatal cases) have been reported. While most cases occurred in the first few 
weeks of initiating therapy, it has also occurred later. 
 
Concomitant glucocorticoid treatment is an additional risk factor for hypocalcaemia. 
 
Renal impairment 
Patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min) or receiving dialysis are at 
greater risk of developing hypocalcaemia. The risks of developing hypocalcaemia and accompanying 
parathyroid hormone elevations increase with increasing degree of renal impairment. Severe and fatal 
cases have been reported. Adequate intake of calcium, vitamin D and regular monitoring of calcium is 
especially important in these patients, see above. 
 
Skin infections 
Patients receiving denosumab may develop skin infections (predominantly cellulitis) leading to 
hospitalisation (see section 4.8). Patients should be advised to seek prompt medical attention if they 
develop signs or symptoms of cellulitis. 
 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) 
ONJ has been reported rarely in patients receiving denosumab for osteoporosis (see section 4.8). 
 
The start of treatment/new treatment course should be delayed in patients with unhealed open soft 
tissue lesions in the mouth. A dental examination with preventive dentistry and an individual 
benefit-risk assessment is recommended prior to treatment with denosumab in patients with 
concomitant risk factors. 
 
The following risk factors should be considered when evaluating a patient’s risk of developing ONJ: 
• 
potency of the medicinal product that inhibits bone resorption (higher risk for highly potent 
compounds), route of administration (higher risk for parenteral administration) and cumulative 
dose of bone resorption therapy. 
• 
cancer, co-morbid conditions (e.g. anaemia, coagulopathies, infection), smoking. 
• 
concomitant therapies: corticosteroids, chemotherapy, angiogenesis inhibitors, radiotherapy to 
head and neck. 
• 
poor oral hygiene, periodontal disease, poorly fitting dentures, history of dental disease, 
invasive dental procedures (e.g. tooth extractions). 
 
All patients should be encouraged to maintain good oral hygiene, receive routine dental check-ups, 
and immediately report any oral symptoms such as dental mobility, pain or swelling or non-healing of 
sores or discharge during treatment with denosumab. While on treatment, invasive dental procedures 
should be performed only after careful consideration and be avoided in close proximity to denosumab 
administration. 
 
The management plan of the patients who develop ONJ should be set up in close collaboration 
between the treating physician and a dentist or oral surgeon with expertise in ONJ. Temporary 
interruption of treatment should be considered until the condition resolves and contributing risk factors 
are mitigated where possible. 
 
Osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal 
Osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal has been reported with denosumab. Possible risk factors 
for osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal include steroid use and chemotherapy and/or local risk 
factors such as infection or trauma. The possibility of osteonecrosis of the external auditory canal 
should be considered in patients receiving denosumab who present with ear symptoms including 
chronic ear infections. 

5 
 
Atypical fractures of the femur 
Atypical femoral fractures have been reported in patients receiving denosumab (see section 4.8). 
Atypical femoral fractures may occur with little or no trauma in the subtrochanteric and diaphyseal 
regions of the femur. Specific radiographic findings characterise these events. Atypical femoral 
fractures have also been reported in patients with certain co-morbid conditions (e.g. vitamin D 
deficiency, rheumatoid arthritis, hypophosphatasia) and with use of certain medicinal products (e.g. 
bisphosphonates, glucocorticoids, proton pump inhibitors). These events have also occurred without 
antiresorptive therapy. Similar fractures reported in association with bisphosphonates are often 
bilateral; therefore, the contralateral femur should be examined in denosumab-treated patients who 
have sustained a femoral shaft fracture. Discontinuation of denosumab therapy in patients suspected to 
have an atypical femur fracture should be considered pending evaluation of the patient based on an 
individual benefit-risk assessment. During denosumab treatment, patients should be advised to report 
new or unusual thigh, hip, or groin pain. Patients presenting with such symptoms should be evaluated 
for an incomplete femoral fracture. 
 
Long-term antiresorptive treatment 
Long-term antiresorptive treatment (including both denosumab and bisphosphonates) may contribute 
to an increased risk for adverse outcomes such as osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femur fractures 
due to significant suppression of bone remodelling (see section 4.2). 
 
Treatment discontinuation 
Following denosumab discontinuation, decrease in bone mineral density (BMD) is expected (see 
section 5.1), leading to an increased risk for fractures. Thus, monitoring of BMD is recommended, and 
alternative treatment should be considered according to clinical guidelines. 
 
Concomitant treatment with other denosumab-containing medicinal products 
Patients being treated with denosumab should not be treated concomitantly with other 
denosumab-containing medicinal products (for prevention of skeletal related events in adults with 
bone metastases from solid tumours). 
 
Hypercalcaemia in paediatric patients 
Denosumab should not be used in paediatric patients (age < 18). Serious hypercalcaemia has been 
reported. Some clinical trial cases were complicated by acute renal injury. 
 
Warnings for excipients 
This medicinal product contains 47 mg sorbitol in each mL of solution. The additive effect of 
concomitantly administered products containing sorbitol (or fructose) and dietary intake of sorbitol (or 
fructose) should be taken into account. 
 
This medicinal product contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per 60 mg that is to say essentially 
‘sodium-free’. 
 
This medicinal product contains 0.1 mg of polysorbate 20 in each syringe which is equivalent to 0.1 
mg/mL. Polysorbates may cause allergic reactions. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
In an interaction study, denosumab did not affect the pharmacokinetics of midazolam, which is 
metabolised by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). This indicates that denosumab should not alter the 
pharmacokinetics of medicinal products metabolised by CYP3A4. 
 
There are no clinical data on the co-administration of denosumab and hormone replacement therapy 
(oestrogen), however the potential for a pharmacodynamic interaction is considered to be low. 
 
In postmenopausal women with osteoporosis the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of 
denosumab were not altered by previous alendronate therapy, based on data from a transition study 
(alendronate to denosumab). 

6 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Pregnancy 
 
There are no or limited amount of data from the use of denosumab in pregnant women. Studies in 
animals have shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). 
 
Denosumab is not recommended for use in pregnant women and women of child-bearing potential not 
using contraception. Women should be advised not to become pregnant during and for at least 
5 months after treatment with denosumab. Any effects of denosumab are likely to be greater during the 
second and third trimesters of pregnancy since monoclonal antibodies are transported across the 
placenta in a linear fashion as pregnancy progresses, with the largest amount transferred during the 
third trimester. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
It is unknown whether denosumab is excreted in human milk. In genetically engineered mice in which 
RANKL has been turned off by gene removal (a “knockout mouse”), studies suggest absence of 
RANKL (the target of denosumab see section 5.1) during pregnancy may interfere with maturation of 
the mammary gland leading to impaired lactation post-partum (see section 5.3). A decision on whether 
to abstain from breast-feeding or to abstain from therapy with denosumab should be made, taking into 
account the benefit of breast-feeding to the newborn/infant and the benefit of denosumab therapy to 
the woman. 
 
Fertility 
 
No data are available on the effect of denosumab on human fertility. Animal studies do not indicate 
direct or indirect harmful effects with respect to fertility (see section 5.3). 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines 
 
Denosumab has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
The most common side effects with denosumab (seen in more than one patient in ten) are 
musculoskeletal pain and pain in the extremity. Uncommon cases of cellulitis, rare cases of 
hypocalcaemia, hypersensitivity, osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femoral fractures (see 
sections 4.4 and 4.8 - description of selected adverse reactions) have been observed in patients taking 
denosumab. 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
The data in table 1 below describe adverse reactions reported from phase II and III clinical trials in 
patients with osteoporosis and breast or prostate cancer patients receiving hormone ablation; and/or 
spontaneous reporting. 
 
The following convention has been used for the classification of the adverse reactions (see table 1): 
very common (≥ 1/10), common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10), uncommon (≥ 1/1 000 to < 1/100), 
rare (≥ 1/10 000 to < 1/1 000), very rare (< 1/10 000) and not known (cannot be estimated from the 
available data). Within each frequency grouping and system organ class, adverse reactions are 
presented in order of decreasing seriousness. 
 

7 
 
Table 1. Adverse reactions reported in patients with osteoporosis and breast or prostate cancer 
patients receiving hormone ablation 
 
MedDRA system organ class 
Frequency category 
Adverse reactions 
Infections and infestations 
Common 
Urinary tract infection 
Common 
Upper respiratory tract infection 
Uncommon 
Diverticulitis1 
Uncommon 
Cellulitis1 
Uncommon 
Ear infection 
Immune system disorders 
Rare 
Drug hypersensitivity1 
Rare 
Anaphylactic reaction1 
Metabolism and nutrition 
disorders 
Rare 
Hypocalcaemia1 
Nervous system disorders 
Common 
Sciatica 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Common 
Constipation 
Common 
Abdominal discomfort 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
disorders 
Common 
Rash 
Common 
Eczema 
Common 
Alopecia 
Uncommon 
Lichenoid drug eruptions1 
Very rare 
Hypersensitivity vasculitis 
Musculoskeletal and connective 
tissue disorders 
Very common 
Pain in extremity 
Very common 
Musculoskeletal pain1 
Rare 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw1 
Rare 
Atypical femoral fractures1 
Not Known 
Osteonecrosis of the external auditory 
canal2 
1 See section Description of selected adverse reactions. 
2 See section 4.4. 
 
In a pooled analysis of data from all phase II and phase III placebo-controlled studies, influenza-like 
illness was reported with a crude incidence rate of 1.2% for denosumab and 0.7% for placebo. 
Although this imbalance was identified via a pooled analysis, it was not identified via a stratified 
analysis. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Hypocalcaemia 
In two phase III placebo-controlled clinical trials in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, 
approximately 0.05% (2 out of 4 050) of patients had declines of serum calcium levels (less than 
1.88 mmol/L) following denosumab administration. Declines of serum calcium levels (less than 
1.88 mmol/L) were not reported in either the two phase III placebo-controlled clinical trials in patients 
receiving hormone ablation or the phase III placebo-controlled clinical trial in men with osteoporosis. 
 
In the post-marketing setting, rare cases of severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia resulting in 
hospitalisation, life-threatening events, and fatal cases have been reported, predominantly in patients at 
increased risk of hypocalcaemia receiving denosumab, with most cases occurring in the first weeks of 
initiating therapy. Examples of the clinical manifestations of severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia have 
included QT interval prolongation, tetany, seizures and altered mental status (see section 4.4). 
Symptoms of hypocalcaemia in denosumab clinical studies included paraesthesias or muscle stiffness, 
twitching, spasms and muscle cramps. 
 
Skin infections 
In phase III placebo-controlled clinical trials, the overall incidence of skin infections was similar in the 
placebo and the denosumab groups: in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis (placebo [1.2%, 
50 out of 4 041] versus denosumab [1.5%, 59 out of 4 050]); in men with osteoporosis (placebo [0.8%, 
1 out of 120] versus denosumab [0%, 0 out of 120]); in breast or prostate cancer patients receiving 
hormone ablation (placebo [1.7%, 14 out of 845] versus denosumab [1.4%, 12 out of 860]). Skin 

8 
 
infections leading to hospitalisation were reported in 0.1% (3 out of 4 041) of postmenopausal women 
with osteoporosis receiving placebo versus 0.4% (16 out of 4 050) of women receiving denosumab. 
These cases were predominantly cellulitis. Skin infections reported as serious adverse reactions were 
similar in the placebo (0.6%, 5 out of 845) and the denosumab (0.6%, 5 out of 860) groups in the 
breast and prostate cancer studies. 
 
Osteonecrosis of the jaw 
ONJ has been reported rarely, in 16 patients, in clinical trials in osteoporosis and in breast or prostate 
cancer patients receiving hormone ablation including a total of 23 148 patients (see section 4.4). 
Thirteen of these ONJ cases occurred in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis during the 
phase III clinical trial extension following treatment with denosumab for up to 10 years. Incidence of 
ONJ was 0.04% at 3 years, 0.06% at 5 years and 0.44% at 10 years of denosumab treatment. The risk 
of ONJ increased with duration of exposure to denosumab. 
 
The risk of ONJ has also been assessed in a retrospective cohort study among 76 192 postmenopausal 
women newly initiating treatment with denosumab. The incidence of ONJ was 0.32% (95% 
confidence interval [CI]: 0.26, 0.39) among patients using denosumab up to 3 years and 0.51% (95% 
CI: 0.39, 0.65) among patients using denosumab up to 5 years of follow-up. 
 
Atypical fractures of the femur 
In the osteoporosis clinical trial programme, atypical femoral fractures were reported rarely in patients 
treated with denosumab (see section 4.4). 
 
Diverticulitis 
In a single phase III placebo-controlled clinical trial in patients with prostate cancer receiving 
androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), an imbalance in diverticulitis adverse events was observed 
(1.2% denosumab, 0% placebo). The incidence of diverticulitis was comparable between treatment 
groups in postmenopausal women or men with osteoporosis and in women undergoing aromatase 
inhibitor therapy for non-metastatic breast cancer. 
 
Drug-related hypersensitivity reactions 
In the post-marketing setting, rare events of drug-related hypersensitivity, including rash, urticaria, 
facial swelling, erythema, and anaphylactic reactions have been reported in patients receiving 
denosumab. 
 
Musculoskeletal pain 
Musculoskeletal pain, including severe cases, has been reported in patients receiving denosumab in the 
post-marketing setting. In clinical trials, musculoskeletal pain was very common in both denosumab 
and placebo groups. Musculoskeletal pain leading to discontinuation of study treatment was 
uncommon. 
 
Lichenoid drug eruptions 
Lichenoid drug eruptions (e.g. lichen planus-like reactions) have been reported in patients in the 
post-marketing setting. 
 
Other special populations 
 
Paediatric population 
Denosumab should not be used in paediatric patients (age < 18). Serious hypercalcaemia has been 
reported (see section 5.1). Some clinical trial cases were complicated by acute renal injury. 
 
Renal impairment 
In clinical studies, patients with severe renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 30 mL/min) or 
receiving dialysis were at greater risk of developing hypocalcaemia in the absence of calcium 
supplementation. Adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is important in patients with severe renal 
impairment or receiving dialysis (see section 4.4). 
 

9 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
There is no experience with overdose in clinical studies. Denosumab has been administered in clinical 
studies using doses up to 180 mg every 4 weeks (cumulative doses up to 1 080 mg over 6 months), 
and no additional adverse reactions were observed. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Drugs for treatment of bone diseases – Other drugs affecting bone 
structure and mineralisation, ATC code: M05BX04 
 
Stoboclo is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the 
European Medicines Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Denosumab is a human monoclonal antibody (IgG2) that targets and binds with high affinity and 
specificity to RANKL, preventing activation of its receptor, RANK, on the surface of osteoclast 
precursors and osteoclasts. Prevention of the RANKL/RANK interaction inhibits osteoclast formation, 
function and survival, thereby decreasing bone resorption in cortical and trabecular bone. 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
 
Denosumab treatment rapidly reduced the rate of bone turnover, reaching a nadir for the bone 
resorption marker serum type 1 C-telopeptides (CTX) (85% reduction) by 3 days, with reductions 
maintained over the dosing interval. At the end of each dosing interval, CTX reductions were partially 
attenuated from maximal reduction of ≥ 87% to approximately ≥ 45% (range 45-80%), reflecting the 
reversibility of denosumab’s effects on bone remodelling once serum levels diminish. These effects 
were sustained with continued treatment. Bone turnover markers generally reached pre-treatment 
levels within 9 months after the last dose. Upon re-initiation, reductions in CTX by denosumab were 
similar to those observed in patients initiating primary denosumab treatment. 
 
Immunogenicity 
 
Anti-denosumab antibodies may develop during denosumab treatment. No apparent correlation of 
antibody development with pharmacokinetics, clinical response or adverse events has been observed. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab administered once every 6 months for 3 years were investigated in 
postmenopausal women (7 808 women aged 60-91 years, of which 23.6% had prevalent vertebral 
fractures) with baseline bone mineral density (BMD) T-scores at the lumbar spine or total hip between 
–2.5 and –4.0 and a mean absolute 10-year fracture probability of 18.60% (deciles: 7.9-32.4%) for 
major osteoporotic fracture and 7.22% (deciles: 1.4-14.9%) for hip fracture. Women with other 
diseases or on therapies that may affect bone were excluded from this study. Women received calcium 
(at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 400 IU) supplementation daily. 
 

10 
 
Effect on vertebral fractures 
Denosumab significantly reduced the risk of new vertebral fractures at 1, 2 and 3 years (p < 0.0001) 
(see table 2). 
 
Table 2. The effect of denosumab on the risk of new vertebral fractures 
 
Proportion of women with fracture (%) 
Absolute risk 
reduction (%)  
(95% CI) 
Relative risk 
reduction (%)  
(95% CI) 
Placebo 
n = 3 906 
Denosumab 
n = 3 902 
0-1 year 
2.2 
0.9 
1.4 (0.8, 1.9) 
61 (42, 74)** 
0-2 years 
5.0 
1.4 
3.5 (2.7, 4.3) 
71 (61, 79)** 
0-3 years 
7.2 
2.3 
4.8 (3.9, 5.8) 
68 (59, 74)* 
*p < 0.0001, **p < 0.0001 – exploratory analysis 
 
Effect on hip fractures 
Denosumab demonstrated a 40% relative reduction (0.5% absolute risk reduction) in the risk of hip 
fracture over 3 years (p < 0.05). The incidence of hip fracture was 1.2% in the placebo group 
compared to 0.7% in the denosumab group at 3 years. 
 
In a post-hoc analysis in women > 75 years, a 62% relative risk reduction was observed with 
denosumab (1.4% absolute risk reduction, p < 0.01). 
 
Effect on all clinical fractures 
Denosumab significantly reduced fractures across all fracture types/groups (see table 3). 
 
Table 3. The effect of denosumab on the risk of clinical fractures over 3 years 
 
Proportion of women with 
fracture (%)+ 
Absolute risk 
reduction (%) 
(95% CI) 
Relative risk 
reduction (%) 
(95% CI) 
Placebo 
n = 3 906 
Denosumab 
n = 3 902 
Any clinical fracture1 
10.2 
7.2 
2.9 (1.6, 4.2) 
30 (19, 41)*** 
Clinical vertebral fracture 
2.6 
0.8 
1.8 (1.2, 2.4) 
69 (53, 80)*** 
Non-vertebral fracture2 
8.0 
6.5 
1.5 (0.3, 2.7) 
20 (5, 33)** 
Major non-vertebral fracture3 
6.4 
5.2 
1.2 (0.1, 2.2) 
20 (3, 34)* 
Major osteoporotic fracture4 
8.0 
5.3 
2.7 (1.6, 3.9) 
35 (22, 45)*** 
*p ≤ 0.05, **p = 0.0106 (secondary endpoint included in multiplicity adjustment), ***p ≤ 0.0001 
+ Event rates based on Kaplan-Meier estimates at 3 years. 
1 Includes clinical vertebral fractures and non-vertebral fractures. 
2 Excludes those of the vertebrae, skull, facial, mandible, metacarpus, and finger and toe phalanges. 
3 Includes pelvis, distal femur, proximal tibia, ribs, proximal humerus, forearm, and hip. 
4 Includes clinical vertebral, hip, forearm, and humerus fractures, as defined by the WHO. 
 
In women with baseline femoral neck BMD ≤ -2.5, denosumab reduced the risk of non-vertebral 
fracture (35% relative risk reduction, 4.1% absolute risk reduction, p < 0.001, exploratory analysis). 
 
The reduction in the incidence of new vertebral fractures, hip fractures and non-vertebral fractures by 
denosumab over 3 years were consistent regardless of the 10-year baseline fracture risk. 
 
Effect on bone mineral density 
Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, versus placebo at 1, 2 and 3 
years. Denosumab increased BMD by 9.2% at the lumbar spine, 6.0% at the total hip, 4.8% at the 
femoral neck, 7.9% at the hip trochanter, 3.5% at the distal 1/3 radius and 4.1% at the total body over 
3 years (all p < 0.0001). 
 
In clinical studies examining the effects of discontinuation of denosumab, BMD returned to 
approximately pre-treatment levels and remained above placebo within 18 months of the last dose. 
These data indicate that continued treatment with denosumab is required to maintain the effect of the 

11 
 
medicinal product. Re-initiation of denosumab resulted in gains in BMD similar to those when 
denosumab was first administered. 
 
Open-label extension study in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis 
A total of 4 550 women (2 343 denosumab & 2 207 placebo) who missed no more than one dose of 
investigational product in the pivotal study described above and completed the month 36 study visit 
agreed to enrol in a 7-year, multinational, multicentre, open-label, single-arm extension study to 
evaluate the long-term safety and efficacy of denosumab. All women in the extension study were to 
receive denosumab 60 mg every 6 months, as well as daily calcium (at least 1 g) and vitamin D 
(at least 400 IU). A total of 2 626 subjects (58% of the women included in the extension study i.e. 34% 
of the women included in the pivotal study) completed the extension study. 
 
In patients treated with denosumab for up to 10 years, BMD increased from the pivotal study baseline 
by 21.7% at the lumbar spine, 9.2% at the total hip, 9.0% at the femoral neck, 13.0% at the trochanter 
and 2.8% at the distal 1/3 radius. The mean lumbar spine BMD T-score at the end of the study was 
−1.3 in patients treated for 10 years. 
 
Fracture incidence was evaluated as a safety endpoint but efficacy in fracture prevention cannot be 
estimated due to high number of discontinuations and open-label design. The cumulative incidence of 
new vertebral and non-vertebral fractures were approximately 6.8% and 13.1% respectively, in 
patients who remained on denosumab treatment for 10 years (n = 1 278). Patients who did not 
complete the study for any reason had higher on-treatment fracture rates. 
 
Thirteen adjudicated cases of osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) and two adjudicated cases of atypical 
fractures of the femur occurred during the extension study. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in men with osteoporosis 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab once every 6 months for 1 year were investigated in 242 men aged 
31-84 years. Subjects with an eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 were excluded from the study. All men 
received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 800 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
The primary efficacy variable was percent change in lumbar spine BMD, fracture efficacy was not 
evaluated. Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, relative to placebo 
at 12 months: 4.8% at lumbar spine, 2.0% at total hip, 2.2% at femoral neck, 2.3% at hip trochanter, 
and 0.9% at distal 1/3 radius (all p < 0.05). Denosumab increased lumbar spine BMD from baseline in 
94.7% of men at 1 year. Significant increases in BMD at lumbar spine, total hip, femoral neck and hip 
trochanter were observed by 6 months (p < 0.0001). 
 
Bone histology in postmenopausal women and men with osteoporosis 
 
Bone histology was evaluated in 62 postmenopausal women with osteoporosis or with low bone mass 
who were either naïve to osteoporosis therapies or had transitioned from previous alendronate therapy 
following 1-3 years treatment with denosumab. Fifty-nine women participated in the bone biopsy 
sub-study at month 24 (n = 41) and/or month 84 (n = 22) of the extension study in postmenopausal 
women with osteoporosis. Bone histology was also evaluated in 17 men with osteoporosis following 
1 year treatment with denosumab. Bone biopsy results showed bone of normal architecture and quality 
with no evidence of mineralisation defects, woven bone or marrow fibrosis. Histomorphometry 
findings in the extension study in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis showed that the 
antiresorptive effects of denosumab, as measured by activation frequency and bone formation rates, 
were maintained over time. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in patients with bone loss associated with androgen deprivation 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab once every 6 months for 3 years were investigated in men with 
histologically confirmed non-metastatic prostate cancer receiving ADT (1 468 men aged 48-97 years) 
who were at increased risk of fracture (defined as > 70 years, or < 70 years with a BMD T-score at the 

12 
 
lumbar spine, total hip, or femoral neck < -1.0 or a history of an osteoporotic fracture). All men 
received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 400 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, relative to treatment with 
placebo at 3 years: 7.9% at the lumbar spine, 5.7% at the total hip, 4.9% at the femoral neck, 6.9% at 
the hip trochanter, 6.9% at the distal 1/3 radius and 4.7% at the total body (all p < 0.0001). In a 
prospectively planned exploratory analysis, significant increases in BMD were observed at the lumbar 
spine, total hip, femoral neck and the hip trochanter 1 month after the initial dose. 
 
Denosumab demonstrated a significant relative risk reduction of new vertebral fractures: 85% (1.6% 
absolute risk reduction) at 1 year, 69% (2.2% absolute risk reduction) at 2 years and 62% (2.4% 
absolute risk reduction) at 3 years (all p < 0.01). 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety in patients with bone loss associated with adjuvant aromatase inhibitor 
therapy 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab once every 6 months for 2 years were investigated in women with 
non-metastatic breast cancer (252 women aged 35-84 years) and baseline BMD T-scores between 
-1.0 to -2.5 at the lumbar spine, total hip or femoral neck. All women received calcium (at least 
1 000 mg) and vitamin D (at least 400 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
The primary efficacy variable was percent change in lumbar spine BMD, fracture efficacy was not 
evaluated. Denosumab significantly increased BMD at all clinical sites measured, relative to treatment 
with placebo at 2 years: 7.6% at lumbar spine, 4.7% at total hip, 3.6% at femoral neck, 5.9% at hip 
trochanter, 6.1% at distal 1/3 radius and 4.2% at total body (all p < 0.0001). 
 
Treatment of bone loss associated with systemic glucocorticoid therapy 
 
Efficacy and safety of denosumab were investigated in 795 patients (70% women and 30% men) aged 
20 to 94 years treated with ≥ 7.5 mg daily oral prednisone (or equivalent). 
 
Two subpopulations were studied: glucocorticoid-continuing (≥ 7.5 mg daily prednisone or its 
equivalent for ≥ 3 months prior to study enrolment; n = 505) and glucocorticoid-initiating (≥ 7.5 mg 
daily prednisone or its equivalent for < 3 months prior to study enrolment; n = 290). Patients were 
randomised (1:1) to receive either denosumab 60 mg subcutaneously once every 6 months or oral 
risedronate 5 mg once daily (active control) for 2 years. Patients received calcium (at least 1 000 mg) 
and vitamin D (at least 800 IU) supplementation daily. 
 
Effect on Bone Mineral Density (BMD) 
In the glucocorticoid-continuing subpopulation, denosumab demonstrated a greater increase in lumbar 
spine BMD compared to risedronate at 1 year (denosumab 3.6%, risedronate 2.0%; p < 0.001) and 
2 years (denosumab 4.5%, risedronate 2.2%; p < 0.001). In the glucocorticoid-initiating subpopulation, 
denosumab demonstrated a greater increase in lumbar spine BMD compared to risedronate at 1 year 
(denosumab 3.1%, risedronate 0.8%; p < 0.001) and 2 years (denosumab 4.6%, risedronate 1.5%; 
p < 0.001). 
 
In addition, denosumab demonstrated a significantly greater mean percent increase in BMD from 
baseline compared to risedronate at the total hip, femoral neck, and hip trochanter. 
 
The study was not powered to show a difference in fractures. At 1 year, the subject incidence of new 
radiological vertebral fracture was 2.7% (denosumab) versus 3.2% (risedronate). The subject 
incidence of non-vertebral fracture was 4.3% (denosumab) versus 2.5% (risedronate). At 2 years, the 
corresponding numbers were 4.1% versus 5.8% for new radiological vertebral fractures and 5.3% 
versus 3.8% for non-vertebral fractures. Most of the fractures occurred in the GC-C subpopulation. 
 
 
 

13 
 
Paediatric population 
 
A single-arm phase III study evaluated the efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics was conducted in 
children with osteogenesis imperfecta, aged 2 to 17 years, 52.3% male, 88.2% Caucasian. A total of 
153 subjects initially received subcutaneous (SC) denosumab 1 mg/kg, up to a maximum of 60 mg, 
every 6 months for 36 months. Sixty subjects transitioned to every 3 months dosing. 
 
At month 12 of every 3 months dosing, the least squares (LS) mean (standard error, SE) change from 
baseline in lumbar spine BMD Z-score was 1.01 (0.12). 
 
The most common adverse events reported during every 6 months dosing were arthralgia (45.8%), 
pain in extremity (37.9%), back pain (32.7%), and hypercalciuria (32.0%). Hypercalcaemia was 
reported during every 6 months (19%) and every 3 months (36.7%) dosing. Serious adverse events of 
hypercalcaemia (13.3%) were reported during every 3 months dosing. 
 
In an extension study (N = 75), serious adverse events of hypercalcaemia (18.5%) were observed 
during every 3 months dosing. 
 
The studies were terminated early due to the occurrence of life-threatening events and hospitalisations 
due to hypercalcaemia (see section 4.2). 
 
In one multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study conducted in 
24 paediatric patients with glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis, aged 5 to 17 years, evaluating change 
from baseline in lumbar spine BMD Z-score, safety and effectiveness were not established hence 
denosumab should not be used for this indication. 
 
The European Medicines Agency has waived the obligation to submit the results of studies with 
denosumab in all subsets of the paediatric population in the treatment of bone loss associated with sex 
hormone ablative therapy, and in subsets of the paediatric population below the age of 2 in the 
treatment of osteoporosis. See section 4.2 for information on paediatric use. 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
Absorption 
 
Following subcutaneous administration of a 1.0 mg/kg dose, which approximates the approved 60 mg 
dose, exposure based on AUC was 78% as compared to intravenous administration at the same dose 
level. For a 60 mg subcutaneous dose, maximum serum denosumab concentrations (Cmax) of 
6 mcg/mL (range 1-17 mcg/mL) occurred in 10 days (range 2-28 days). 
 
Biotransformation 
 
Denosumab is composed solely of amino acids and carbohydrates as native immunoglobulin and is 
unlikely to be eliminated via hepatic metabolic mechanisms. Its metabolism and elimination are 
expected to follow the immunoglobulin clearance pathways, resulting in degradation to small peptides 
and individual amino acids. 
 
Elimination 
 
After Cmax, serum levels declined with a half-life of 26 days (range 6-52 days) over a period of 
3 months (range 1.5-4.5 months). Fifty-three percent (53%) of patients had no measurable amounts of 
denosumab detected at 6 months post-dose. 
 
No accumulation or change in denosumab pharmacokinetics with time was observed upon 
subcutaneous multiple-dosing of 60 mg once every 6 months. Denosumab pharmacokinetics were not 
affected by the formation of binding antibodies to denosumab and were similar in men and women. 

14 
 
Age (28-87 years), race and disease state (low bone mass or osteoporosis; prostate or breast cancer) do 
not appear to significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of denosumab. 
 
A trend was observed between higher body weight and lower exposure based on AUC and Cmax. 
However, the trend is not considered clinically important, since pharmacodynamic effects based on 
bone turnover markers and BMD increases were consistent across a wide range of body weight. 
Linearity/non-linearity 
 
In dose ranging studies, denosumab exhibited non-linear, dose-dependent pharmacokinetics, with 
lower clearance at higher doses or concentrations, but approximately dose-proportional increases in 
exposures for doses of 60 mg and greater. 
 
Renal impairment 
 
In a study of 55 patients with varying degrees of renal function, including patients on dialysis, the 
degree of renal impairment had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of denosumab. 
 
Hepatic impairment 
 
No specific study in patients with hepatic impairment was performed. In general, monoclonal 
antibodies are not eliminated via hepatic metabolic mechanisms. The pharmacokinetics of denosumab 
is not expected to be affected by hepatic impairment. 
 
Paediatric population 
 
Denosumab should not be used in paediatric populations (see sections 4.2 and 5.1). 
 
In a phase III study of paediatric patients with osteogenesis imperfecta (N = 153), maximum serum 
denosumab concentrations were observed on day 10 across all age groups. For every 3 months and 
every 6 months dosing, mean serum denosumab trough concentrations were observed to be higher for 
children 11 to 17 years of age, while children 2 to 6 years of age had the lowest mean trough 
concentrations. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
In single and repeated dose toxicity studies in cynomolgus monkeys, denosumab doses resulting 
in 100 to 150 times greater systemic exposure than the recommended human dose had no impact on 
cardiovascular physiology, male or female fertility, or produced specific target organ toxicity. 
 
Standard tests to investigate the genotoxicity potential of denosumab have not been evaluated, since 
such tests are not relevant for this molecule. However, due to its character it is unlikely that 
denosumab has any potential for genotoxicity. 
 
The carcinogenic potential of denosumab has not been evaluated in long-term animal studies. 
 
In preclinical studies conducted in knockout mice lacking RANK or RANKL, impairment of lymph 
node formation was observed in the foetus. An absence of lactation due to inhibition of mammary 
gland maturation (lobulo-alveolar gland development during pregnancy) was also observed in 
knockout mice lacking RANK or RANKL. 
 
In a study of cynomolgus monkeys dosed with denosumab during the period equivalent to the first 
trimester at AUC exposures up to 99-fold higher than the human dose (60 mg every 6 months), there 
was no evidence of maternal or foetal harm. In this study, foetal lymph nodes were not examined. 
 
In another study of cynomolgus monkeys dosed with denosumab throughout pregnancy at AUC 
exposures 119-fold higher than the human dose (60 mg every 6 months), there were increased 
stillbirths and postnatal mortality; abnormal bone growth resulting in reduced bone strength, reduced 

15 
 
haematopoiesis, and tooth malalignment; absence of peripheral lymph nodes; and decreased neonatal 
growth. A no observed adverse effect level for reproductive effects was not established. Following a 
6 month period after birth, bone related changes showed recovery and there was no effect on tooth 
eruption. However, the effects on lymph nodes and tooth malalignment persisted, and minimal to 
moderate mineralisation in multiple tissues was seen in one animal (relation to treatment uncertain). 
There was no evidence of maternal harm prior to labour; adverse maternal effects occurred 
infrequently during labour. Maternal mammary gland development was normal. 
 
In preclinical bone quality studies in monkeys on long-term denosumab treatment, decreases in bone 
turnover were associated with improvement in bone strength and normal bone histology. Calcium 
levels were transiently decreased and parathyroid hormone levels transiently increased in 
ovariectomised monkeys treated with denosumab. 
 
In male mice genetically engineered to express huRANKL (knock-in mice), which were subjected to a 
transcortical fracture, denosumab delayed the removal of cartilage and remodelling of the fracture 
callus compared to control, but biomechanical strength was not adversely affected. 
 
Knockout mice (see section 4.6) lacking RANK or RANKL exhibited decreased body weight, reduced 
bone growth and lack of tooth eruption. In neonatal rats, inhibition of RANKL (target of denosumab 
therapy) with high doses of a construct of osteoprotegerin bound to Fc (OPG-Fc) was associated with 
inhibition of bone growth and tooth eruption. These changes were partially reversible in this model 
when dosing with RANKL inhibitors was discontinued. Adolescent primates dosed with denosumab at 
27 and 150 times (10 and 50 mg/kg dose) the clinical exposure had abnormal growth plates. Therefore, 
treatment with denosumab may impair bone growth in children with open growth plates and may 
inhibit eruption of dentition. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
Acetic acid* 
Sodium acetate trihydrate (for pH adjustment)* 
Sorbitol (E420) 
Polysorbate 20 (E432) 
Water for injections 
* Acetate buffer is formed by mixing acetic acid with sodium acetate trihydrate 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal 
products. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
54 months. 
 
Once removed from the refrigerator, Stoboclo may be stored at temperature up to a maximum of 30°C 
for a single period of up to 63 days, but not exceeding the original expiry date. If not used within this 
period of up to 63 days, Stoboclo may be returned to the refrigerator for maximum of 3 days and must 
be discarded if not used within this time period. 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C – 8°C). 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 

16 
 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
 
One mL solution in a single use pre-filled syringe made of type I borosilicate glass, (bromobutyl) 
rubber stopper and stainless steel 27 gauge needle with safety guard. 
 
Pack size of one pre-filled syringe with safety guard. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
• 
Before administration, the solution should be inspected. Do not inject the solution if it contains 
visible particles or is cloudy or discoloured. 
• 
Do not shake. 
• 
To avoid discomfort at the site of injection, allow the pre-filled syringe to reach room 
temperature (up to 30°C) before injecting and inject slowly. 
• 
Inject the entire contents of the pre-filled syringe. 
• 
Comprehensive instructions for the preparation and administration of Stoboclo are included in 
the pack. 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
1062 Budapest, 
Váci út 1-3. WestEnd Office Building B torony 
Hungary 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/24/1905/001 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 14 February 2025 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 

17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURERS OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE 
SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURERS RESPONSIBLE 
FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO 
THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT 

18 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURERS OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND 
MANUFACTURERS RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer of the biological active substance 
 
CELLTRION, Inc.  
20, Academy-ro 51 beon-gil, 
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon, 22014 
Republic of Korea 
 
Name and address of the manufacturers responsible for batch release 
 
Nuvisan France S.A.R.L 
2400 Route des Colles, 
06410 Biot,  
France 
 
Midas Pharma GmbH 
Rheinstrasse 49, West, 
55218 Ingelheim Am Rhein, 
Rhineland-Palatinate,  
Germany 
 
Kymos S.L. 
Ronda de Can Fatjó, 7B 
Parc Tecnològic del Vallès, 
Cerdanyola del Vallès,  
08290 Barcelona,  
Spain  
 
The printed package leaflet of the medicinal product must state the name and address of the 
manufacturer responsible for the release of the concerned batch. 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription. 
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of 
Union reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC 
and any subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance 
activities and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the 
marketing authorisation and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 

19 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit-risk profile or as the result of 
an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 
 
• 
Additional risk minimisation measures 
 
The MAH shall ensure that a patient reminder card regarding osteonecrosis of the jaw is implemented. 

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 

21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 

22 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
OUTER CARTON FOR PRE-FILLED SYRINGE WITH SAFETY GUARD 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Stoboclo 60 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe  
denosumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
 
1 mL pre-filled syringe containing 60 mg of denosumab (60 mg/mL). 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
Excipients: Acetic acid, sodium acetate trihydrate, sorbitol (E420), polysorbate 20 (E432), water for 
injections. 
See package leaflet for further information. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
Solution for injection 
1 pre-filled syringe with safety guard.  
60 mg/1 mL 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Subcutaneous use. 
Important: read the package leaflet before handling pre-filled syringe. 
Do not shake. 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 
Store in a refrigerator. 

23 
 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
1062 Budapest, 
Váci út 1-3. WestEnd Office Building B torony 
Hungary 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/24/1905/001 1 pre-filled syringe  
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
Stoboclo 60 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 

24 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
LABEL FOR PRE-FILLED SYRINGE WITH SAFETY GUARD 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Stoboclo 60 mg injection  
denosumab 
SC 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
 
60 mg/1 mL 
 
 
6. 
OTHER 
 
 

25 
 
REMINDER CARD TEXT (included in pack) 
 
 
Stoboclo 60 mg injection  
denosumab 
 
SC 
 
Next injection in 6 months: 
 
Use Stoboclo for as long as your doctor prescribes it for you. 
 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 

26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET 

 
27 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user 
 
Stoboclo 60 mg solution for injection in pre-filled syringe 
denosumab 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
- 
Your doctor will give you a patient reminder card, which contains important safety information 
you need to be aware of before and during your treatment with Stoboclo. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What Stoboclo is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Stoboclo 
3. 
How to use Stoboclo 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store Stoboclo 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What Stoboclo is and what it is used for 
 
What Stoboclo is and how it works 
 
Stoboclo contains denosumab, a protein (monoclonal antibody) that interferes with the action of 
another protein, in order to treat bone loss and osteoporosis. Treatment with Stoboclo makes bone 
stronger and less likely to break. 
 
Bone is a living tissue and is renewed all the time. Oestrogen helps keep bones healthy. After the 
menopause, oestrogen level drops which may cause bones to become thin and fragile. This can 
eventually lead to a condition called osteoporosis. Osteoporosis can also occur in men due to a number 
of causes including ageing and/or a low level of the male hormone, testosterone. It can also occur in 
patients receiving glucocorticoids. Many patients with osteoporosis have no symptoms, but they are 
still at risk of breaking bones, especially in the spine, hips and wrists. 
Surgery or medicines that stop the production of oestrogen or testosterone used to treat patients with 
breast or prostate cancer can also lead to bone loss. The bones become weaker and break more easily. 
 
What Stoboclo is used for 
 
Stoboclo is used to treat: 
• 
osteoporosis in women after the menopause (postmenopausal) and men who have an increased 
risk of fracture (broken bones), reducing the risk of spinal, non-spinal and hip fractures. 
• 
bone loss that results from a reduction in hormone (testosterone) level caused by surgery or 
treatment with medicines in patients with prostate cancer. 
• 
bone loss that results from long-term treatment with glucocorticoids in patients who have an 
increased risk of fracture. 
 

 
28 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Stoboclo 
 
Do not use Stoboclo 
 
• 
if you have low calcium levels in the blood (hypocalcaemia). 
• 
if you are allergic to denosumab or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in 
section 6). 
 
Warnings and precautions 
 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before using Stoboclo. 
 
Whilst being treated with Stoboclo you may develop a skin infection with symptoms such as a 
swollen, red area of skin, most commonly in the lower leg, that feels hot and tender (cellulitis), and 
possibly with symptoms of fever. Please tell your doctor immediately if you develop any of these 
symptoms. 
 
You should also take calcium and vitamin D supplements while being on treatment with Stoboclo. 
Your doctor will discuss this with you. 
 
You may have low levels of calcium in your blood while receiving Stoboclo. Please tell your doctor 
immediately if you notice any of the following symptoms: spasms, twitches, or cramps in your muscle, 
and/or numbness or tingling in your fingers, toes or around your mouth, and/or seizures, confusion, or 
loss of consciousness. 
 
Severe low blood calcium levels leading to hospitalisation and even life-threatening reactions have 
been reported in rare cases. Before each dose and in patients predisposed to hypocalcaemia within two 
weeks after initial dose, the calcium levels in your blood will therefore be checked (via blood test). 
 
Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had severe kidney problems, kidney failure or have needed 
dialysis or are taking medicines called glucocorticoids (such as prednisolone or dexamethasone), 
which may increase your risk of getting low blood calcium if you do not take calcium supplements. 
 
Problems with your mouth, teeth or jaw 
A side effect called osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ) (bone damage in the jaw) has been reported rarely 
(may affect up to 1 in 1,000 people) in patients receiving denosumab for osteoporosis. The risk of ONJ 
increases in patients treated for a long time (may affect up to 1 in 200 people if treated for 10 years). 
ONJ can also occur after stopping treatment. It is important to try to prevent ONJ developing as it may 
be a painful condition that can be difficult to treat. In order to reduce the risk of developing ONJ, take 
the following precautions: 
 
Before receiving treatment, tell your doctor or nurse (health care professional) if you: 
 
• 
have any problems with your mouth or teeth such as poor dental health, gum disease, or a 
planned tooth extraction. 
• 
don’t receive routine dental care or have not had a dental check-up for a long time. 
• 
are a smoker (as this may increase the risk of dental problems). 
• 
have previously been treated with a bisphosphonate (used to treat or prevent bone disorders). 
• 
are taking medicines called corticosteroids (such as prednisolone or dexamethasone). 
• 
have cancer. 
 
Your doctor may ask you to undergo a dental examination before you start treatment with Stoboclo. 
 
While being treated, you should maintain good oral hygiene and receive routine dental check-ups. If 
you wear dentures you should make sure these fit properly. If you are under dental treatment or will 
undergo dental surgery (e.g. tooth extractions), inform your doctor about your dental treatment and tell 
your dentist that you are being treated with Stoboclo. 

 
29 
 
Contact your doctor and dentist immediately if you experience any problems with your mouth or teeth 
such as loose teeth, pain or swelling, or non-healing of sores or discharge, as these could be signs of 
ONJ. 
 
Unusual thigh bone fractures 
Some people have developed unusual fractures in their thigh bone while being treated with 
denosumab. Contact your doctor if you experience new or unusual pain in your hip, groin, or thigh. 
 
Children and adolescents 
 
Stoboclo should not be used in children and adolescents under 18 years of age. 
 
Other medicines and Stoboclo 
 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other 
medicines. It is especially important that you tell your doctor if you are being treated with another 
medicine containing denosumab. 
 
You should not take Stoboclo together with another medicine containing denosumab. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding 
 
Stoboclo has not been tested in pregnant women. It is important to tell your doctor if you are pregnant; 
think you may be pregnant; or plan to get pregnant. Stoboclo is not recommended for use if you are 
pregnant. Women of child-bearing potential should use effective methods of contraception while being 
treated with Stoboclo and for at least 5 months after stopping treatment with Stoboclo. 
 
If you become pregnant during treatment with Stoboclo or less than 5 months after stopping treatment 
with Stoboclo, please inform your doctor. 
 
It is not known whether denosumab is excreted in breast milk. It is important to tell your doctor if you 
are breast-feeding or plan to do so. Your doctor will then help you decide whether to stop 
breast-feeding, or whether to stop taking Stoboclo, considering the benefit of breast-feeding to the 
baby and the benefit of Stoboclo to the mother. 
 
If you are breast-feeding during Stoboclo treatment, please inform your doctor. 
 
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking any medicine. 
 
Driving and using machines 
 
Stoboclo has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
 
Stoboclo contains sorbitol (E420) 
 
This medicine contains 47 mg sorbitol in each mL of solution. 
 
Stoboclo contains sodium 
 
This medicine contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per 60 mg, that is to say essentially 
‘sodium-free’. 
 
Stoboclo contains polysorbate 20 (E432) 
This medicine contains 0.1 mg of polysorbate 20 in each syringe which is equivalent to 0.1 mg/mL. 
Polysorbates may cause allergic reactions. Tell your doctor if you have any known allergies. 
 

 
30 
 
3. 
How to use Stoboclo 
 
The recommended dose is one pre-filled syringe of 60 mg administered once every 6 months, as a 
single injection under the skin (subcutaneous). The best places to inject are the top of your thighs and 
the abdomen. Your carer can also use the outer area of your upper arm. Please consult your doctor on 
the date for a potential next injection. Each pack of Stoboclo contains a reminder card included in the 
carton and used to keep a record of the next injection date. 
 
You should also take calcium and vitamin D supplements while being on treatment with Stoboclo. 
Your doctor will discuss this with you. 
 
Your doctor may decide that it is best for you or a carer to inject Stoboclo. Your doctor or healthcare 
provider will show you or your carer how to use Stoboclo. For instructions on how to inject Stoboclo, 
please read the section at the end of this leaflet. 
 
Do not shake. 
 
If you forget to use Stoboclo 
 
If a dose of Stoboclo is missed, the injection should be administered as soon as possible. Thereafter, 
injections should be scheduled every 6 months from the date of the last injection. 
 
If you stop using Stoboclo 
 
To get the most benefit from your treatment in reducing the risk of fractures, it is important to use 
Stoboclo for as long as your doctor prescribes it for you. Do not stop your treatment without 
contacting your doctor. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
Uncommonly, patients receiving Stoboclo may develop skin infections (predominantly cellulitis). 
Please tell your doctor immediately if you develop any of these symptoms while being on treatment 
with Stoboclo: swollen, red area of skin, most commonly in the lower leg, that feels hot and tender, 
and possibly with symptoms of fever. 
 
Rarely, patients receiving Stoboclo may develop pain in the mouth and/or jaw, swelling or non-healing 
of sores in the mouth or jaw, discharge, numbness or a feeling of heaviness in the jaw, or loosening of 
a tooth. These could be signs of bone damage in the jaw (osteonecrosis). Tell your doctor and dentist 
immediately if you experience such symptoms while being treated with Stoboclo or after stopping 
treatment. 
 
Rarely, patients receiving Stoboclo may have low calcium levels in the blood (hypocalcaemia); 
severely low blood calcium levels may lead to hospitalisation and may even be life-threatening. 
Symptoms include spasms, twitches, or cramps in your muscles, and/or numbness or tingling in your 
fingers, toes or around your mouth and/or seizures, confusion, or loss of consciousness. If any of these 
apply to you, tell your doctor immediately. Low calcium in the blood may also lead to a change in 
heart rhythm called QT prolongation which is seen by electrocardiogram (ECG). 
 
Rarely unusual fractures of the thigh bone may occur in patients receiving Stoboclo. Contact your 
doctor if you experience new or unusual pain in your hip, groin or thigh as this may be an early 
indication of a possible fracture of the thigh bone. 
 
Rarely, allergic reactions may occur in patients receiving Stoboclo. Symptoms include swelling of the 
face, lips, tongue, throat or other parts of the body; rash, itching or hives on the skin, wheezing or 

 
31 
 
difficulty breathing. Please tell your doctor if you develop any of these symptoms while being treated 
with Stoboclo. 
 
Very common side effects (may affect more than 1 in 10 people): 
 
• 
bone, joint, and/or muscle pain which is sometimes severe, 
• 
arm or leg pain (pain in extremity). 
 
Common side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 people): 
 
• 
painful urination, frequent urination, blood in the urine, inability to hold your urine, 
• 
upper respiratory tract infection, 
• 
pain, tingling or numbness that moves down your leg (sciatica), 
• 
constipation, 
• 
abdominal discomfort, 
• 
rash, 
• 
skin condition with itching, redness and/or dryness (eczema), 
• 
hair loss (alopecia). 
 
Uncommon side effects (may affect up to 1 in 100 people): 
 
• 
fever, vomiting and abdominal pain or discomfort (diverticulitis), 
• 
ear infection, 
• 
rash that may occur on the skin or sores in the mouth (lichenoid drug eruptions). 
 
Very rare side effects (may affect up to 1 in 10 000 people): 
 
• 
allergic reaction that can damage blood vessels mainly in the skin (e.g. purple or brownish-red 
spots, hives or skin sores) (hypersensitivity vasculitis). 
 
Not known (frequency cannot be estimated from the available data): 
 
• 
talk to your doctor if you have ear pain, discharge from the ear and/or an ear infection. These 
could be signs of bone damage in the ear. 
 
Reporting of side effects 
 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects 
not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the safety of 
this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store Stoboclo 
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the label and carton after EXP. The 
expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C – 8°C).  
Do not freeze. 
Keep the pre-filled syringe in the outer carton in order to protect from light. 
 
Your pre-filled syringe may be left outside the refrigerator to reach room temperature (up to 30°C) 
before injection. This will make the injection more comfortable. Once your syringe has been left to 

 
32 
 
reach room temperature (up to 30°C), it may be stored at room temperature for a single period of up to 
63 days, but not exceeding the original expiry date. If not used within this period of up to 63 days, 
your syringe may be returned to the refrigerator for maximum of 3 days and must be discarded if not 
used within this time period. Do not use your syringe after the expiry date printed on the label. 
 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to 
throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help to protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What Stoboclo contains 
 
- 
The active substance is denosumab. Each 1 mL pre-filled syringe contains 60 mg of denosumab 
(60 mg/mL). 
- 
The other ingredients are acetic acid, sodium acetate trihydrate, sorbitol (E420), polysorbate 20 
(E432) and water for injections.  
 
What Stoboclo looks like and contents of the pack 
 
Stoboclo is a clear, colourless to pale yellow solution for injection provided in a ready to use pre-filled 
syringe. 
 
Each pack contains one pre-filled syringe with safety guard. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
1062 Budapest, 
Váci út 1-3. WestEnd Office Building B torony 
Hungary 
 
Manufacturer 
Nuvisan France S.A.R.L 
2400 Route des Colles, 
06410 Biot,  
France 
 
Manufacturer 
Midas Pharma GmbH 
Rheinstrasse 49, West, 
55218 Ingelheim Am Rhein,  
Rhineland-Palatinate, 
Germany 
 
Manufacturer 
Kymos S.L. 
Ronda de Can Fatjó, 7B 
Parc Tecnològic del Vallès, 
Cerdanyola del Vallès,  
08290 Barcelona,  
Spain 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
 

 
33 
 
België/Belgique/Belgien 
Celltrion Healthcare Belgium BVBA  
Tél/Tel: +32 1528 7418 
BEinfo@celltrionhc.com 
 
Lietuva 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
Tel: + 36 1 231 0493 
 
България 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
Teл.: +36 1 231 0493 
 
Luxembourg/Luxemburg 
Celltrion Healthcare Belgium BVBA  
Tél/Tel: +32 1528 7418 
BEinfo@celltrionhc.com 
 
Česká republika 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
Tel: +36 1 231 0493 
 
Magyarország 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
Tel.: +36 1 231 0493 
 
Danmark 
Celltrion Healthcare Denmark ApS  
Tlf.: +45 3535 2989 
contact_dk@celltrionhc.com 
 
Malta 
Mint Health Ltd 
Tel: +356 2093 9800 
 
Deutschland 
Celltrion Healthcare Deutschland GmbH 
Tel: +49 303 464 941 50 
infoDE@celltrionhc.com 
 
Nederland 
Celltrion Healthcare Netherlands B.V.  
Tel: +31 20 888 7300 
NLinfo@celltrionhc.com 
 
Eesti 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft.  
Tel: +36 1 231 0493 
contact_fi@celltrionhc.com 
 
Norge 
Celltrion Healthcare Norway AS 
contact_no@celltrionhc.com 
 
Ελλάδα 
ΒΙΑΝΕΞ Α.Ε. 
Τηλ: +30 210 8009111 
 
Österreich 
Astro-Pharma GmbH 
Tel: +43 1 97 99 860 
 
España 
Kern Pharma, S.L. 
Tel: +34 93 700 2525 
 
Polska 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
Tel.: +36 1 231 0493 
 
France 
Celltrion Healthcare France SAS 
Tél: +33 (0)1 71 25 27 00 
 
Portugal 
CELLTRION PORTUGAL, UNIPESSOAL LDA  
Tel: +351 21 936 8542 
contact_pt@celltrion.com 
 
Hrvatska 
Oktal Pharma d.o.o. 
Tel: +385 1 6595 777 
 
România 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
Tel: +36 1 231 0493 
 
Ireland 
Celltrion Healthcare Ireland Limited  
Tel: +353 1 223 4026 
enquiry_ie@celltrionhc.com 
 
Slovenija 
OPH Oktal Pharma d.o.o. 
Tel: +386 1 519 29 22 
 
Ísland 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft.  
Sími: +36 1 231 0493 
contact_fi@celltrionhc.com 
 
Slovenská republika 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
Tel: +36 1 231 0493 
 
Italia 
Suomi/Finland 

 
34 
 
Celltrion Healthcare Italy S.R.L.  
Tel: +39 0247927040 
celltrionhealthcare_italy@legalmail.it 
 
Celltrion Healthcare Finland Oy. 
Puh/Tel: +358 29 170 7755 
contact_fi@celltrionhc.com 
 
Κύπρος 
C.A. Papaellinas Ltd 
Τηλ: +357 22741741 
 
Sverige 
Celltrion Sweden AB  
Tel: +46 8 80 11 77 
contact_se@celltrionhc.com 
Latvija 
Celltrion Healthcare Hungary Kft. 
Tel: +36 1 231 0493 
 
 
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in 
 
Other sources of information 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site:  
https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 

 
35 
 
Instructions for use: 
 
Read and follow the Instructions for use that come with your Stoboclo pre-filled syringe before you 
start using it and each time you get a reﬁll. There may be new information. Stoboclo may be 
administered by healthcare professionals (HCPs), caregivers or may be self-administered by the 
patients if they have received training. Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about giving 
yourself an injection. 
 
Important Information 
• 
Stoboclo is given as an injection into the tissue just under the skin (subcutaneous injection). 
• 
Do not open the sealed carton until you are ready to use the pre-ﬁlled syringe. 
• 
Do not remove the needle cap from the pre-filled syringe until just before you give the 
injection.  
• 
Do not attempt to activate the pre-filled syringe prior to injection. 
• 
Do not attempt to remove the clear safety guard from the pre-filled syringe. 
• 
Do not use the pre-ﬁlled syringe if it has been dropped on a hard surface. Use a new pre-ﬁlled 
syringe. 
• 
Do not shake the pre-ﬁlled syringe. Strong shaking may damage the medicine. 
• 
The pre-ﬁlled syringe cannot be re-used. Dispose of the used pre-ﬁlled syringe immediately 
after use in a sharps disposal container (see Step 15. Dispose of Stoboclo). 
 
Storing Stoboclo 
• 
Keep the pre-ﬁlled syringe out of the sight and reach of children. Contains small parts. 
• 
Store the pre-ﬁlled syringe in a refrigerator between 2 °C and 8 ºC. Do not freeze. 
• 
Once removed from the refrigerator, Stoboclo may be stored at temperature up to a maximum 
of 30°C for a single period of up to 63 days, but not exceeding the original expiry date. If not 
used within this period of up to 63 days, Stoboclo may be returned to the refrigerator for 
maximum of 3 days and must be discarded if not used within this time period. 
• 
Store the pre-filled syringe sealed inside its carton to protect it from light. 
 
Parts of the pre-filled syringe (see Figure A) 
 
 
 
Figure A 
 

 
36 
 
Preparing for the Injection 
 
 
 
1. Gather the supplies for the injection. 
1a. Prepare a clean, ﬂat surface, such as a table or counter top, 
in a well-lit area. 
1b. Take the carton containing the pre-ﬁlled syringe out of 
the refrigerator. 
1c. Make sure you have the following supplies (see Figure B): 
- Carton containing pre-ﬁlled syringe 
Not included in the carton: 
- Alcohol swab 
- Cotton ball or gauze 
- Adhesive bandage 
- Sharps disposal container 
Figure B 
 
 
 
2. Check the expiration date on the carton (see Figure C). 
• Do not use it if the expiration date has passed. If the 
expiration date has passed, return the entire carton to the 
pharmacy. 
• The printed expiration date refers to the last day of the 
month. 
Figure C 
 
 
 
3. Remove the pre-ﬁlled syringe from the carton. 
3a. Open the carton. Gripping the syringe body, lift the 
pre-ﬁlled syringe from the carton (see Figure D). 
• Do not hold by the head of the plunger rod, plunger rod, 
safety guard or needle cap. 
• Do not pull back on the plunger rod at any time. 
 
Figure D 

 
37 
 
Preparing for the Injection 
 
 
 
4. Inspect the pre-ﬁlled syringe. 
4a. Look at the pre-ﬁlled syringe and make sure you have the 
correct medicine (Stoboclo). 
4b. Look at the pre-ﬁlled syringe and make sure it is not 
cracked or damaged. 
4c. Check the expiration date on the label of the pre-ﬁlled 
syringe (see Figure E). 
• Do not use if the needle cap is missing or not securely 
attached. 
• Do not use if the expiration date has passed. 
• Do not shake the pre-ﬁlled syringe. 
Figure E 
 
 
 
5. Inspect the medicine. 
5a. Look at the medicine and conﬁrm that the liquid is clear, 
colourless to pale yellow, and does not contain any visible 
particles or ﬂakes in it (see Figure F). 
• Do not use the pre-ﬁlled syringe if the liquid is 
discoloured, cloudy, or has any visible particles or ﬂakes in 
it. 
• You may see air bubbles in the liquid. This is normal. 
Figure F 
 
 
 
6. Wait 30 minutes. 
6a. Let the pre-ﬁlled syringe stand outside the box for 30 
minutes at room temperature (20 °C to 30 °C) to allow it to 
warm up (see Figure G). 
• Do not warm the pre-ﬁlled syringe using heat sources 
such as hot water or a microwave. 
• If the syringe does not reach room temperature, this could 
cause the injection to feel uncomfortable. 
Figure G 

 
38 
 
Preparing for the Injection 
 
 
 
7. Choose an appropriate injection site (see Figure H). 
7a. You may inject into:  
- the upper thighs. 
- the abdomen, except for the 5 cm around the belly 
button (navel). 
- the outer area of the upper arms (only if you are a 
caregiver or HCP). 
• Do not inject into moles, scars, bruises, or areas where 
the skin is tender, red, hard, or if there are cracks in the 
skin. 
• Do not inject through clothing. 
7b. Choose a different injection site for each new injection at 
least 2.5 cm away from the area used for the last injection. 
Figure H 
 
 
 
8. Wash your hands. 
8a. Wash your hands with soap and water and dry them 
thoroughly (see Figure I). 
Figure I 
 
 
 
9. Clean the injection site. 
9a. Clean the injection site with an alcohol swab using a 
circular motion (see Figure J). 
9b. Let the skin dry before injecting. 
• Do not blow on or touch the injection site again before 
giving the injection. 
Figure J 
 

 
39 
 
Administering the Injection 
 
 
 
10. Remove the cap. 
10a. Hold the body of the pre-ﬁlled syringe in one hand 
between the thumb and index ﬁnger. With the other hand, 
carefully pull the needle cap straight off (see Figure K). 
• Do not hold the plunger rod while removing the cap. 
• You may notice a few drops of liquid at the tip of 
needle. This is normal. 
10b. Dispose of the cap right away in a sharps disposal 
container (see Step 15 and Figure K). 
• Do not use the pre-ﬁlled syringe if it is dropped 
without the needle cap in place. If this happens, use a new 
pre-ﬁlled syringe. 
• Remove the needle cap only when you are ready to 
inject. 
• Do not re-cap the pre-ﬁlled syringe. 
• Do not touch the needle. Doing so may result in a needle 
stick injury. 
Figure K 
 
 
 
11. Insert the pre-ﬁlled syringe into the injection site. 
11a. Hold the body of the pre-ﬁlled syringe in one hand 
between the thumb and index ﬁnger. 
11b. Use the other hand to gently pinch the cleaned skin 
between your thumb and index ﬁnger. Do not squeeze it 
tightly. 
Note: It is important to keep the skin pinched when inserting 
the needle to make sure that you inject under the skin (into 
the fatty area) but not any deeper (into muscle). 
11c. With a quick and “dart-like” motion, insert the needle 
completely into the fold of skin at a 45-degree angle (see 
Figure L). 
• Do not pull back on the plunger rod at any time. 
Figure L 
 
 
 
12. Give the injection. 
12a. After the needle is inserted, release the pinched skin. 
12b. Slowly push the plunger rod all the way down until the 
full dose of medicine gets injected, and the syringe is empty 
(see Figure M). 
• Do not change the position of the pre-ﬁlled syringe 
after the injection has started. 
• If the plunger rod is not fully pressed, the safety guard 
will not extend to cover the needle when it is removed. 
Figure M 

 
40 
 
Administering the Injection 
 
 
 
13. Remove the pre-ﬁlled syringe from the injection site. 
13a. After the pre-ﬁlled syringe is empty, as the needle is being 
taken out, slowly remove the needle by lifting your thumb from 
the plunger rod until the needle is completely covered by the 
safety guard (see Figure N). 
• If the needle is not covered, proceed to carefully 
dispose of the syringe (see Step 15. Dispose of Stoboclo). 
• Do not put the needle cap back on used pre-ﬁlled 
syringes. 
• Do not reuse the pre-ﬁlled syringe. 
• Do not rub the injection site. 
Figure N 
 
After the Injection 
 
 
14. Care for the injection site. 
14a. If some bleeding occurs, treat the injection site by gently 
pressing, not rubbing, a cotton ball or gauze to the site and 
apply an adhesive bandage if needed. 
 
 
 
15. Dispose of the pre-filled syringe. 
15a. Put the used pre-ﬁlled syringe in a sharps disposal 
container right away after use (see Figure O). 
15b. Do not throw away (dispose of) the pre-ﬁlled syringe in 
your household trash. 
• Keep the syringe and sharps disposal container out of 
the sight and reach of children. 
• If you do not have a sharps disposal container, you 
may use a household container that is closable and 
puncture resistant. 
• For the safety and health of you and others, needles 
and used syringes must never be re-used. Any unused 
medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of 
in accordance with local requirements. 
• Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or 
household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to throw away 
medicines you no longer use. These measures will help 
protect the environment. 
Figure O 
 
