1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I  
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS  
 

2 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Teizeild 1 mg/mL concentrate for solution for infusion 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
One mL of concentrate for solution for infusion contains 1 mg of teplizumab. 
 
Each vial contains 2 mg of teplizumab in 2 mL of concentrate (2 mg/2 mL). 
 
Teplizumab is a monoclonal antibody (humanised IgG1 kappa) produced in Chinese hamster ovary 
(CHO) cells by recombinant DNA technology. 
 
Excipients with known effect 
 
Each vial contains 7.45 mg of sodium and 0.10 mg of polysorbate 80. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1.  
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Concentrate for solution for infusion (sterile concentrate) 
 
Clear, colourless solution. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications  
 
Teizeild is indicated to delay the onset of stage 3 type 1 diabetes (T1D) in adult and paediatric patients 
8 years of age and older with stage 2 T1D. 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration  
 
Teizeild should be administered by a healthcare professional with access to appropriate medical 
support to manage potential severe adverse reactions. 
 
Laboratory evaluation and vaccination prior to initiation 
  
• 
Prior to initiating Teizeild, a complete blood count and liver enzyme tests should be obtained.  
 
• 
Use of Teizeild is not recommended in patients with (see section 4.4):  
o Lymphocyte count less than 1.0 x 109 lymphocytes/L  
o Haemoglobin less than 100 g/L  
o Platelet count less than 100 x 109 platelets/L  
o Absolute neutrophil count less than 1.5 x 109 neutrophils/L  
o Elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) or aspartate aminotransferase (AST) greater 
than 2 times the upper limit of normal (ULN) or bilirubin greater than 1.5 times ULN  

3 
o Laboratory or clinical evidence of acute infection with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) or 
cytomegalovirus (CMV)  
o Active serious infection or chronic active infection other than localised skin infections  
 
• 
All age-appropriate vaccinations should be administered prior to initiating Teizeild (see section 
4.4 for detailed guidance).  
 
Premedication 
  
Premedication should be used prior to Teizeild infusion for the first 5 days of dosing with: (1) a 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) or paracetamol, (2) an antihistamine, and (3) use of an 
antiemetic could be considered (see section 4.4). Additional doses of premedication should be 
administered if needed.  
 
Posology 
 
Teizeild should be administered by intravenous infusion (over a minimum of 30 minutes), using a 
body surface area (BSA)-based dosing, once daily for 14 consecutive days as follows:  
 
• 
Day 1: 65 micrograms/m2  
• 
Day 2: 125 micrograms/m2  
• 
Day 3: 250 micrograms/m2  
• 
Day 4: 500 micrograms/m2  
• 
Days 5 through 14: 1 030 micrograms/m2  
 
Missed dose(s)  
If a planned Teizeild infusion is missed, dosing should be resumed by administering all remaining 
doses on consecutive days to complete the 14-day treatment course.  
 
Treatment discontinuation 
Temporary treatment discontinuation may be required according to the severity of laboratory 
abnormalities. Based on clinical judgment, treatment should be paused if platelet count, neutrophil 
count, or haemoglobin level decreases significantly.  
 
Dose interruption should not exceed 3 days. Dosing may be resumed by administering all remaining 
doses on consecutive days to complete the 14-day treatment course (e.g. if dosing is missed on Days 
4 and 5, dosing may restart at Day 6 with the dosing level specified for Day 4). 
 
Treatment should be permanently discontinued if: 
• 
Elevated liver enzymes (ALT or AST greater than 5 times ULN) or bilirubin greater than 3 times 
ULN 
• 
Prolonged severe lymphopenia (< 0.5 x 109 lymphocytes/L lasting 1 week or longer) 
• 
Clinically relevant (physician´s decision based on the individual patient´s data) decrease of 
platelet count, neutrophil count, or haemoglobin level for 3 consecutive days 
• 
A serious infection develops 
 
For additional information, see sections 4.4 and 4.8. 
 
Special populations  
 
Elderly  
Clinical studies did not include elderly patients (65 years of age and older).  
 
Renal impairment 
No studies have been performed in patients with renal impairment (see section 5.2). 
 

4 
Hepatic impairment 
No studies have been performed in patients with hepatic impairment (see section 5.2). 
 
Body weight 
BSA-based dosing is required to normalise the exposure of Teizeild across body weight (see Posology 
and section 5.2). 
 
Paediatric population  
The safety and efficacy of Teizeild in children younger than 8 years of age have not been established.  
 
Method of administration 
 
Teizeild should be administered by intravenous infusion over a minimum of 30 minutes.  
Two doses should not be administered on the same day. 
 
For instructions on preparation of the medicinal product before administration, see section 6.6 and at 
the end of the package leaflet. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Cytokine release syndrome 
 
Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) has been observed in clinical studies in patients treated with 
teplizumab during the treatment period and through 28 days after the last administration (see section 
4.8). CRS symptoms included fever, nausea, fatigue, headache, myalgia, arthralgia, increased ALT, 
increased AST, and increased total bilirubin. These symptoms typically occurred during the first 
5 days of treatment (see section 4.8). 
 
To mitigate CRS: 
• 
antipyretics, antihistamines and/or antiemetics should be administered prior to treatment (see 
section 4.2). 
• 
liver enzymes and bilirubin should be monitored during treatment, more frequently within the 
first week. Treatment should be discontinued in patients who develop elevated ALT or AST 
more than 5 times the upper limit of normal (ULN) or bilirubin more than 3 times ULN. 
• 
Symptoms of CRS should be treated with antipyretics, antihistamines and/or antiemetics. If 
severe CRS develops, temporarily pausing dosing for 1-2 days should be considered (and the 
remaining doses to complete the full 14-day course should be administered on consecutive 
days). If CRS does not improve or if CRS recurs despite the pause, discontinuing treatment 
may be warranted. 
 
Serious infections 
 
Bacterial and viral infections have occurred in patients treated with Teizeild, including gastroenteritis, 
cellulitis, pneumonia, abscess, sepsis (see section 4.8). Use of Teizeild is not recommended in patients 
with active serious infection or chronic infection other than localised skin infections. Patients should 
be monitored for signs and symptoms of infection during and after treatment. If serious infection 
develops, appropriate treatment should be provided and Teizeild should be discontinued. 
 
Lymphopenia 
 
In clinical studies, 75% of patients treated with Teizeild developed lymphopenia. For most patients 
who experienced lymphopenia, lymphocyte levels began to recover after the fifth day of treatment and 

5 
returned to pre-treatment values within two weeks after treatment completion and without dose 
interruption (see section 4.8). 
 
White blood cell counts should be monitored during the treatment period. If prolonged severe 
lymphopenia (< 0.5 x 109 cells/L lasting 1 week or longer) develops, treatment should be discontinued 
(see section 4.8). 
 
Hypersensitivity reactions 
 
Acute hypersensitivity reactions including serum sickness, angioedema, urticaria, rash, vomiting and 
bronchospasm occurred in patients treated with Teizeild. Generalised cutaneous reactions and 
anaphylaxis have occurred in at least one patient (see section 4.8). If severe hypersensitivity reactions 
occur, Teizeild should be discontinued and treatment should be provided promptly. 
 
Vaccinations 
 
The safety of immunisation with live-attenuated vaccines in patients treated with Teizeild has not been 
studied. Additionally, Teizeild may interfere with the immune response to vaccination and decrease 
vaccine efficacy. 
 
• 
All age-appropriate vaccinations should be administered prior to starting Teizeild (see section 
4.2). 
• 
Inactivated or mRNA vaccinations are not recommended within the 2 weeks prior to 
treatment, during treatment, or up to 6 weeks after completion of treatment.  
• 
Live-attenuated vaccinations are not recommended within the 8 weeks prior to starting 
treatment, during treatment, or up to 52 weeks after completion of treatment. 
 
Glucose monitoring 
 
Blood glucose as well as signs and symptoms of hypoglycaemia or hyperglycaemia should be 
monitored and diabetes managed according to current practice guidelines. 
 
Other considerations 
 
Patients must not have type 2 diabetes (T2D) or secondary dysglycaemia related to a condition other 
than T1D (e.g. diabetes secondary to medicinal products or surgery, monogenic diabetes).  
 
Educational/Safety advice tools 
 
Healthcare professionals involved in the management of patients treated with Teizeild must be 
familiar with the guides available for the safe use of this medicinal product and inform patients about 
the potential risks associated with the use of Teizeild. 
 
• 
Guide for risk minimisation for Healthcare Professionals: Healthcare Professional Guide 
• 
Guide for risk minimisation for Patients: Patient Guide – to be provided to patients by healthcare 
professionals 
 
Excipients with known effect 
 
Sodium 
This medicinal product contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per vial, that is to say essentially 
‘sodium-free’. Teizeild is administered in 0.9% sodium chloride intravenous solution (see section 6.6). 
 
Polysorbate 80 
This medicinal product contains 0.10 mg of polysorbate 80 in each vial which is equivalent to 
0.05 mg/mL. Polysorbates may cause allergic reactions. 
 

6 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction  
 
No drug interaction studies have been performed. 
 
Teizeild should be administered with caution in patients with concomitant medicinal products that are 
associated with significant liver abnormalities, cytopenias and other immune modulators.  
 
Cytokine release syndrome accompanied by a slight and transient increase in IL-6 concentrations may 
occur with Teizeild.  
 
Teizeild is not expected to have any relevant cytochrome P450 mediated drug-drug interactions. 
 
Teizeild may interfere with the immune response to vaccination (see section 4.4). 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation  
 
Women of childbearing potential 
 
Women of childbearing potential have to use effective contraception during treatment with teplizumab 
and for 30 days after the last dose of treatment. Teizeild is not recommended in women of 
childbearing potential not using contraception. 
 
Pregnancy 
 
There are no available data from the use of teplizumab in pregnant women. Studies in animals have 
shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). Teizeild is not recommended during pregnancy. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
It is unknown whether teplizumab is excreted in human milk. Toxicological data in animals suggest 
excretion of teplizumab in milk of lactating mice (see section 5.3). A risk to the newborns/infants 
cannot be excluded. Breast-feeding should be discontinued during treatment with Teizeild and for 
30 days after the last dose of treatment.  
 
Fertility 
 
There are no clinical data available for teplizumab on the effects on fertility. Fertility and reproductive 
performance were unaffected in female and male mice treated with a surrogate anti-mouse CD3 
antibody (see section 5.3). 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines  
 
Teizeild has a minor influence on the ability to drive and use machines. Fatigue has been reported (see 
section 4.8). 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects  
 
Summary of safety profile 
 
The most frequently reported adverse reactions were lymphopenia (75%), leukopenia (58%), 
neutropenia (37%), and rash (36%). The most frequent serious adverse reaction was cytokine release 
syndrome (0.9%). Other serious adverse reactions included alanine aminotransferase increased (0.2%), 
aspartate aminotransferase increased (0.2%), lymphopenia (0.2%), neutropenia (0.2%), and infection 
(0.2%). 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 

7 
The adverse reactions occurring in patients in the pooled safety analysis of clinical studies and post-
marketing setting are shown in Table 1 per MedDRA System Organ Class presented by frequency 
categories: very common: (≥ 1/10), common: (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10), uncommon: (≥ 1/1 000 to < 1/100), 
rare: (≥ 1/10 000 to < 1/1 000), very rare: (< 1/10 000), not known: (cannot be estimated from the 
available data). Within each frequency grouping, adverse reactions are presented in the order of 
decreasing seriousness. 
 
Table 1. Adverse reactions 
 
System organ class 
Frequency 
Very common 
Common 
Uncommon 
Not known 
Infections and infestations 
 
 
Infections1 
Epstein-Barr 
virus 
reactivation 
Blood and lymphatic 
system disorders 
Lymphopenia, 
Thrombocytopenia, 
Leukopenia, 
Neutropenia, 
Haemoglobin 
decreased  
Eosinophilia 
 
 
Immune system disorders 
 
Cytokine 
release 
syndrome  
Hypersensitivity1 
 
Nervous system disorders  
Headache 
 
 
 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Vomiting, Nausea  
Diarrhoea, 
Abdominal 
pain 
 
 
Hepatobiliary disorders 
Alanine 
aminotransferase 
increased, Aspartate 
aminotransferase 
increased 
Bilirubin 
increased 
 
 
Skin and subcutaneous 
tissue disorders 
Rash, Pruritus 
Rash 
maculo-
papular, 
Rash 
pruritic, 
Urticaria, 
Skin 
exfoliation  
 
 
General disorders and 
administration site 
conditions 
Pyrexia, Fatigue 
Chills 
 
Pain, Illness 
1 Reported as serious – see “Description of selected adverse reactions”. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) 
In study TN-10, CRS was reported in 2% of patients treated with Teizeild. 
 
In the pool of 7 clinical studies, 6% of patients treated with Teizeild developed CRS. In 14% of these 
patients, CRS was reported as serious (see section 4.4). Liver transaminase elevations were observed 
more frequently in patients treated with Teizeild who experienced CRS. 
 
Serious infections 

8 
In study TN-10, serious infections (cellulitis, gastroenteritis, pneumonia, wound infection) were 
reported in 9% of patients treated with Teizeild. 
 
In the pool of 7 clinical studies, serious infections were reported in 3.1% of patients treated with 
Teizeild, including gastroenteritis, cellulitis, pneumonia, abscess, sepsis, and infectious 
mononucleosis. 
 
Lymphopenia 
In study TN-10, lymphopenia was reported in 73% of patients treated with Teizeild. The average 
lymphocyte count nadir occurred at day 5 of treatment, with recovery and return to baseline by week 6 
(see section 4.4). 
 
In the pool of 7 clinical studies, severe lymphopenia (< 0.5 x 109 cells/L) lasting 1 week or longer 
occurred in 2% of patients treated with Teizeild and 0.5% of patients permanently discontinued 
treatment because of lymphopenia. 
 
Rash and hypersensitivity reactions 
Hypersensitivity reactions were reported with Teizeild in study TN-10. Serum sickness was observed 
in 2% of patients treated with Teizeild.  
 
In the pool of 7 clinical studies of patients: 
 
• 
Anaphylaxis (with hypoxia and bronchospasm) was observed in one patient treated with 
Teizeild who was hospitalised. 
• 
Angioedema (periorbital and facial) was observed in 0.2% patients treated with Teizeild, 
• 
Peripheral and generalised oedema was reported in 1.2% of patients treated with Teizeild. 
• 
Rash was observed in 36% of patients treated with Teizeild. 0.3% of patients treated with 
Teizeild had a serious rash. 
• 
Urticaria was reported in 2.7% of patients treated with Teizeild. 
• 
Hypersensitivity reactions were reported in 1% of patients treated with Teizeild. Less than 
0.1% of patients treated with Teizeild had a serious hypersensitivity reaction. 
 
Haemoglobin decreased and thrombocytopenia 
In the pool of 7 clinical studies, haemoglobin decreased was reported in 23% of patients treated with 
Teizeild and thrombocytopenia was reported in 17% of patients treated with Teizeild; recovery 
occurred within 2 to 4 weeks of treatment. In clinical studies, 1.2% of patients treated with Teizeild 
discontinued treatment due to haemoglobin less than 85 g/L (or a decrease of more than 20 g/L to a 
value less than 100 g/L), and 1% discontinued Teizeild due to platelet count less than 
50 x 109 platelets/L. 
 
Liver enzyme and bilirubin elevations 
Liver enzyme and bilirubin elevations were observed in patients treated with Teizeild, both in the 
context of CRS and in patients without CRS. On laboratory analysis, 7.8% of patients treated with 
Teizeild experienced a peak ALT more than 3 times the ULN. For AST, 5.3% of patients treated with 
Teizeild experienced a peak AST more than 3 times the ULN. Most liver enzyme elevations were 
transient and resolved 1-2 weeks after treatment. 
 
Immunogenicity 
The observed incidence of anti-drug antibodies (ADA) is highly dependent on the sensitivity and 
specificity of the assay. Differences in assay methods preclude meaningful comparisons of the 
incidence of anti-drug antibodies in the studies described below with the incidence of anti-drug 
antibodies in other studies. 
 
In the placebo-controlled study in patients aged 8 years of age and older with stage 2 T1D (study TN-
10) (see section 5.1), approximately 57% of patients treated with Teizeild developed treatment 
emergent anti-teplizumab antibodies, 46% of whom developed neutralising antibodies.  
 

9 
Based on the available data, no definitive conclusion can be made to characterise the effects of ADA 
on pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, or effectiveness of Teizeild. 
 
Paediatric population 
 
Immunogenicity data in children younger than 8 years of age have not been established.  
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose  
 
There is no clinical experience with overdose with teplizumab. 
 
There is no known specific antidote for Teizeild overdose. In the event of overdose the patient should 
be monitored for any signs or symptoms of adverse reactions and all appropriate measures should be 
taken immediately. Clinical judgement should be applied. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1  
Pharmacodynamic properties  
 
Pharmacotherapeutic Group: other drugs in diabetes, ATC Code: A10XX01 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Teplizumab binds to CD3 (a cell surface antigen present on T lymphocytes) and delays disease 
progression in patients with stage 2 T1D. The mechanism may involve partial agonistic signalling 
leading to deactivation of autoreactive CD8+ T lymphocytes and reduced immune-mediated beta-cell 
destruction. Teplizumab leads to an increase in the proportion of CD8+ T cells with signs of 
exhaustion in peripheral blood. 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
 
Clinical studies have shown that teplizumab binds to CD3 molecules on the surface of both CD4+ and 
CD8+ T cells during treatment, with internalisation of the teplizumab/CD3 complex from the surface 
of T cells. Pharmacodynamic effects include transient lymphopenia with a reduction in circulating T 
cells with a nadir on the 5th day of dosing, during a 14-day course of teplizumab treatment (see section 
4.4). Teplizumab exposure-response relationship and time course of pharmacodynamic response for 
the safety and effectiveness of teplizumab have not been fully characterised. 
 
Target patient population 
 
Teplizumab is indicated in adult and paediatric patients 8 years of age and older who have a diagnosis 
of stage 2 T1D.  
 
Stage 2 T1D confirmed by:  
o At least two positive pancreatic islet autoantibodies  
o Dysglycaemia without overt hyperglycaemia  
 
Clinical efficacy and safety 
 

10 
The effectiveness of teplizumab was investigated in the following clinical study: 
 
Study TN-10 
A randomised, double-blind, event-driven, placebo-controlled study in 76 patients, 8 to 49 years of age 
with stage 2 T1D. Stage 2 T1D was defined as having both of the following: 
 
1. Two or more of the following pancreatic islet autoantibodies: 
o Glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GAD) autoantibodies 
o Insulin autoantibody (IAA) 
o Insulinoma-associated antigen 2 autoantibody (IA-2A) 
o Zinc transporter 8 autoantibody (ZnT8) 
o Islet cell autoantibody (ICA) 
 
2. Dysglycaemia on oral glucose tolerance testing 
 
In this study, patients were randomised 1:1 to receive teplizumab or placebo once daily by intravenous 
infusion for 14 days. The 2 treatment groups were: 
• 
Group 1: Daily intravenous doses of 51 micrograms/m2, 103 micrograms/m2, 
207 micrograms/m2, and 413 micrograms/m2 on study days 0 to 3, respectively, and 1 dose of 
826 micrograms/m2 on each of study days 4 to 13. The total dose for the 14-day course was 
approximately 9 034 micrograms/m2.  
• 
Group 2: Intravenous placebo only. 
 
Patients in the teplizumab group had a total drug exposure that was comparable to the total drug 
exposure achieved with the recommended total teplizumab dose (see section 4.2). The primary 
efficacy endpoint in this study was the time from randomisation to development of stage 3 T1D 
diagnosis. 
 
Baseline patient characteristics 
In this study, 45% were female and the median age was 14 years (72% were < 18 years old). Patients’ 
characteristics are displayed in Table 2. 
 
Table 2. Baseline characteristics of adult and paediatric patients 8 years of age and older with 
stage 2 T1D (Study TN-10)1 
 
Teplizumab 
N=44 
Placebo 
N=32 
Age group 
 
 
≥ 18 years 
34% 
19% 
< 18 years 
66% 
81% 
Paediatric age group quartiles 
 
 
8 to < 11 years 
21% 
25% 
11 to < 14 years 
27% 
31% 
14 to < 18 years 
18% 
25% 
Glucose, mg/dL2 
 
 
median (min, max) 
165 (115, 207) 
154 (103, 200) 
OGTT 30 minutes, median (min, max) 
161 (99, 237) 
165 (121, 223) 
OGTT 60 minutes, median (min, max) 
186 (97, 244) 
173 (77, 233) 
OGTT 90 minutes, median (min, max) 
175 (98, 242) 
159 (82, 244) 
OGTT 120 minutes, median (min, max) 
152 (87, 240) 
144 (81, 217) 
HbA1c, % 
 
 
median (min, max) 
5.2 (4.6, 6.1) 
5.3 (4.3, 5.6) 
HLA-DR3/DR4 
 
 
Both DR3 and DR4 
25% 
22% 
DR3 only 
23% 
25% 

11 
Teplizumab 
N=44 
Placebo 
N=32 
DR4 only 
36% 
44% 
Neither DR3 nor DR4 
11% 
9% 
Not analysed 
5% 
0 
Autoantibody type positive 
 
 
GAD65 
91% 
88% 
IAA 
43% 
34% 
IA-2A  
59% 
75% 
ICA  
66% 
88% 
ZnT8 
73% 
75% 
Autoantibodies positive (N) 
 
 
1 
2% 
0 
2 
27% 
22% 
3 
25% 
16% 
4 
27% 
44% 
5 
18% 
19% 
1 Intent to treat (ITT) population  
2 The glucose data are area under the time-concentration curve (AUC) values from the oral glucose 
tolerance test.  
Abbreviations: HbA1c=haemoglobin A1c, SD=standard deviation, HLA=human leukocyte antigen, 
GAD65=glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GAD) autoantibody, IAA=insulin autoantibody, IA-
2A=insulinoma-associated antigen 2 autoantibody, ZnT8=zinc transporter 8 autoantibody, ICA=islet 
cell autoantibody. 
 
Efficacy results 
 
In study TN-10, stage 3 T1D was diagnosed in 20 (45%) of the patients treated with teplizumab and in 
23 (72%) of the patients treated with placebo. A Cox proportional hazards model, stratified by age and 
oral glucose tolerance test status at randomisation, showed that the median time from randomisation to 
stage 3 T1D diagnosis was 50 months in the teplizumab group and 25 months in the placebo group, for 
a difference of 25 months. With a median follow-up time of 51 months, therapy with teplizumab 
resulted in a statistically significant delay in the development of stage 3 T1D, hazard ratio 0.41 (95% 
CI: 0.22 to 0.78; p=0.0066) (Figure 1). 
 
Study TN-10 was not designed to assess whether there were differences in the effectiveness between 
subgroups based on demographic characteristics or baseline disease characteristics. 
 
Figure 1: Kaplan-Meier curve of time to diagnosis of stage 3 T1D in adult and paediatric 
patients 8 years of age and older with stage 2 T1D by treatment group (Study TN-10)1 
 

12 
 
1 ITT population 
 
Paediatric population 
 
The European Medicines Agency has deferred the obligation to submit the results of studies with 
Teizeild containing teplizumab in one or more subsets of the paediatric population in prevention of 
stage 3 type 1 diabetes mellitus as per paediatric investigation plan (PIP) EMEA-000524-PIP02-24, 
for the granted indication (see section 4.2 for information on paediatric use). 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties  
 
Steady state concentrations of teplizumab are not expected to be achieved during the 14-day course of 
teplizumab. 
 
Absorption 
 
There is no information about absorption since teplizumab is administered intravenously. 
 
Distribution 
 
No protein binding studies were conducted as teplizumab is a monoclonal antibody. 
 
Metabolism 
 
Teplizumab is expected to be metabolised into small peptides by catabolic pathways. 
 
Elimination 
 
The apparent elimination half-life of teplizumab is approximately 3 days. 
 
Special populations 
 
Age 
No clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of teplizumab were observed based on 
age (8 to 35 years old). 
 
Gender 
No clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of teplizumab were observed based on 
gender. 

13 
 
Race 
No clinically significant differences in the pharmacokinetics of teplizumab were observed based on 
racial groups (White, Asian). 
 
Body weight 
BSA-based dosing normalises the exposure to teplizumab across body weight. 
 
Renal impairment 
No specific studies to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of teplizumab in patients with renal impairment 
have been performed. 
 
Hepatic impairment 
No specific studies to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of teplizumab in patients with hepatic impairment 
have been performed.  
 
Paediatric population 
The pharmacokinetics of teplizumab in children younger than 8 years of age have not been 
established.  
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data  
 
No studies have been performed to assess the genotoxic, including mutagenic, potential of teplizumab. 
As an antibody, teplizumab is not expected to interact directly with DNA. No long-term studies have 
been performed to assess the carcinogenic potential of teplizumab. Based on the weight of evidence 
assessment and the proposed long term immunomodulatory mode of action a very low potential 
carcinogenicity risk cannot fully be excluded. 
 
Developmental and reproductive toxicity 
 
Non-clinical studies conducted in mice using a surrogate antibody directed towards murine CD3 
indicate direct or indirect harmful with respect to pregnancy and embryonic/foetal development. 
 
In an embryo-foetal developmental toxicity study in pregnant mice by subcutaneous injection at dose 
levels of 0, 0.03, 0.3, or 20 mg/kg on gestation days 6, 10, and 14, increase in post-implantation loss 
occurred in the 20 mg/kg group in the presence of maternal toxicity. 
 
In a pre- and postnatal development toxicity study in pregnant mice administered every 3 days from 
gestation day 6 through lactation day 19 at doses of 0, 0.3, 3, or 20 mg/kg, no maternal toxicity or 
increased incidence of post-implantation loss was observed. Reductions in T cell populations and 
increases in B cells, and a reduction in the adaptive immune response to keyhole limpet hemocyanin 
(KLH) were observed in the offspring on postnatal days 35 and 84 at 20 mg/kg. The surrogate 
antibody was present in the offspring serum at level less than 1.5% that of maternal serum at the high 
dose. A trend towards reduction in fertility was observed in the offspring of dams at 20 mg/kg. 
 
Fertility and reproductive performance were unaffected in female and male mice that received a 
murine surrogate anti-mouse CD3 antibody administered by the subcutaneous route at doses up to 
20 mg/kg. 
 
 

14 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients  
 
Dibasic sodium phosphate 
Monobasic sodium phosphate 
Polysorbate 80 (E 433) 
Sodium chloride 
Water for injections 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities  
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal 
products. Teizeild should not be infused concomitantly in the same intravenous line with other 
medicinal products.  
 
Incompatible materials 
• 
Ethylene-propylene copolymer (EPC) and polypropylene (PP) intravenous infusion bags 
• 
Light protected infusion sets 
• 
For Teizeild dose < 68 micrograms: polyethylene (PE) and polyolefin (PO) blend. 
 
This medicinal product should be prepared and administered as instructed in section 4.2 and section 
6.6. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life  
 
Unopened vial 
 
3 years 
 
After dilution 
 
IV infusion bags 
Chemical, physical and microbial in-use stability has been demonstrated for 6 hours at ambient 
temperature (15 C to 25 C).  
 
From a microbiological point of view, it is recommended that the product should be used immediately. 
If not used immediately, in-use storage times and conditions prior to use are the responsibility of the 
user and should not be longer than 6 hours at ambient temperature (15 C to 25 C). 
 
Syringe-based infusions 
Chemical, physical and microbial in-use stability has been demonstrated for 12 hours under 
refrigerated conditions (2 C to 8 C), followed by no more than 6 hours at ambient temperature 
(15 C to 25 C).  
 
From a microbiological point of view, it is recommended that the product should be used immediately. 
If not used immediately, in-use storage times and conditions prior to use are the responsibility of the 
user and should not be longer than 12 hours under refrigerated conditions (2 C to 8 C), followed by 
no more than 6 hours at ambient temperature (15 C to 25 C). 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage  
 
Store in a refrigerator (2 °C to 8 °C).  
Do not freeze.  
Keep the vial in the outer carton in order to protect from light.  
Store upright. 
 

15 
For storage conditions after dilution of the medicinal product, see section 6.3. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container  
 
Teizeild is supplied in a 2 mL Type 1 borosilicate glass vial with a butyl rubber stopper and an 
aluminium seal with a coloured polypropylene flip-off cap.  
 
Pack sizes of 1, 10 or 14 vials. 
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling  
 
Preparation for intravenous administration 
 
• 
Must dilute Teizeild prior to use. This requires a two-step dilution process. 
• 
In preparation for dilution, inspect the vial visually before use (the solution should be clear and 
colourless). Do not use if particulate matter or colouration is seen. 
• 
Prepare using aseptic technique. Each vial is intended for single dose only. 
• 
Start the infusion immediately after dilution. If not used immediately, store the diluted solution for 
infusion (see section 6.3). 
 
Step 1: Initial dilution (1:10) 
• 
Prepare 18 mL of sodium chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution for injection in a: 
o Sterile glass vial  
or 
o Sterile polyvinylchloride (PVC) with di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) infusion bag  
or 
o Sterile syringe (polypropylene (PP), polycarbonate (PC) or glass) 
 
• 
Remove the cap from the vial – this is the preparation start time (see section 6.3). 
 
Based on BSA dosing requirements (e.g. > 1.94 m2), two (2) Teizeild vials may be needed for days 5 
through 14. 
 
In this case, to make sure the complete dose for each day is contained in one (1) infusion bag or 
syringe: 
o Prepare two (2) dilution solutions 
o Add the cumulative volume for the calculated dose to a single infusion bag or syringe 
 
• 
Remove 2 mL of Teizeild from the vial and slowly add to the 18 mL of sodium chloride 9 mg/mL 
(0.9%) solution for injection. Mix gently by slowly swirling the vial or rocking the infusion bag or 
syringe. The resulting 20 mL diluted solution contains 100 micrograms (mcg)/mL of teplizumab. 
 
• 
Calculate patient’s BSA (e.g. using the Mosteller formula) before treatment. 
 
• 
Using the patient’s BSA, calculate the dose based on treatment day (see section 4.2). 
 
Dose (x mcg)=Daily dosage level (x mcg
m2 ) x BSA (m2) 
 
• 
Calculate the volume of 100 mcg/mL Teizeild solution (prepared in Step 1) to be further diluted in 
Step 2. 
 

16 
Volume of initial dilution, 1:10 (mL) = Dose (x mcg)
100
 
 
Step 2: Final dilution 
There are two different methods for intravenous administration of final dilution: infusion bag or 
syringe pump infusion. Use the appropriate calculation depending on the selected method. 
 
• 
Infusion bag for intravenous administration: 
 
o Using an appropriately sized syringe (e.g. 5 mL), withdraw the volume of diluted solution 
required for that day’s calculated dose from the 100 mcg/mL solution (see Step 1: Initial 
dilution (1:10)). 
o Slowly add contents of the syringe containing the dose to a PVC with DEHP infusion bag 
containing 25 mL sodium chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution for injection. Gently rock the 
infusion bag to ensure that the solution mixes sufficiently. Do not shake. 
o Infusion administration has a minimum duration of 30 minutes. Rate may be slowed for 
patient’s tolerability. 
 
• 
Syringe (PP, PC or glass) for intravenous infusion via syringe pump [Concentration range 
15 mcg/mL to 60 mcg/mL]: 
 
o Calculate the maximum volume that can be administrated for the calculated dose (based 
on treatment day, dose and patient BSA) using a minimum infusion concentration of 
15 mcg/mL. 
 
VolumeInfusion(mL)  =   
Dose (x mcg)
Minimum infusion concentration 15 mcg/mL  
 
o Calculate the volume of saline to be added to the infusion syringe: 
 
a) If the calculated maximum volume to be administered is ≤ 60 mL: 
 
VolumeSaline(mL) =  VolumeInfusion(mL) -  Volumeinitial dilution, 1:10 (mL)  
 
b) If the calculated maximum volume to be administered exceeds 60 mL – the 
maximum infusion volume is capped at 60 mL. 
 
VolumeSaline(mL) =  60 mL -  Volumeinitial dilution, 1:10 (mL)  
 
o Measure the appropriate volume of saline and transfer it to the infusion syringe.  
 
o Using an appropriately sized syringe (e.g. 5 mL), withdraw the volume of diluted Teizeild 
solution calculated above (see volume of initial dilution, 1:10) and add it to the infusion 
syringe. 
 
o Gently rock the infusion syringe to ensure that the solution mixes sufficiently. Do not 
shake. 
 
o Attach infusion syringe to a syringe pump. The syringe pump should support rates as low 
as 1 mL/hour. 
 

17 
o Run infusion with syringe pump – do not manually push the syringe. Calculate the 
infusion rate (to ensure a minimum of 30 minutes). The maximum infusion rate should be 
2 mL/min (maximum 120 mL/hour). The actual rate will vary based on the volume of 
infusion, as shown below.  
 
Infusion rate (mL/minute)  =   VolumeInfusion(mL)
30 minutes
 
 
o Infusion administration has a minimum duration of 30 minutes. Rate may be slowed for 
patient’s tolerability. 
 
These steps may be followed if using a sterile glass vial for dilution preparation instead of a syringe 
(for intravenous infusion via syringe pump). An overfill should be considered as part of the 
calculations. 
 
Disposal 
 
The unused portion of remaining diluted Teizeild solution in the PVC with DEHP infusion bag, 
syringe or sterile glass vial should be discarded. 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
Sanofi Winthrop Industrie 
82 avenue Raspail 
94250 Gentilly 
France 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBERS 
 
EU/1/25/1998/001 
EU/1/25/1998/002 
EU/1/25/1998/003 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 

18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE 
SUBSTANCE AND MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR 
BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO 
THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT 

19 
A. 
MANUFACTURER OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE AND 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer of the biological active substance  
 
AGC Biologics 
21511 23rd Drive SE 
Bothell, WA 98021  
USA 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release  
 
Sanofi B.V. 
Paasheuvelweg 25 
1105 BP Amsterdam 
Netherlands 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (see Annex I: Summary of Product 
Characteristics, section 4.2). 
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of 
Union reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC 
and any subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall submit the first PSUR for this product within 
6 months following authorisation. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance 
activities and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the 
marketing authorisation and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of 
an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 
 
• 
Additional risk minimisation measures 
 
Prior to the launch of Teizeild in each Member State the Marketing Authorisation Holder 
(MAH) must agree about the content and format of the educational program, including 

20 
communication media, distribution modalities, and any other aspects of the program, with the 
National Competent Authority. 
The educational program is aimed at providing information related to the risks associated with 
the use of Teizeild and how to manage them. 
 
The MAH shall ensure that in each Member State where Teizeild is marketed, all healthcare 
professionals (HCPs) and patients/caregivers who are expected to prescribe, dispense, use 
Teizeild have access to/are provided with the following educational/safety advice tools message 
to be disseminated through professional bodies: 
 
• 
Guide for risk minimisation for Healthcare Professionals: Healthcare Professional Guide 
• 
Guide for risk minimisation for Patients: Patient Guide 
 
Healthcare Professional Guide 
The objective is to ensure (at prescription and initiation of the treatment with teplizumab) a 
conversation between the prescribing/treating HCPs and the patient/legal representative around 
specific information and important recommendation related to the treatment with teplizumab. 
These are pertaining to the following safety concerns: 
 
- 
Cytokine release syndrome, 
- 
Lymphopenia, 
- 
Severe infections. 
 
The HCP guide includes the following key elements: 
 
- 
Information related to the requirement to premedicate patients, to monitor total blood count, 
liver enzymes prior to, during or after the treatment, 
- 
Guidance for vaccination prior to or after the treatment. 
 
Patient Guide 
Objective of this guide is for patients treated with teplizumab and their legal representative to 
know the risks related to the use of teplizumab and to be able to recognize the signs and 
symptoms indicative of those risks. 
 
At the time of treatment initiation, the patient guide will be given by the HCPs to the 
patient/legal representative (which the patient should keep and be able to share with other HCPs 
involved with their treatment). HCPs can download this patient guide in countries, where 
available. The patient guide helps the patient identify the following safety concerns: 
 
- 
Cytokine release syndrome, 
- 
Lymphopenia, 
- 
Severe infections. 
 
The patient guide includes the following key elements: 
 
- 
Information to educate patient about signs/symptoms which could be indicative of these 
risks and to tell their doctor or nurse immediately if these occur, 
- 
Guidance for vaccinations prior to or after the treatment, 
- 
Recommendation for the patients/legal representative to read the package leaflet (PL) 
thoroughly. 
 
 

21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III  
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET  
 
 

22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING  
 
 

23 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
CARTON 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
Teizeild 1 mg/mL concentrate for solution for infusion  
teplizumab 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE  
 
Each vial contains 2 mg of teplizumab in 2 mL of concentrate. 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: dibasic sodium phosphate, monobasic sodium phosphate, polysorbate 80 (E 433), sodium 
chloride, water for injections. See leaflet for further information. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Concentrate for solution for infusion 
 
1 vial, 2 mg/2 mL 
10 vials, 2 mg/2 mL 
14 vials, 2 mg/2 mL 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
For single use only. 
Intravenous use after dilution. 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
[QR code to be included] 
teizeild.info.sanofi 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
Read the leaflet for the shelf life after dilution. 
 
 

24 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 
Store in a refrigerator. 
Do not freeze. 
Keep the vial in the outer carton in order to protect from light.  
Store upright. 
 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
Sanofi Winthrop Industrie 
82 avenue Raspail 
94250 Gentilly 
France 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBERS  
 
EU/1/25/1998/001 1 vial  
EU/1/25/1998/002 10 vials 
EU/1/25/1998/003 14 vials 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
Justification for not including Braille accepted. 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC  
SN  
NN 
 

25 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
VIAL LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTES OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Teizeild 1 mg/mL sterile concentrate 
teplizumab 
IV after dilution 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT  
 
2 mg/2 mL 
 
 
6. 
OTHER  
 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET  

27 
Package leaflet: Information for the patient  
 
Teizeild 1 mg/mL concentrate for solution for infusion 
teplizumab 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What Teizeild is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you are given Teizeild 
3. 
How Teizeild is given 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store Teizeild 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What Teizeild is and what it is used for 
 
Teizeild is a medicine that contains the active substance teplizumab. Teplizumab is a monoclonal 
antibody, a type of protein designed to recognise and attach to a target. 
 
Teizeild is used in adults and children 8 years of age and older who have stage 2 type 1 diabetes 
(T1D). It is used to delay the onset of stage 3 T1D in these patients. 
 
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune condition that occurs when your own immune system (the 
body’s natural defences) mistakenly attacks cells in the pancreas (called beta cells) that make insulin 
(a hormone that controls the amount of glucose (sugar) in the blood). Over time, this leads to a 
complete lack of insulin in the body. 
 
T1D develops in three stages. In stage 1 T1D, your blood sugar levels are normal and you don’t have 
any symptoms. In stage 2 T1D, your blood sugar levels start to increase and become abnormal. In 
stage 3 T1D, your body cannot make enough insulin on its own to control your blood sugar and you 
need insulin treatment to manage the condition. 
 
Before starting treatment with Teizeild your doctor will confirm that you have stage 2 T1D by 
ensuring that you test positive for 2 or more autoantibodies (a type of protein made by the immune 
system indicating the autoimmune destruction of beta cells in the pancreas) and have dysglycaemia 
without persistently high blood sugar levels (overt hyperglycaemia). 
 
The active substance in Teizeild, teplizumab, binds to an activating molecule on the surface of T cells 
(a type of white blood cell) known as CD3. By binding to CD3, teplizumab deactivates the T cells that 
attack and destroy beta cells which helps to preserve beta cell function and slows down the 
progression of T1D. 
 
If you have any questions on how Teizeild works or about your treatment with Teizeild, ask your 
doctor, nurse or pharmacist. 

28 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you are given Teizeild 
 
You must not be given Teizeild  
• 
if you are allergic to teplizumab or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in 
section 6). 
 
Warnings and precautions  
Talk to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist about all your medical conditions before you are given 
Teizeild, including if you: 
• 
have a serious infection – or an infection that does not go away or that keeps coming back. 
• 
have recently had or are planning to have a vaccine. Teizeild may affect how well a vaccine 
works. Tell your doctor, nurse or pharmacist that you are being treated with Teizeild before having 
a vaccine. Depending on the type of vaccine, your doctor will tell you when you can safely receive 
any vaccine prior to and after the treatment with Teizeild. 
After you have been given Teizeild  
Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you have any of the following: 
• 
Fever, nausea, tiredness, headache, muscle pain (myalgia), joint pain (arthralgia) or increased liver 
enzymes in your blood, which may be signs and symptoms of a serious condition known as 
cytokine release syndrome (see section 4 “Possible side effects”).  
• 
Fever, chills, tiredness, nausea, vomiting, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain, swollen lymph 
nodes or a painful, swollen lump that feels warm (abscess). These may be symptoms of an 
infection (see section 4 “Possible side effects”).   
• 
Hives, rash, joint pain or swelling, itching, dizziness, wheezing, difficulty breathing or swelling of 
your tongue and lips. These may be symptoms of allergic reactions (see section 4 “Possible side 
effects”). 
 
Teizeild may lower your lymphocyte count, a type of white blood cells that helps fight infections (see 
section 4 “Possible side effects”). 
 
Your doctor will do blood tests to check your liver and your complete blood counts before you start 
treatment and during treatment with Teizeild.  
 
Patient Guide 
Your doctor will provide you with a patient guide that includes information about possible side effects, 
their symptoms, and instructions on what to do if they occur. Read it carefully and ask your doctor if 
you have any questions about your treatment. 
 
Children 
The safety and efficacy of Teizeild in children under 8 years of age have not been established. 
 
Other medicines and Teizeild 
Tell your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other 
medicines. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding  
Tell your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you are pregnant, think you may be pregnant or are planning 
to have a baby. Teizeild may harm your unborn baby.  
• 
Teizeild is not recommended during pregnancy and in women who can have children who are not 
using contraception (birth control).  
Tell your doctor, nurse or pharmacist if you are breast-feeding or are planning to breast-feed. It is not 
known if Teizeild passes into your breast milk and if it can harm your baby.  

29 
• 
It is recommended to stop breast-feeding during treatment with Teizeild and for 30 days after the 
last dose. 
 
Driving and using machines  
Teizeild has minor effects on your ability to drive and use machines. If you feel tired (fatigue) (see 
section 4 “Possible side effects”), do not drive or use machines before discussing it with your doctor, 
nurse or pharmacist. 
 
Teizeild contains sodium and polysorbate 80 
This medicine contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per vial, that is to say essentially ‘sodium-
free’. 
 
This medicine contains 0.10 mg of polysorbate 80 in each vial which is equivalent to 0.05 mg/mL. 
Polysorbates may cause allergic reactions. Tell your doctor if you or your child have any known 
allergies. 
 
 
3. 
How Teizeild is given 
Teizeild should be given to you by a healthcare professional with access to appropriate medical 
support needed to manage serious side effects. Teizeild is given as an infusion (drip) into a vein 
(intravenous (IV)).  
 
Your doctor will determine your dose of Teizeild based on your body surface area, which is a way of 
measuring the total area of your skin.  
 
How often Teizeild is given 
You will be given the infusion once a day for 14 days. Each infusion will last a minimum of 
30 minutes. 
 
For the first 5 days of treatment, your doctor or nurse will give you other medicines by mouth to 
reduce your risk of developing cytokine release syndrome. 
These medicines include: 
• 
ibuprofen or naproxen – or other medicines for fever such as paracetamol 
• 
an antihistamine – a medicine used to treat allergies 
• 
an anti-nausea medicine. 
 
If you are given more Teizeild than you should  
If you are given too much Teizeild, your doctor will treat and monitor any side effects you may have.  
 
If you miss a Teizeild infusion  
If you miss a scheduled infusion, your doctor or nurse will continue your treatment on the next 
scheduled day. You will not get 2 infusions on the same day. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
During and after your treatment with Teizeild, your doctor or nurse will check for serious side effects, 
as well as other side effects, and treat you as needed. 
 

30 
Serious side effects 
Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you have any of the following serious side effects: 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
Decrease in lymphocytes (a type of white blood cells), as measured in blood tests. 
 
• 
This can happen after your first dose. 
• 
This can affect how well your body can fight infections. 
• 
Longer and more severe decreases in lymphocytes could make you more susceptible to 
infections (see section 2 “What you need to know before you are given Teizeild”). 
• 
Your lymphocytes counts should start to go back to normal after your fifth dose of Teizeild. 
 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
Cytokine release syndrome (CRS) 
The signs and symptoms may start during the first 5 days of treatment and may include: 
 
• 
fever 
• 
feeling tired 
• 
muscle and joint pain 
• 
nausea 
• 
headache 
• 
increased liver enzymes and bilirubin (a breakdown product of red blood cells) in your blood. 
 
Uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
• 
Infections, with symptoms such as fever, chills, tiredness, nausea, vomiting, cough, shortness 
of breath, chest pain, swollen lymph nodes or a painful, swollen lump that feels warm 
(abscess) 
• 
Hypersensitivity, with symptoms such as hives, rash, joint pain or swelling, itching, dizziness, 
wheezing, difficulty breathing or swelling of your tongue and lips. 
 
Other side effects 
Tell your doctor or nurse if you have any of the following side effects: 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Low levels of blood platelets, components that help the blood to clot (thrombocytopenia) 
• 
Low levels of neutrophils, a type of white blood cell (neutropenia) 
• 
Low levels of white blood cells (leucopenia) 
• 
Decrease in haemoglobin (the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen around the body) 
• 
Headache 
• 
Vomiting 
• 
Nausea 
• 
Increase in liver enzyme levels  
• 
Rash 
• 
Itching (pruritus) 
• 
Fever (pyrexia) 
• 
Feeling tired (fatigue) 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Increased levels of eosinophils, a type of white blood cell (eosinophilia) 
• 
Diarrhoea 
• 
Abdominal (belly) pain 
• 
Increase in bilirubin levels 
• 
Itchy skin 

31 
• 
Red and itchy raised bumps (hives) 
• 
Skin exfoliation 
• 
Chills 
Not known (frequency cannot be estimated from the available data) 
• 
Mononucleosis (Epstein-Barr virus) reactivation  
• 
Pain 
• 
Illness 
 
Your doctor or nurse may pause or stop your treatment if you get liver problems, have a serious 
infection, or if your blood counts stay too low. 
 
Reporting of side effects  
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects, you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store Teizeild 
 
Your doctor, pharmacist or nurse is responsible for storing this medicine and disposing of any unused 
product correctly. The following information is intended for healthcare professionals.  
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the carton and the vial after “EXP”. 
The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2 °C to 8 °C). Do not freeze the vials. 
Keep the vial in the outer carton in order to protect from light.  
Store upright. 
 
After dilution 
 
IV infusion bags 
Chemical, physical and microbial in-use stability has been demonstrated for 6 hours at ambient 
temperature (15 C to 25 C).  
 
From a microbiological point of view, it is recommended that the product should be used immediately. 
If not used immediately, in-use storage times and conditions prior to use are the responsibility of the 
user and should not be longer than 6 hours at ambient temperature (15 C to 25 C). 
 
Syringe-based infusions 
Chemical, physical and microbial in-use stability has been demonstrated for 12 hours under 
refrigerated conditions (2 C to 8 C), followed by no more than 6 hours at ambient temperature 
(15 C to 25 C).  
 
From a microbiological point of view, it is recommended that the product should be used immediately. 
If not used immediately, in-use storage times and conditions prior to use are the responsibility of the 
user and should not be longer than 12 hours under refrigerated conditions (2 C to 8 C), followed by 
no more than 6 hours at ambient temperature (15 C to 25 C). 
 
Do not throw away medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your doctor or nurse how to 
throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help protect the environment. 

32 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What Teizeild contains  
- 
The active substance is teplizumab 
- 
One vial contains 2 mg of teplizumab 
- 
The other ingredients (excipients) are dibasic sodium phosphate, monobasic sodium phosphate, 
polysorbate 80 (E 433), sodium chloride, and water for injections (see section 2 “Teizeild 
contains sodium and polysorbate 80”). 
 
What Teizeild looks like and contents of the pack 
Teizeild is a concentrate for solution for infusion in a vial (1 mg/mL). It is a clear, colourless solution. 
Teizeild is supplied in a carton pack containing 1, 10 or 14 vials.  
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
Sanofi Winthrop Industrie 
82 avenue Raspail 
94250 Gentilly 
France 
 
Manufacturer 
Sanofi B.V. 
Paasheuvelweg 25 
1105 BP Amsterdam 
Netherlands 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
 
België/Belgique/Belgien 
Sanofi Belgium 
Tél/Tel: +32 (0)2 710 54 00 
 
Lietuva 
Swixx Biopharma UAB 
Tel: +370 5 236 91 40 
 
България 
Swixx Biopharma EOOD 
Тел.: +359 (0)2 4942 480 
 
Luxembourg/Luxemburg 
Sanofi Belgium  
Tél/Tel: +32 (0)2 710 54 00 (Belgique/Belgien) 
 
Česká republika 
Sanofi s.r.o. 
Tel: +420 233 086 111 
 
Magyarország 
SANOFI-AVENTIS Zrt.  
Tel.: +36 1 505 0050 
 
Danmark 
Sanofi A/S 
Tlf.: +45 45 16 70 00 
 
Malta 
Sanofi S.r.l. 
Tel: +39 02 39394275 
 
 
Deutschland 
Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland GmbH 
Tel.: 0800 52 52 010 
Tel. aus dem Ausland: +49 69 305 21 131 
 
Nederland 
Sanofi B.V. 
Tel: +31 20 245 4000 
 

33 
Eesti 
Swixx Biopharma OÜ 
Tel: +372 640 10 30 
 
Norge 
sanofi-aventis Norge AS 
Tlf: +47 67 10 71 00 
 
Ελλάδα 
Sanofi-Aventis Μονοπρόσωπη AEBE 
Τηλ: +30 210 900 16 00 
 
Österreich 
sanofi-aventis GmbH 
Tel: +43 1 80 185 – 0 
 
España 
sanofi-aventis, S.A 
Tel: +34 93 485 94 00 
 
Polska 
Sanofi Sp. z o.o. 
Tel.: +48 22 280 00 00 
 
France 
Sanofi Winthrop Industrie 
Tél: 0 800 222 555 
Appel depuis l’étranger : +33 1 57 63 23 23 
 
Portugal 
Sanofi - Produtos Farmacêuticos, Lda. 
Tel: +351 21 35 89 400 
 
Hrvatska 
Swixx Biopharma d.o.o. 
Tel: +385 1 2078 500 
 
România 
Sanofi Romania SRL 
Tel: +40 (0) 21 317 31 36 
 
Ireland 
sanofi-aventis Ireland Ltd. T/A SANOFI 
Tel: +353 (0) 1 403 56 00 
 
Slovenija 
Swixx Biopharma d.o.o. 
Tel: +386 1 235 51 00 
 
Ísland 
Vistor ehf. 
Sími: +354 535 7000 
 
Slovenská republika 
Swixx Biopharma s.r.o. 
Tel: +421 2 208 33 600 
 
Italia 
Sanofi S.r.l. 
Tel: 800 536389 
 
Suomi/Finland 
Sanofi Oy 
Puh/Tel: +358 (0) 201 200 300 
 
Κύπρος 
C.A. Papaellinas Ltd. 
Τηλ: +357 22 741741 
 
Sverige 
Sanofi AB 
Tel: +46 (0)8 634 50 00 
 
Latvija 
Swixx Biopharma SIA 
Tel: +371 6 616 47 50 
 
 
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in  
 
Other sources of information 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
 
The following information is intended for healthcare professionals only: 
 
Preparation for intravenous administration 
 
• 
Must dilute Teizeild prior to use. This requires a two-step dilution process. 

34 
• 
In preparation for dilution, inspect the vial visually before use (the solution should be clear and 
colourless). Do not use if particulate matter or colouration is seen. 
• 
Prepare using aseptic technique. Each vial is intended for single dose only. 
• 
Start the infusion immediately after dilution. If not used immediately, store the diluted solution for 
infusion (see package leaflet, section “How to store Teizeild”). 
 
Step 1: Initial dilution (1:10) 
• 
Prepare 18 mL of sodium chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution for injection in a: 
o Sterile glass vial 
or 
o Sterile polyvinylchloride (PVC) with di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) infusion bag 
or 
o Sterile syringe (polypropylene (PP), polycarbonate (PC) or glass) 
 
• 
Remove the cap from the vial – this is the preparation start time. 
 
Based on BSA dosing requirements (e.g. > 1.94 m2), two (2) Teizeild vials may be needed for days 5 
through 14. 
 
In this case, to make sure the complete dose for each day is contained in one (1) infusion bag or 
syringe: 
o Prepare two (2) dilution solutions 
o Add the cumulative volume for the calculated dose to a single infusion bag or syringe 
 
• 
Remove 2 mL of Teizeild from the vial and slowly add to the 18 mL of sodium chloride 9 mg/mL 
(0.9%) solution for injection. Mix gently by slowly swirling the vial or rocking the infusion bag or 
syringe. The resulting 20 mL diluted solution contains 100 micrograms (mcg)/mL of teplizumab. 
 
• 
Calculate patient’s BSA (e.g. using the Mosteller formula) before treatment. 
 
• 
Using the patient’s BSA, calculate the dose based on treatment day (see section 4.2). 
 
Dose (x mcg)=Daily dosage level (x mcg
m2 ) x BSA (m2) 
 
• 
Calculate the volume of 100 mcg/mL Teizeild solution (prepared in Step 1) to be further diluted in 
Step 2. 
 
Volume of initial dilution, 1:10 (mL) = Dose (x mcg)
100
 

35 
 
Step 2: Final dilution 
There are two different methods for intravenous administration of final dilution: infusion bag or 
syringe pump infusion. Use the appropriate calculation depending on the selected method. 
 
• 
Infusion bag for intravenous administration: 
 
o Using an appropriately sized syringe (e.g. 5 mL), withdraw the volume of diluted solution 
required for that day’s calculated dose from the 100 mcg/mL solution (see Step 1: Initial 
dilution (1:10)). 
o Slowly add contents of the syringe containing the dose to a PVC with DEHP infusion bag 
containing 25 mL sodium chloride 9 mg/mL (0.9%) solution for injection. Gently rock the 
infusion bag to ensure that the solution mixes sufficiently. Do not shake. 
o Infusion administration has a minimum duration of 30 minutes. Rate may be slowed for 
patient’s tolerability. 
 
• 
Syringe (PP, PC or glass) for intravenous infusion via syringe pump [Concentration range 
15 mcg/mL to 60 mcg/mL]: 
 
o 
Calculate the maximum volume that can be administrated for the calculated dose (based 
on treatment day, dose and patient BSA) using a minimum infusion concentration of 
15 mcg/mL. 
 
VolumeInfusion(mL)  =   
Dose (x mcg)
Minimum infusion concentration 15 mcg/mL  
 
 
o Calculate the volume of saline to be added to the infusion syringe: 
 
a) If the calculated maximum volume to be administered is ≤ 60 mL: 
 
VolumeSaline(mL) =  VolumeInfusion(mL) -  Volumeinitial dilution, 1:10 (mL)  
 
b) If the calculated maximum volume to be administered exceeds 60 mL – the 
maximum infusion volume is capped at 60 mL. 
 
VolumeSaline(mL) =  60 mL -  Volumeinitial dilution, 1:10 (mL)  
 
o Measure the appropriate volume of saline and transfer it to the infusion syringe.  
 
o Using an appropriately sized syringe (e.g. 5 mL), withdraw the volume of diluted Teizeild 
solution calculated above (see volume of initial dilution, 1:10) and add it to the infusion 
syringe. 
 
o Gently rock the infusion syringe to ensure that the solution mixes sufficiently. Do not 
shake. 
 
o Attach infusion syringe to a syringe pump. The syringe pump should support rates as low 
as 1 mL/hour. 
 
o Run infusion with syringe pump – do not manually push the syringe. Calculate the 
infusion rate (to ensure a minimum of 30 minutes). The maximum infusion rate should be 

36 
2 mL/min (maximum 120 mL/hour). The actual rate will vary based on the volume of 
infusion, as shown below.  
 
Infusion rate (mL/minute)  =   VolumeInfusion(mL)
30 minutes
 
 
o Infusion administration has a minimum duration of 30 minutes. Rate may be slowed for 
patient’s tolerability. 
 
These steps may be followed if using a sterile glass vial for dilution preparation instead of a syringe 
(for intravenous infusion via syringe pump). An overfill should be considered as part of the 
calculations. 
 
Disposal 
 
The unused portion of remaining diluted Teizeild solution in the PVC with DEHP infusion bag, 
syringe or sterile glass vial should be discarded. 
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
