1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I  
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS  

2 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions.  
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Wainzua 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each pre-filled pen contains 45 mg eplontersen (as eplontersen sodium) in 0.8 ml of solution. 
 
Each ml contains 56 mg eplontersen (as eplontersen sodium). 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Solution for injection (injection). 
Clear, colourless to yellow solution (pH of approximately 7.4 and osmolality 250 to 330 mOsm/kg). 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications  
 
Wainzua is indicated for the treatment of hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis (ATTRv) in 
adult patients with stage 1 or stage 2 polyneuropathy. 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration  
 
Treatment should be prescribed and supervised by a physician experienced in the treatment of patients 
with hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis.  
 
Posology 
 
The recommended dose of eplontersen is 45 mg administered monthly. 
 
Vitamin A supplementation at approximately, but not exceeding, 2 500 IU to 3 000 IU vitamin A per 
day is advised for patients treated with Wainzua (see section 4.4). 
 
Treatment should be initiated as early as possible after symptom onset (see section 5.1). 
 
The decision to continue treatment in those patients whose disease progresses to stage 3 
polyneuropathy should be taken at the discretion of the physician based on the overall benefit and risk 
assessment. 
 
Missed dose 
 
If a dose of Wainzua is missed, then the next dose should be administered as soon as possible. Dosing 
should be resumed at monthly intervals from the date of the last dose; a double dose should not be 
administered. 
 
Special populations 

3 
 
Elderly 
 
No dose adjustment is required in elderly patients (≥ 65 years of age) (see section 5.2). 
 
Renal impairment 
 
No dose adjustment is necessary in patients with mild to moderate renal impairment (estimated 
glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] ≥ 45 to < 90 mL/min/1.73 m2). Eplontersen has not been studied in 
patients with eGFR < 45 mL/min/1.73 m2 or end-stage renal disease (see section 5.2) and should only 
be used in these patients if the anticipated clinical benefit outweighs the potential risk.  
 
Hepatic impairment 
 
No dose adjustment is necessary in patients with mild hepatic impairment. Eplontersen has not been 
studied in patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment and should only be used in these 
patients if the anticipated clinical benefit outweighs the potential risk (see section 5.2). 
 
Patients undergoing liver transplant 
 
The safety and efficacy of Wainzua have not been evaluated in patients undergoing liver transplant. 
No data are available. 
 
Paediatric population 
 
The safety and efficacy of Wainzua in children and adolescents below 18 years of age have not been 
established. No data are available (see section 5.1). 
 
Method of administration  
 
Wainzua is for subcutaneous use. Wainzua is a pre-filled pen for single-use only. 
 
The first injection administered by the patient or caregiver should be performed under the guidance of 
an appropriately qualified health care professional. Patients and/or caregivers should be trained in the 
subcutaneous administration of Wainzua. 
 
The pre-filled pen should be removed from refrigerated storage at least 30 minutes before use and 
allowed to reach room temperature prior to injection. Other warming methods should not be used. 
 
Inspect solution visually before use. The solution should appear colourless to yellow. Do not use if 
cloudiness, particulate matter, or discolouration is observed prior to administration. 
 
If self-administered, Wainzua should be injected in the abdomen or upper thigh region. If a caregiver 
administers the injection, the back of the upper arm can also be used. 
 
Wainzua should not be injected into skin that is bruised, tender, red, or hard, into scars or damaged 
skin, the area around the navel should be avoided. 
 
Comprehensive instructions for administration using the pre-filled pen are provided in the 
‘Instructions for Use’. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications  
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use  
 

4 
Vitamin A deficiency 
 
Based on the mechanism of action, Wainzua is expected to reduce serum vitamin A (retinol) below 
normal levels (see section 5.1). Serum vitamin A levels below the lower limit of normal should be 
corrected and any ocular symptoms or signs related to vitamin A deficiency should be evaluated prior 
to initiation of treatment with Wainzua. 
 
Patients receiving Wainzua should take oral supplementation of approximately, but not exceeding, 
2 500 IU (female) to 3 000 IU (male) of vitamin A per day to reduce the potential risk of ocular 
symptoms due to vitamin A deficiency. Referral for ophthalmological assessment is recommended if 
patients develop ocular symptoms consistent with vitamin A deficiency, including reduced night 
vision or night blindness, persistent dry eyes, eye inflammation, corneal inflammation or ulceration, 
corneal thickening or corneal perforation. 
 
During the first 60 days of pregnancy, both too high and too low vitamin A levels may be associated 
with an increased risk of foetal malformation. Therefore, pregnancy should be excluded before 
treatment initiation and women of childbearing potential should practise effective contraception (see 
section 4.6). If a woman intends to become pregnant, Wainzua and vitamin A supplementation should 
be discontinued, and serum vitamin A levels should be monitored and have returned to normal before 
conception is attempted. 
 
In the event of an unplanned pregnancy, Wainzua should be discontinued. Due to the long half-life of 
eplontersen (see section 5.2), a vitamin A deficit may even develop after cessation of treatment. No 
recommendation can be given whether to continue or discontinue vitamin A supplementation during 
the first trimester of an unplanned pregnancy. If vitamin A supplementation is continued, the daily 
dose should not exceed 3 000 IU per day, due to the lack of data supporting higher doses. Thereafter, 
vitamin A supplementation of 2 500 IU to 3 000 IU per day should be resumed in the second and third 
trimesters if serum vitamin A levels have not yet returned to normal, because of the increased risk of 
vitamin A deficiency in the third trimester. 
 
It is not known whether vitamin A supplementation in pregnancy will be sufficient to prevent 
vitamin A deficiency if the pregnant female continues to receive Wainzua. However, increasing 
vitamin A supplementation to above 3 000 IU per day during pregnancy is unlikely to correct serum 
retinol levels due to the mechanism of action of eplontersen and may be harmful to the mother and 
foetus. 
 
Excipients with known effect 
 
This medicinal product contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per dose of 0.8 ml, that is to say 
essentially ‘sodium-free’. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction  
 
No interaction studies have been performed.  
 
In vitro studies indicate that eplontersen is not a substrate or inhibitor of transporters, does not interact 
with highly plasma protein bound medicinal products, and is not an inhibitor or inducer of CYP 
enzymes. 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation  
 
Women of child-bearing potential 
 
Wainzua will reduce the plasma levels of vitamin A, which is crucial for normal foetal development. It 
is not known whether vitamin A supplementation will be sufficient to reduce the risk to the foetus (see 
section 4.4). For this reason, pregnancy should be excluded before initiation of Wainzua therapy and 
women of child-bearing potential should practice effective contraception. 

5 
 
If a woman intends to become pregnant, Wainzua and vitamin A supplementation should be 
discontinued, and serum vitamin A levels should be monitored and have returned to normal before 
conception is attempted (see section 4.4). Serum vitamin A levels may remain reduced for more than 
15 weeks after the last dose of treatment. 
 
Pregnancy 
 
There are no data on the use of eplontersen in pregnant women. Animal studies are insufficient with 
respect to reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). Due to the potential teratogenic risk arising from 
unbalanced vitamin A levels, Wainzua should not be used during pregnancy and in women of 
childbearing potential not using contraception. In case of pregnancy, close monitoring of the foetus 
and vitamin A status should be carried out, especially during the first trimester (see section 4.4). 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
It is unknown whether eplontersen or its metabolites are excreted in human milk. A risk to the 
breastfed child cannot be excluded.  
 
A decision must be made whether to discontinue breast-feeding or to discontinue/abstain from 
Wainzua therapy, taking into account the benefit of breast feeding for the child and the benefit of 
therapy for the woman. 
 
Fertility 
 
There is no information available on the effects of eplontersen on human fertility. No impact on male 
or female fertility was detected in animal studies (see section 5.3). 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines  
 
Eplontersen has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects  
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
The most frequent adverse reactions during treatment with eplontersen were vitamin A decreased 
(97% of patients) and vomiting (9% of patients). 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
The safety data reflects exposure to Wainzua in 144 patients with polyneuropathy caused by ATTRv 
(ATTRv-PN) randomised to eplontersen and who received at least one dose of eplontersen. 130 
patients completed treatment with eplontersen through Week 85. The mean duration of treatment was 
541 days (range: 57 to 582 days). 
 
Adverse reactions are organised by MedDRA System Organ Class (SOC). Within each SOC, preferred 
terms are arranged by decreasing frequency and then by decreasing seriousness. Frequencies of 
occurrence of adverse reactions are defined as: very common (≥ 1/10); common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10); 
uncommon (≥ 1/1 000 to < 1/100); rare (≥ 1/10 000 to < 1/1 000); very rare (< 1/10 000) and not 
known (cannot be estimated from available data). 
 

6 
Table 1: Adverse reactions reported for Wainzua 
System organ class 
Adverse reaction 
Frequency 
Gastrointestinal disorders  
Vomiting 
Common 
General disorders and 
administration site conditions 
Injection site erythema 
Common 
Injection site pain 
Common 
Injection site pruritus 
Common 
Investigations 
Vitamin A decreased 
Very common* 
* Based on laboratory findings of vitamin A below the lower limit of normal during the study. 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose  
 
There is no specific treatment for an overdose with eplontersen. In the event of an overdose, 
supportive medical care should be provided. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1  
Pharmacodynamic properties  
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: Other nervous system drugs, ATC code: N07XX21. 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Eplontersen is a N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc)-conjugated 2′-O-2-methoxyethyl-modified chimeric 
gapmer antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) with a mixed backbone of phosphorothioate and phosphate 
diester internucleotide linkages. The GalNAc conjugate enables targeted delivery of the ASO to 
hepatocytes. The selective binding of eplontersen to the transthyretin (TTR) messenger RNA (mRNA) 
within the hepatocytes causes the degradation of both mutant and wild type (normal) TTR mRNA. 
This prevents the synthesis of TTR protein in the liver, resulting in significant reductions in the levels 
of mutated and wild type TTR protein secreted by the liver into the circulation. 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
 
In the clinical study in patients with ATTRv-PN receiving eplontersen, a decrease in serum TTR 
concentrations was observed at the first assessment (Week 5) and TTR concentrations continued to 
decrease through Week 35. A sustained reduction of TTR concentration was observed throughout the 
duration of the treatment (85 weeks). Mean (SD) for serum TTR percent reduction from baseline was 
82.1% (11.7) at Week 35, 83.0% (10.4) at Week 65 and 81.8% (13.4) at Week 85 when treated with 
eplontersen. Similar reduction from baseline in serum TTR concentrations was observed regardless of 
sex, race, age, region, body weight, cardiomyopathy status, previous treatment, Val30Met mutation 
status, disease stage, and familial amyloid cardiomyopathy clinical diagnosis at baseline. 
 
TTR is a carrier protein for retinol binding protein 4, which is the principal carrier of vitamin A 
(retinol). Therefore, a reduction in plasma TTR is expected to result in the reduction of plasma retinol 
levels to below the lower limit of normal. 

7 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety 
 
The efficacy and safety of eplontersen was evaluated in a randomised, multicentre, open-label, trial 
(NEURO-TTRansform) that included a total of 168 adult patients with ATTRv-PN. Patients were 
randomised in a 6:1 ratio to receive subcutaneous injection of eplontersen 45 mg every 4 weeks 
(N=144) or inotersen 284 mg weekly (N=24) as a reference group. Of the 144 patients randomised to 
eplontersen, 140 (97.2 %) patients completed treatment through Week 35, 135 (93.8%) completed 
treatment through Week 65. 
 
An external placebo control consisted of a placebo cohort of patients from the inotersen pivotal study 
(NEURO-TTR): randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre clinical trial in adult 
patients with ATTRv-PN. That cohort received subcutaneous injections of placebo once weekly. Both 
studies employed identical eligibility criteria. 
 
The characteristics of the eplontersen and external placebo groups were generally similar, and 
potential imbalances in key baseline characteristics (Val30Met mutation status, disease stage, and 
previous treatment) were accounted for in the prespecified statistical analysis.  
 
Of the 144 patients randomised to eplontersen, the median patient age at baseline was 51.5 years 
(range 24 to 82), 30.6% were ≥ 65 years old, and 69.4% of patients were male. Twenty (20) different 
TTR variants were represented: Val30Met (59.0%), Phe64Leu (3.5%), Leu58His (2.8%), Thr60Ala 
(2.8%), Val122Ile (2.8%), Ser77Tyr (2.1%), Ser50Arg (1.4%), Thr49Ala (0.7%), Glu89Gln (0.7%), 
and Other (24.3%, includes Ala97Ser (15%)). At baseline, 79.9% of patients had stage 1 disease 
(unimpaired ambulation; mild sensory, motor, and autonomic neuropathy in the lower limbs), 20.1% 
had stage 2 disease (assistance with ambulation required; moderate impairment of the lower limbs, 
upper limbs, and trunk), and there were no patients with stage 3 disease. 69.4% of patients had prior 
treatment with either tafamidis or diflunisal. 
 
At Week 66 analysis, the co-primary endpoints included percent change from baseline in serum TTR 
concentration at Week 65, change from baseline in mNIS+7 score and change from baseline in 
Norfolk QoL-DN total score at Week 66, all when eplontersen was compared to placebo.  
 
The mNIS+7 is an objective assessment of neuropathy and comprises the NIS and Modified +7 
composite scores. In the version of the mNIS+7 used in the trial, the NIS objectively measures deficits 
in cranial nerve function, muscle strength, reflexes, and sensations, and the Modified +7 assesses heart 
rate response to deep breathing, quantitative sensory testing (touch-pressure and heat-pain), and 
peripheral nerve electrophysiology. The validated version of the mNIS+7 score used in the trial had a 
range of -22.3 to 346.3 points, with higher scores representing a greater severity of disease.  
 
The Norfolk QoL-DN scale is a patient-reported assessment that evaluates the subjective experience of 
neuropathy in the following domains: physical functioning/large fibre neuropathy, activities of daily 
living, symptoms, small fibre neuropathy, and autonomic neuropathy. The version of the Norfolk 
QoL-DN that was used in the trial had a range from -4 to 136 points, with higher scores representing 
greater impairment. 
 
Other secondary endpoints were formally tested hierarchically at Week 66 analysis and included 
change from baseline in neuropathy symptoms and change score, in the physical component summary 
score of short form 36-item health survey (version 2), in polyneuropathy disability score and in 
nutritional status (modified body mass index). 
 
Treatment with eplontersen in NEURO-TTRansform study demonstrated statistically significant 
improvements in all endpoints at both Week 35 and Week 66 (see Table 2) compared to the external 
placebo group (all p < 0.0001). 
 

8 
Table 2: Summary of clinical efficacy results from NEURO-TTRansform Study 
Analysis/ 
Endpoint 
Mean (SD) 
LSM Change/Percent Change 
from Baseline, (Estimate SE) 
[95% CI] 
Eplontersen- 
Placebo* 
Difference in 
LSM 
[95% CI] 
p-value 
Placebo* 
Eplontersen 
Placebo* 
Eplontersen 
Safety analysis 
set 
N = 60 
N = 144 
N = 60 
N = 144 
 
 
Serum TTR, g/L 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Baseline 
0.15 (0.04) 
0.23 (0.08) 
 
 
 
 
   Week 35 
 
 
-14.7% (2.2) 
[-18.96, -10.44] 
-81.3% (1.8) 
[-84.83, -77.71] 
-66.6% 
[-71.61, -61.53] 
p < 0.0001 
   Week 65 
0.14 (0.04) 
0.04 (0.02) 
-10.2% (2.2) 
[-14.43, -5.87] 
-80.2% (1.8) 
[-83.75, -76.72] 
-70.1% 
[-75.02, -65.15] 
p < 0.0001 
mNIS+7 
composite score 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Baseline 
74.1 (39.0) 
79.8 (42.3) 
 
 
 
 
   Week 35 
 
 
9.9 (1.9) 
[6.29, 13.56] 
1.1 (1.8)  
[-2.47, 4.77] 
-8.8 
[-13.21, -4.34] 
p = 0.0001 
   Week 66 
96.6 (50.2) 
79.7 (44.9) 
26.3 (2.6)  
[21.32, 31.38] 
3.2 (2.5) 
[-1.75, 8.18] 
-23.1 
[-29.26, -17.01] 
p < 0.0001 
Norfolk QOL-DN 
total score 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Baseline 
48.6 (27.0) 
43.3 (26.2) 
 
 
 
 
   Week 35 
 
 
8.4 (2.1) 
[4.30, 12.58] 
-2.8 (2.1) 
[-6.87, 1.19] 
-11.3 
[-16.26, -6.30] 
p < 0.0001 
   Week 66 
58.9 (32.0) 
35.6 (26.3) 
13.7 (2.4) 
[8.92, 18.50] 
-5.5 (2.4) 
[-10.19, -0.91] 
-19.3 
[-24.99, -13.53] 
p < 0.0001 
 
Full analysis set 
N = 59 
N = 141 
N = 59 
N = 141 
 
 
Neuropathy 
symptom and 
change score, 
Week 66 2 
 
 
8.2  
[6.24, 10.12] 
-0.0  
[-1.92, 1.86] 
-8.2 
[-10.65, -5.76] 
p < 0.0001 
Physical 
component score 
of short form 36 
item health 
survey, Week 65 2 
 
 
-4.46 
[-6.139, -2.770] 
0.85 
[-0.711, 2.412] 
5.31 
[3.195, 7.416] 
p < 0.0001 
Modified body 
mass index, 
Week 65 2 
 
 
-90.8 
[-112.84,  
-68.69] 
-8.1 
[-28.55, 12.42] 
82.7 
[54.64, 110.76] 
p < 0.0001 
* External placebo group from another randomised controlled trial (NEURO-TTR). 
1 Based on an ANCOVA with a reference-based multiple imputation approach for missing data, adjusted by 
propensity score weights with fixed categorical effects for treatment, time, treatment-by-time interaction, 
disease stage, Val30M mutation, previous treatment, fixed covariates for the baseline value and the baseline-
by-time interaction. In the reference-based imputation approach, missing data in the placebo group and missing 
data in eplontersen treatment group while on treatment, is imputed under a within treatment arm missing at 
random assumption. For a patient in eplontersen treatment group who discontinued, missing data were imputed 
based on the placebo group. 
2 Based on a MMRM adjusted by propensity score weights with fixed categorical effects for treatment, time, 
treatment-by-time interaction, disease stage, Val30M mutation, previous treatment, fixed covariates for the 
baseline value and the baseline-by-time interaction.  
ANCOVA = analysis of covariance; CI = confidence interval; LSM = least squares mean; MMRM = mixed 
effects model with repeated measures; mNIS+7 = modified neuropathy impairment score +7; N = number of 

9 
participants in group; Norfolk QoL-DN = Norfolk quality of life – diabetic neuropathy questionnaire; 
SD = standard deviation; SE = standard error; TTR = transthyretin. 
 
The secondary endpoint of change from baseline in PND score at Week 65 was statistically significant 
in favor of eplontersen (p= 0.02). More patients in the eplontersen group experienced improvement 
from baseline in PND score than in the external placebo group (5.7% vs 3.4%) and fewer patients in 
the eplontersen group experienced a worsening from baseline than in the external placebo group 
(12.8% vs. 22.0%). 
 
Patients receiving eplontersen experienced similar improvements relative to placebo in the reduction 
of serum TTR concentration, mNIS+7 composite and Norfolk QoL-DN total scores across all 
subgroups including age, sex, race, region, Val30Met mutation status, cardiomyopathy status, familial 
amyloid cardiomyopathy clinical diagnosis at baseline and disease stage. 
 
Through the end of treatment with eplontersen at Week 85, reduction of TTR concentration and the 
observed effect in mNIS+7 composite score were sustained, and the mean Norfolk QoL-DN total 
score remained stable. 
 
Immunogenicity 
 
In the clinical study in patients with ATTRv-PN, after an 84-week treatment period (median treatment 
duration of 561 days (80 weeks), range: 57 to 582 days), 58 patients (40.3%) developed 
treatment-emergent anti-drug antibodies (ADAs). ADA to eplontersen tended to be persistent with a 
late onset (median onset 223 days) and low titer (median peak titer 200). In the patients who tested 
positive for anti-eplontersen antibodies, there was no clinically meaningful impact on the efficacy, 
safety, pharmacokinetics, or pharmacodynamics of eplontersen. 
 
Paediatric population 
 
The European Medicines Agency has waived the obligation to submit the results of studies with 
eplontersen in all subsets of the paediatric population in the treatment of transthyretin amyloidosis (see 
section 4.2 for information on paediatric use). 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties  
 
The pharmacokinetic properties of Wainzua were evaluated by measuring plasma concentrations of 
eplontersen following subcutaneous administration of single and multiple doses (once every 4 weeks) 
in healthy subjects and multiple doses (once every 4 weeks) in patients with ATTRv-PN. 
 
Absorption 
 
Following subcutaneous administration, eplontersen is absorbed rapidly into the systemic circulation 
with the time to maximum plasma concentrations of approximately 2 hours, based on population 
estimates. Population estimates of steady state maximum concentrations (Cmax), trough concentrations 
(Ctrough), and area under the curve (AUCτ) were 0.218 μg/ml, 0.0002 μg/ml, and 1.95 μg h/ml, 
respectively, following 45 mg once every 4 weeks dosing in patients with ATTRv-PN. No 
accumulation of eplontersen Cmax and AUC was observed in plasma after repeated dosing (once every 
4 weeks). Accumulation was observed in Ctrough, and steady-state was reached after approximately 
17 weeks. 
 
Distribution 
 
Eplontersen is highly bound to human plasma proteins (> 98%). The population estimates for the 
apparent central volume of distribution is 12.9 l and the apparent peripheral volume of distribution is 
11 100 l. Eplontersen is expected to distribute primarily to the liver and kidney cortex after 
subcutaneous dosing. 
 

10 
Biotransformation 
 
Eplontersen is metabolised by endo- and exonucleases into short oligonucleotide fragments of varying 
sizes primarily within the liver. There were no major circulating metabolites in humans. 
Oligonucleotide therapeutics, including eplontersen, are not metabolised by CYP enzymes. 
 
Elimination 
 
Eplontersen is primarily eliminated by metabolism followed by renal excretion of the short 
oligonucleotide metabolites. The mean fraction of unchanged ASO eliminated in urine was less than 
1% of the administered dose within 24 hours. The terminal elimination half-life is approximately 
3 weeks based on population estimates. 
 
Linearity/non-linearity 
 
Eplontersen Cmax and AUC showed a slightly greater than dose-proportional increase following single 
subcutaneous doses ranging from 45 to 120 mg (i.e. 1 to 2.7 times the recommended dose) in healthy 
volunteers. 
 
Special populations 
 
Based on the population pharmacokinetic, body weight, sex, race, and Val30Met mutation status are 
unlikely to have a clinically meaningful effect on eplontersen exposure. Definitive assessments were 
limited in some cases as covariates were limited by the overall low numbers. 
 
Elderly population 
 
No overall differences in pharmacokinetics were observed between adult and elderly (≥ 65 years of 
age) patients. 
 
Renal impairment 
 
No formal clinical studies have been conducted to investigate the effect of renal impairment on 
eplontersen pharmacokinetics. A population pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analysis showed 
no clinically meaningful differences in the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of eplontersen 
based on mild and moderate renal impairment (eGFR ≥ 45 to < 90 ml/min). Eplontersen has not been 
studied in patients with eGFR < 45 ml/min or in patients with end-stage renal disease. 
 
Hepatic impairment  
 
No formal clinical studies have been conducted to investigate the effect of hepatic impairment on 
eplontersen. A population pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic analysis showed no clinically 
meaningful differences in the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of eplontersen based on mild 
hepatic impairment (total bilirubin ≤ 1 × ULN and AST > 1 × ULN, or total bilirubin > 1.0 to 
1.5 × ULN and any AST). Eplontersen has not been studied in patients with moderate hepatic 
impairment (total bilirubin > 1.5 to 3 × ULN and any AST) or severe hepatic impairment (total 
bilirubin > 3 to 10 × ULN and any AST) or in patients with prior liver transplant. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data  
 
General toxicology 
 
Repeated administration of eplontersen at 24 mg/kg/week for 13 weeks or 25 mg/kg/month for 
9 months in monkeys reduced TTR protein in plasma by 69% and 52%, respectively. There were no 
toxicologically relevant findings related to this pharmacologic inhibition of TTR expression. 
 

11 
Most of the findings observed after repeated subcutaneous dosing for up to 6 months in mice and 
9 months in monkeys were non-adverse and related to the uptake and accumulation of eplontersen by 
various cell types in multiple organs of all tested animal species including monocytes/macrophages, 
kidney proximal tubular epithelia, Kupffer cells of the liver, and histiocytic cell infiltrates in lymph 
nodes and injection sites.  
 
In a single monkey in the 13 week toxicity study, severely decreased platelet counts associated with 
spontaneous haemorrhage, presented as haematoma and petechiae, were observed at the highest dose 
tested (24 mg/kg/week). Similar findings were not observed at the NOAEL of 6 mg/kg/week in 
monkeys, which corresponds to more than 70-fold the human AUC at the recommended therapeutic 
eplontersen dose. 
 
Genotoxicity/Carcinogenicity 
 
Eplontersen did not exhibit genotoxic potential in vitro and in vivo and was not carcinogenic in ras.H2 
transgenic mice. 
 
Reproductive toxicity 
 
Eplontersen had no effects on fertility or embryo-foetal development in mice up to 38-fold (based on 
human equivalent dose) to the recommended human monthly dose of 45 mg. Eplontersen is not 
pharmacologically active in mice. Consequently, only effects related to the chemistry of eplontersen 
could be captured in this study. However, no effect on fertility or embryo-foetal development was 
noted with a mouse-specific analogue of eplontersen in mice, which was associated with > 90% 
inhibition of TTR mRNA expression.  
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients  
 
Sodium dihydrogen phosphate dihydrate  
Disodium hydrogen phosphate anhydrous 
Sodium chloride 
Hydrochloric acid (for pH adjustment) 
Sodium hydroxide (for pH adjustment) 
Water for injections 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities  
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal 
products. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life  
 
4 years. 
 
Wainzua may be stored in original carton unrefrigerated for up to 6 weeks below 30°C. If not used 
within 6 weeks, it should be discarded. 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage  
 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C – 8°C). Do not freeze. 
 
Store in the original package. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container  

12 
 
0.8 ml sterile solution for injection in a single-use, type I glass syringe with a staked 27-gauge ½ inch 
(12.7 mm) stainless steel needle, rigid needle shield, and siliconised chlorobutyl elastomer stopper in a 
pre-filled pen.  
 
Pack size of one single-use pre-filled pen. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling  
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
AstraZeneca AB 
SE-151 85 Södertälje 
Sweden 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/24/1875/001 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 06 March 2025 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 

13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY 
AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO 
THE SAFE AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL 
PRODUCT 
 

14 
A. 
MANUFACTURER RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE  
 
Name and address of the manufacturer responsible for batch release 
 
AstraZeneca AB 
Gärtunavägen 
SE-152 57 Södertälje 
Sweden 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE  
 
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (see Annex I: Summary of Product 
Characteristics, section 4.2). 
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION  
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union 
reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any 
subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall submit the first PSUR for this product within 
6 months following authorisation. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT   
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance 
activities and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the 
marketing authorisation and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of 
an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III  
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET  
 
 

16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING  
 
 

17 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
OUTER CARTON PRE-FILLED PEN 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
Wainzua 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
eplontersen 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
One pre-filled pen contains 45 mg eplontersen (as eplontersen sodium) in 0.8 ml. 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Excipients: sodium dihydrogen phosphate dihydrate, disodium hydrogen phosphate anhydrous, 
sodium chloride, hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, water for injections. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Solution for injection 
 
1 pre-filled pen 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Subcutaneous use 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Open here 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 
Store in a refrigerator. 
Do not freeze. 
Store in the original package. 

18 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
AstraZeneca AB 
SE-151 85 Södertälje 
Sweden 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/24/1875/001  
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
wainzua 45 mg 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN  
NN  

19 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
PRE-FILLED PEN LABEL 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Wainzua 45 mg  
injection  
eplontersen 
Subcutaneous use 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT  
 
0.8 ml 
 
 
6. 
OTHER  
 
AstraZeneca 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET  

21 
Package leaflet: Information for the patient 
 
Wainzua 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
eplontersen 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
 
• 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
• 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse. 
• 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
• 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What Wainzua is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Wainzua 
3. 
How to use Wainzua 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store Wainzua 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What Wainzua is and what it is used for 
 
The active substance of Wainzua, eplontersen, is a type of medicine called an antisense 
oligonucleotide. 
 
Wainzua is used to treat adults with nerve damage throughout the body (polyneuropathy) caused by 
hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTRv).  
 
In people with ATTRv, the protein transthyretin (TTR) is defective and breaks easily. This causes it to 
clump together and form so-called amyloid deposits, which can build up around or within the nerves, 
and other places in the body and stop them from working normally. 
 
Wainzua works by lowering the amount of TTR protein made by the liver. As a result, there is less 
TTR protein in the blood to form amyloid deposits and this can help to reduce the symptoms of the 
disease. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you use Wainzua 
 
Do not use Wainzua if: 
• 
you are allergic to eplontersen or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in 
section 6). 
 
Warnings and precautions 
 
You will need vitamin A supplements during treatment with Wainzua. This medicine lowers the 
amount of vitamin A in your blood. Your doctor will check your vitamin A levels before treatment. 

22 
• 
Your doctor will ask you to take an oral vitamin A supplement daily during treatment. 
 
Signs of low vitamin A can include poor vision especially at night, dry eyes, hazy or cloudy vision, 
or eye inflammation (redness, pain, excess tears or other discharge, or feeling that something is in the 
eye). 
 
• 
Talk to your doctor if you notice problems with vision or any other eye problems while using 
Wainzua. If necessary, your doctor will refer you to an eye specialist for a check-up. 
 
You should confirm you are not pregnant before starting treatment with Wainzua. Both too high 
and too low levels of vitamin A can harm the development of your unborn child. Women of 
child-bearing age should practise effective contraception during treatment with Wainzua (see 
section “Pregnancy and breast-feeding” later in this leaflet). 
 
• 
Vitamin A levels may remain low for more than 15 weeks after the last dose of Wainzua. 
• 
Tell your doctor if you are planning to become pregnant. Your doctor will tell you to stop 
taking Wainzua and vitamin A supplementation. Your doctor will also ensure that your vitamin 
A levels have returned to normal before you attempt to get pregnant. 
• 
Tell your doctor if you have an unplanned pregnancy during treatment. Your doctor will 
tell you to stop taking Wainzua. In the first 3 months of your pregnancy, your doctor may tell 
you to stop taking vitamin A supplementation. During the last 6 months of your pregnancy, your 
doctor may tell you to resume the vitamin A supplementation if your vitamin A levels have not 
yet returned to normal because of the increased risk of vitamin A deficiency during the last 
3 months of your pregnancy. 
 
Children and adolescents 
Wainzua should not be used in children and adolescents under 18 years of age. Its safety and efficacy 
have not been established in this population. 
 
Other medicines and Wainzua 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are using, have recently used or might use any other medicines. 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding 
If you are pregnant or breastfeeding, think you may be pregnant, or are planning to have a baby, ask 
your doctor or pharmacist for advice before using this medicine. 
 
Women of childbearing age 
Wainzua will reduce the level of vitamin A in your blood, and vitamin A is important for normal 
development of your unborn child (see section “Warnings and precautions” earlier in this leaflet). 
 
• 
You should use effective contraception during treatment with Wainzua if you are a woman 
who is able to become pregnant.  
• 
Talk to your doctor or nurse about suitable methods of contraception. 
• 
You should confirm you are not pregnant before starting treatment with Wainzua. 
• 
Tell your doctor if you are planning to become pregnant or if you are pregnant during 
treatment. Your doctor will advise you to stop taking Wainzua. 
 
Pregnancy 
You should not use Wainzua if you are pregnant. 
 
Breast-feeding 
It is not known whether the active substance of Wainzua can pass into breast milk. A risk to the 
breastfed child cannot be excluded. Before you start treatment, tell your doctor if you are 
breast-feeding or planning to breast-feed. Your doctor may tell you to stop taking Wainzua. 
 
Driving and using machines 

23 
It is unlikely that Wainzua will affect your ability to drive and use machines. Your doctor will tell you 
whether your condition allows you to drive vehicles and use machines safely. 
 
Wainzua contains sodium 
This medicine contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per dose of 0.8 mL, that is to say essentially 
‘sodium-free’. 
 
 
3. 
How to use Wainzua 
 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse has told you. Check with your 
doctor or pharmacist if you are not sure. 
 
The recommended dose is an injection of 45 mg once every month. 
 
Wainzua is given as an injection under the skin (subcutaneous use). The injection can be done in the 
belly area (abdomen) or upper thigh region. If given by a carer or health care professional, Wainzua 
can also be given in the back of your upper arm. You should not inject the medicine into skin that is 
bruised, tender, red or hard, or into scars or damaged skin. The area around the belly button (navel) 
should be avoided. 
 
You and your doctor or nurse will decide if Wainzua should be injected by yourself, by your carer, or 
by a healthcare professional. You or your carer will receive training on the right way to prepare and 
inject this medicine. Read the ‘Instructions for Use’ carefully before using the pre-filled pen (provided 
in a separate booklet). 
 
Your doctor will tell you how long you need to receive Wainzua. Do not stop treatment unless your 
doctor tells you to. 
 
If you use more Wainzua than you should 
If you inject too much, get medical advice immediately, or go to a hospital emergency department. Do 
this even if you have no symptoms. Bring the medicine's carton or pen with you. 
 
If you forget to use Wainzua 
If you miss your dose of Wainzua, have your next dose as soon as possible, and continue your monthly 
injections from then on. Do not administer a double dose. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, pharmacist, or nurse. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Low levels of vitamin A, as seen in blood tests 
 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
• 
vomiting  
• 
redness (erythema), itching (pruritus) and pain where the injection was given 
 
Reporting of side effects 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects, you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 

24 
5. 
How to store Wainzua 
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the pre-filled pen label and carton 
after ‘EXP’. The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C to 8°C). Do not freeze. 
 
If necessary, Wainzua may be stored outside the refrigerator at a temperature below 30°C for up to 
6 weeks in the original carton. Dispose of unrefrigerated medicine if it is not used within 6 weeks. 
 
Store in the original package. 
 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to 
throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What Wainzua contains 
The active substance is eplontersen. One pre-filled pen contains 45 mg eplontersen (as eplontersen 
sodium) in 0.8 ml solution. 
 
The other ingredients are sodium dihydrogen phosphate dihydrate, disodium hydrogen phosphate 
anhydrous, sodium chloride and water for injections. Hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide may be 
used to adjust the pH (see “Wainzua contains sodium” in section 2). 
 
What Wainzua looks like and contents of the pack 
Wainzua is a solution for injection (injection) which is clear, colourless to yellow. 
 
Wainzua is available in a pack containing 1 single-use pre-filled pen. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
AstraZeneca AB 
SE-151 85 Södertälje 
Sweden 
 
Manufacturer 
AstraZeneca AB 
Gärtunavägen 
SE-152 57 Södertälje 
Sweden 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
 
België/Belgique/Belgien 
AstraZeneca S.A./N.V.  
Tel: +32 2 370 48 11 
Lietuva 
UAB AstraZeneca Lietuva 
Tel: +370 5 2660550 
България 
АстраЗенека България ЕООД  
Тел.: +359 (2) 44 55 000 
Luxembourg/Luxemburg 
AstraZeneca S.A./N.V. 
Tél/Tel: +32 2 370 48 11 
 

25 
Česká republika 
AstraZeneca Czech Republic s.r.o. 
Tel +    
Magyarország 
AstraZeneca Kft. 
Tel.: +36 1 883 6500 
Danmark 
AstraZeneca A/S  
Tlf.: +45 43 66 64 62 
Malta 
Associated Drug Co. Ltd 
Tel: +356 2277 8000 
Deutschland 
AstraZeneca GmbH  
Tel: +49 40 809034100 
Nederland 
AstraZeneca BV  
Tel: +31 85 808 9900 
Eesti 
AstraZeneca 
Tel: +372 6549 600 
Norge 
AstraZeneca AS 
Tlf: +47 21 00 64 00 
Ελλάδα 
AstraZeneca A.E. 
Τηλ: +30 210 6871500 
Österreich 
AstraZeneca Österreich GmbH 
Tel: +43 1 711 31 0 
España 
AstraZeneca Farmacéutica Spain, S.A. 
Tel: +34 91 301 91 00 
Polska 
AstraZeneca Pharma Poland Sp. z o.o. 
Tel.: +48 22 245 73 00 
France 
AstraZeneca 
Tél: +33 1 41 29 40 00 
Portugal 
AstraZeneca Produtos Farmacêuticos, Lda. Tel: 
+351 21 434 61 00 
Hrvatska 
AstraZeneca d.o.o. 
Tel: +385 1 4628 000 
România 
AstraZeneca Pharma SRL 
Tel: +40 21 317 60 41 
Ireland 
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals (Ireland) DAC  
Tel: +353 1609 7100 
Slovenija 
AstraZeneca UK Limited  
Tel: +386 1 51 35600 
Ísland 
Vistor 
Sími: +354 535 7000 
Slovenská republika 
AstraZeneca AB, o.z.  
Tel: +421 2 5737 7777 
Italia 
AstraZeneca S.p.A.  
Tel: +39 02 00704500 
Suomi/Finland 
AstraZeneca Oy  
Puh/Tel: +358 10 23 010 
Κύπρος 
Αλέκτωρ Φαρµακευτική Λτδ  
Τηλ: +357 22490305 
Sverige 
AstraZeneca AB  
Tel: +46 8 553 26 000 
Latvija 
SIA AstraZeneca Latvija  
Tel: +371 67377100 
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in 
 
Other sources of information 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 

26 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
Wainzua 45 mg solution for injection in pre-filled pen  
(eplontersen) 
 
 
This Instructions for use contains information on how to inject Wainzua 45 mg solution for injection 
in pre-filled pen. 
 
Read this Instructions for Use before you first use your pre-filled pen and each time you get a 
new pen. There may be new information. This information does not take the place of talking to 
your healthcare provider about your medical condition or your treatment. 
 
Your healthcare provider should show you or your caregiver how to use the pre-filled pen the right 
way. If you or your caregiver have any questions, talk to your healthcare provider. 
 
 
Important information you need to know before using the pen 
• 
Store Wainzua pen in a refrigerator between 2°C to 8°C in the original carton. If needed, an 
unopened carton can be stored at room temperature up to 30°C for up to 6 weeks.  
• 
Keep pen in the carton until ready to use.  
• 
Each pen contains 1 dose and can only be used 1 time. 
• 
The dose is given only as an injection under the skin (subcutaneous). 
 
Do not use your pen if it has: 
• 
been frozen. 
• 
been dropped, damaged, or appears to be tampered with. 
• 
passed the expiry date (EXP). 
 
Do not share your pen with anyone. 
• 
Keep your pen and all medicines out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
 
Your pre-filled pen 
Do not remove the cap until right before you give the injection. 
 
Do not touch the orange needle guard. 
 
Before use 
 
After use 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preparing to inject 
Protective sleeve 
(in the cap) 
Orange
needle guard 
(needle hidden inside) 
Orange 
plunger 
Viewing 
window 
Cap 
Liquid 
medicine 
Cap 
(removed) 

27 
Step 1 – Gather supplies for your injection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 2 – Remove from refrigerator and wait 30 minutes 
 
Keep pre-filled pen in the carton for 30 minutes at room 
temperature 20°C to 25°C before injecting. 
• 
Do not warm in any other way. For example, do not 
warm it in a microwave, hot water, or near other heat 
sources. 
• 
Keep it away from light or direct sunlight. 
 
 
 
Step 3 – Remove the pre-filled pen from the carton and inspect 
Check the pre-filled pen for damage. 
Check the expiry (EXP) date. 
Check the liquid through the viewing 
window. 
• 
It is normal to see small air bubbles in the 
liquid.  
• 
The liquid should be clear and colourless to 
slightly yellow. 
• 
Do not use if the liquid is cloudy, 
discoloured, or contains visible particles. 
 
 
1 pen  
1 alcohol 
wipe 
1 cotton ball 
or gauze 
1 small 
bandage 
1 puncture-
resistant (sharps) 
disposal container 
Not included in the pack 
Inspect 
30 
min 

28 
 
Injecting with your pre-filled pen 
 
Step 4 – Choose an injection site 
 
You or your caregiver can inject in the front of your 
thigh or the lower part of your stomach (abdomen). 
 
A caregiver or healthcare professional may also inject 
you in the back of your upper arm. 
Do not try to inject yourself in the upper arm. 
 
For each injection, choose an injection site that is at 
least 1 inch (3 cm) away from where you last injected. 
 
Do not inject:  
• 
into the 2-inch (5-cm) area around your belly 
button. 
• 
where skin is red, warm, tender, bruised, scaly, or 
hard. 
• 
into scars, damaged, discoloured, or tattooed skin. 
• 
through clothing. 
Step 5 – Wash your hands and clean the injection site 
 
Wash your hands well with soap and water. 
Clean the injection site with an alcohol wipe or with soap and water. Let it air dry. 
Do not touch the cleaned 
area before injecting. 
 
Step 6 – Pull off the cap 
Hold the pen body with 1 hand, and 
carefully pull the cap straight off 
with your other hand. The orange 
needle guard is now exposed, and the 
needle is hidden underneath.  
• 
Throw away the cap. 
• 
Do not touch the needle or push 
on the orange needle guard with 
your finger.  
 
• 
Do not recap the pre-filled pen. This could cause the medicine to come out too soon or damage 
the pre-filled pen. 
 
For all 
For caregivers or healthcare professional only 
abdomen 
thigh 
back of 
upper arm 
Protective sleeve 
(in the cap) 
Orange 
needle guard 

29 
 
Step 7 – Injecting  
 
Inject using the pre-filled pen by following the 
steps in figures a, b, c and d. 
 
When injecting, press and hold the pen for 
10 seconds until the orange plunger fills the 
viewing window. You may hear a first ‘click’ at 
the start of the injection and a second ‘click’ at 
the end of the injection. This is normal. 
 
Do not move or change the position of the 
pre-filled pen after the injection has started. 
 
Position the pre-filled pen. 
• 
Place the orange needle guard flat against 
your skin (90-degree angle). 
• 
Make sure you can see the viewing window. 
 
 
 
Press down firmly and hold. 
• 
You may hear the first 
‘click’ right away, this 
tells you the injection has 
started.  
• 
The orange plunger will 
move down in the viewing 
window. 
Hold down firmly for about 
10 seconds. 
• 
The orange plunger will 
fill the viewing window. 
• 
You may hear the second 
‘click’ at the end of 
injection. 
After you have completed 
your injection, lift the pen 
straight up. 
• 
The orange needle guard 
will slide down and lock 
into place over the needle. 
 
 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Viewing 
window 
10 
sec 

30 
Step 8 – Check the viewing window 
 
Check the viewing window to make sure all the 
medicine has been injected.  
 
If the orange plunger rod does not fill the 
viewing window, you may not have received the 
full dose. 
 
If this happens or if you have any other 
concerns, contact your doctor or healthcare 
professional. 
 
 
 
 
Step 9 – Check the injection site 
There may be a small amount of blood or liquid 
at the injection site. This is normal. 
 
If needed, press a cotton ball or gauze on the 
area and apply a small bandage. 
 
Step 10 – Throw away the used pre-filled pen 
Put your used pen in a puncture resistant sharps 
disposal container right away after use. 
 
Do not throw away the pen in your household 
waste. 
 
Disposal guidelines 
Dispose of the full container as instructed by your healthcare professional or pharmacist. 
Do not recycle your used sharps disposal container. 
 
Before injection 
After injection 
