 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 

 
2 
 
 
This medicinal product is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of 
new safety information. Healthcare professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions. 
See section 4.8 for how to report adverse reactions. 
 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Zandoriah, 20 micrograms/80 microliters solution for injection in pre-filled pen. 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each dose of 80 microliters contains 20 micrograms of teriparatide *. 
 
One pre-filled pen of 2.4 mL contains 600 micrograms of teriparatide (corresponding to 250 
micrograms per mL). 
 
*Teriparatide, rhPTH(1-34), produced in E. coli, using recombinant DNA technology, is identical to 
the 34 N-terminal amino acid sequence of endogenous human parathyroid hormone. 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1. 
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Solution for injection. 
 
Colorless, clear solution. 
 
The acceptable pH range is 3.8–4.5, and the product osmolality range is 262–368 mOsmol/kg. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications 
 
Teriparatide is indicated in adults. 
 
Treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women and in men at increased risk of fracture (see 
section 5.1). In postmenopausal women, a significant reduction in the incidence of vertebral and non-
vertebral fractures but not hip fractures has been demonstrated. 
 
Treatment of osteoporosis associated with sustained systemic glucocorticoid therapy in women and men 
at increased risk for fracture (see section 5.1). 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration 
 
Posology 
 
The recommended dose of teriparatide is 20 micrograms administered once daily. 
 
The maximum total duration of treatment with teriparatide should be 24 months (see section 4.4). The 
24-month course of teriparatide should not be repeated over a patient's lifetime. 
 
Patients should receive supplemental calcium and vitamin D supplements if dietary intake is 
inadequate. 
 
Following cessation of teriparatide therapy, patients may be continued on other osteoporosis therapies. 

 
3 
 
 
 
Special populations 
 
Patients with renal impairment 
Teriparatide must not be used in patients with severe renal impairment (see section 4.3). In patients 
with moderate renal impairment, teriparatide should be used with caution. No special caution is 
required for patients with mild renal impairment. 
 
Patients with hepatic impairment 
No data are available in patients with impaired hepatic function (see section 5.3). Therefore, teriparatide 
should be used with caution. 
 
Paediatric population and young adults with open epiphyses 
The safety and efficacy of teriparatide in children and adolescents less than 18 years has not been 
established. Teriparatide should not be used in paediatric patients (less than 18 years), or young adults 
with open epiphyses. 
 
Elderly patients 
Dose adjustment based on age is not required (see section 5.2). 
 
Method of administration 
Teriparatide should be administered once daily by subcutaneous injection in the thigh or abdomen.  
 
Patients must be trained to use the proper injection techniques (see section 6.6). A user manual is also 
available to instruct patients on the correct use of the pen. 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
• 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1 
• 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding (see sections 4.4 and 4.6) 
• 
Pre-existing hypercalcaemia 
• 
Severe renal impairment 
• 
Metabolic bone diseases (including hyperparathyroidism and Paget's disease of the bone) other 
than primary osteoporosis or glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis 
• 
Unexplained elevations of alkaline phosphatase 
• 
Prior external beam or implant radiation therapy to the skeleton 
• 
Patients with skeletal malignancies or bone metastases should be excluded from treatment with 
teriparatide. 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Traceability 
 
In order to improve the traceability of biological medicinal products, the name and the batch number 
of the administered product should be clearly recorded. 
 
Serum and urine calcium 
 
In normocalcaemic patients, slight and transient elevations of serum calcium concentrations have been 
observed following teriparatide injection. Serum calcium concentrations reach a maximum between 4 
and 6 hours and return to baseline by 16 to 24 hours after each dose of teriparatide. Therefore, if blood 
samples for serum calcium measurements are taken, this should be done at least 16 hours after the 
most recent teriparatide injection. Routine calcium monitoring during therapy is not required. 
 
Teriparatide may cause small increases in urinary calcium excretion, but the incidence of 
hypercalciuria did not differ from that in the placebo-treated patients in clinical trials. 
 

 
4 
 
 
Urolithiasis 
 
Teriparatide has not been studied in patients with active urolithiasis. Teriparatide should be used with 
caution in patients with active or recent urolithiasis because of the potential to exacerbate this 
condition. 
 
Orthostatic hypotension 
 
In short-term clinical studies with teriparatide, isolated episodes of transient orthostatic hypotension 
were observed. Typically, an event began within 4 hours of dosing and spontaneously resolved within 
a few minutes to a few hours. When transient orthostatic hypotension occurred, it happened within the 
first several doses, was relieved by placing subjects in a reclining position, and did not preclude 
continued treatment. 
 
Renal impairment 
 
Caution should be exercised in patients with moderate renal impairment. 
 
Younger adult population 
 
Experience in the younger adult population, including premenopausal women, is limited (see section 
5.1). Treatment should only be initiated if the benefit clearly outweighs risks in this population. 
 
Women of childbearing potential should use effective methods of contraception during use of 
teriparatide. If pregnancy occurs, teriparatide should be discontinued (see sections 4.3 and 4.6). 
 
Duration of treatment 
 
Studies in rats indicate an increased incidence of osteosarcoma with long-term administration of 
teriparatide (see section 5.3). Until further clinical data become available, the recommended treatment 
time of 24 months should not be exceeded. 
 
Sodium content 
 
This medicinal product contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per dose, that is to say essentially 
‘sodium-free’. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction 
 
In a study of 15 healthy subjects administered digoxin daily to steady state, a single teriparatide dose 
did not alter the cardiac effect of digoxin. However, sporadic case reports have suggested that 
hypercalcaemia may predispose patients to digitalis toxicity. Because teriparatide transiently increases 
serum calcium, teriparatide should be used with caution in patients taking digitalis. 
 
Teriparatide has been evaluated in pharmacodynamic interaction studies with hydrochlorothiazide. No 
clinically significant interactions were noted. 
 
Co-administration of raloxifene or hormone replacement therapy with teriparatide did not alter the 
effects of teriparatide on serum or urine calcium or on clinical adverse events. 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation: 
Women of childbearing potential / Contraception in females 
 
Women of childbearing potential should use effective methods of contraception during use of 
teriparatide. If pregnancy occurs, teriparatide should be discontinued. 
 
Pregnancy 

 
5 
 
 
 
Teriparatide is contraindicated for use during pregnancy (see section 4.3). 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
Teriparatide is contraindicated for use during breast-feeding. It is not known whether teriparatide is 
excreted in human milk. 
 
Fertility 
 
Studies in rabbits have shown reproductive toxicity (see section 5.3). The effect of teriparatide on 
human foetal development has not been studied. The potential risk for humans is unknown. 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines: 
 
Teriparatide has no or negligible influence on the ability to drive and use machines. Transient, 
orthostatic hypotension or dizziness was observed in some patients. These patients should refrain from 
driving or the use of machines until symptoms have subsided. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects: 
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
The most commonly reported adverse reactions in patients treated with teriparatide are nausea, pain in 
limb, headache and dizziness. 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
Of patients in the teriparatide trials, 82.8 % of the teriparatide patients and 84.5 % of the placebo 
patients reported at least 1 adverse event. 
 
The adverse reactions associated with the use of teriparatide in osteoporosis clinical trials and post-
marketing exposure are summarised in the table below. The following convention has been used for 
the classification of the adverse reactions: very common (≥ 1/10), common (≥ 1/100 to < 1/10), 
uncommon (≥1/1000 to <1/100), rare (≥1/10000 to <1/1000), very rare  
(< 1/10,000). 
 
Blood and lymphatic system disorders 
Common: Anaemia 
Immune System Disorder 
Rare: Anaphylaxis 
Metabolism and nutrition disorders 
Common: Hypercholesterolaemia 
Uncommon: Hypercalcaemia greater than 2.76 mmol/L, hyperuricaemia 
Rare: Hypercalcaemia greater than 3.25 mmol/L 
Psychiatric disorders 
Common: Depression 
Nervous system disorders 
Common: Dizziness, headache, sciatica, syncope 
Ear and labyrinth disorders 
Common: Vertigo 
Cardiac disorders 
Common: Palpitations 
Uncommon: Tachycardia 
Vascular disorders 
Common: Hypotension 
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders 

 
6 
 
 
Common: Dyspnoea 
Uncommon: Emphysema 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Common: Nausea, vomiting, hiatus hernia, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease 
Uncommon: Haemorrhoids 
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders 
Common: Sweating increased 
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders 
Very common: Pain in limb 
Common: Muscle cramps 
Uncommon: Myalgia, arthralgia, back cramp/pain* 
Renal and urinary disorders 
Uncommon: Urinary incontinence, polyuria, micturition urgency, nephrolithiasis 
Rare: Renal failure/impairment 
General disorders and administration site conditions 
Common: Fatigue, chest pain, asthenia, mild and transient injection site events, including pain, 
swelling, erythema, localised bruising, pruritus and minor bleeding at injection site 
Uncommon: Injection site erythema, injection site reaction 
Rare: Possible allergic events soon after injection: acute dyspnoea, oro/facial oedema, generalised 
urticaria, chest pain, oedema (mainly peripheral) 
Investigations 
Uncommon: Weight increased, cardiac murmur, alkaline phosphatase increase 
* Serious cases of back cramp or pain have been reported within minutes of the injection. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
In clinical trials the following reactions were reported at a ≥ 1 % difference in frequency from placebo: 
vertigo, nausea, pain in limb, dizziness, depression, dyspnoea. 
 
Teriparatide increases serum uric acid concentrations. In clinical trials, 2.8 % of teriparatide patients 
had serum uric acid concentrations above the upper limit of normal compared with 0.7 % of placebo 
patients. However, the hyperuricaemia did not result in an increase in gout, arthralgia, or urolithiasis. 
 
In a large clinical trial, antibodies that cross-reacted with teriparatide were detected in 2.8 % of women 
receiving teriparatide. Generally, antibodies were first detected following 12 months of treatment and 
diminished after withdrawal of therapy. There was no evidence of hypersensitivity reactions, allergic 
reactions, effects on serum calcium, or effects on Bone Mineral Density (BMD) response. 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the Yellow Card Scheme.  
 
4.9 
Overdose 
 
Signs and symptoms 
 
Teriparatide has been administered in single doses of up to 100 micrograms and in repeated doses of 
up to 60 micrograms/day for 6 weeks. 
 
The effects of overdose that might be expected include delayed hypercalcaemia and risk of orthostatic 
hypotension. Nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and headache can also occur. 
 
Overdose experience based on post-marketing spontaneous reports 
 
In post-marketing spontaneous reports, there have been cases of medication error where the entire 
contents (up to 800 mcg) of the teriparatide pen have been administered as a single dose. Transient 

 
7 
 
 
events reported have included nausea, weakness/lethargy and hypotension. In some cases, no adverse 
events occurred as a result of the overdose. No fatalities associated with overdose have been reported. 
 
Overdose management 
 
There is no specific antidote for teriparatide. Treatment of suspected overdose should include 
transitory discontinuation of teriparatide, monitoring of serum calcium, and implementation of 
appropriate supportive measures, such as hydration. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties 
 
Pharmaco-therapeutic group: Calcium homeostasis, parathyroid hormones and analogues, ATC 
code: H05 AA02. 
Zandoriah is a biosimilar medicinal product. Detailed information is available on the website of the 
European Medicines Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu.> 
 
Mechanism of action 
 
Endogenous 84-amino-acid parathyroid hormone (PTH) is the primary regulator of calcium and 
phosphate metabolism in bone and kidney. Teriparatide (rhPTH[1-34]) is the active fragment (1-34) of 
endogenous human PTH. Physiological actions of PTH include stimulation of bone formation by 
direct effects on bone-forming cells (osteoblasts) indirectly increasing the intestinal absorption of 
calcium and increasing the tubular re-absorption of calcium and excretion of phosphate by the kidney. 
 
Pharmacodynamic effects 
 
Teriparatide is a bone formation agent to treat osteoporosis. The skeletal effects of teriparatide depend 
upon the pattern of systemic exposure. Once-daily administration of teriparatide increases apposition 
of new bone on trabecular and cortical bone surfaces by preferential stimulation of osteoblastic 
activity over osteoclastic activity. 
 
Clinical efficacy 
 
Risk Factors 
Independent risk factors, for example, low BMD, age, the existence of previous fracture, family 
history of hip fractures, high bone turnover and low body mass index should be considered in order to 
identify women and men at increased risk of osteoporotic fractures who could benefit from treatment. 
 
Premenopausal women with glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis should be considered at high risk for 
fracture if they have a prevalent fracture or a combination of risk factors that place them at high risk 
for fracture (e.g., low bone density [e.g., T-score ≤−2], sustained high dose glucocorticoid therapy 
[e.g., ≥7.5 mg/day for at least 6 months], high underlying disease activity, low sex steroid levels). 
 
Postmenopausal osteoporosis 
The pivotal study included 1,637 postmenopausal women (mean age 69.5 years). At baseline, ninety 
percent of the patients had one or more vertebral fractures and on average, vertebral BMD was 0.82 
g/cm2 (equivalent to a T-score = -2.6). All patients were offered 1,000 mg calcium per day and at least 
400 IU vitamin D per day. Results from up to 24 months (median: 19 months) treatment with 
Teriparatide demonstrate statistically significant fracture reduction (Table 1). To prevent one or more 
new vertebral fractures, 11 women had to be treated for a median of 19 months. 
 
Table 1 
 
Fracture Incidence in Postmenopausal Women 
 
Placebo 
Teriparatide 
Relative Risk 

 
8 
 
 
(N = 544) (%) 
(N = 541) (%) 
(95% CI) 
vs placebo 
New vertebral fracture (≥1)a 
14.3 
5.0 b 
0.35 
(0.22, 0.55) 
Multiple vertebral fractures (≥2)a 
4.9 
1.1 b 
0.23 
(0.09, 0.60) 
Non-vertebral fragility fractures c 
5.5 
2.6 d 
0.47 
(0.25, 0.87) 
Major non-vertebral fragility 
fracturesc (hip, radius, humerus, ribs 
and pelvis) 
3.9 
1.5 d 
0.38 
(0.17, 0.86) 
Abbreviations: N = number of patients randomly assigned to each treatment group; CI = Confidence 
Interval. 
 
a The incidence of vertebral fractures was assessed in 448 placebo and 444 teriparatide patients who had 
baseline and follow-up spine radiographs 
b p≤0.001 compared with placebo 
c A significant reduction in the incidence of hip fractures has not been demonstrated 
d p≤0.025 compared with placebo 
 
 
After 19 months (median) treatment, bone mineral density (BMD) had increased in the lumbar spine 
and total hip, respectively, by 9 % and 4 % compared with placebo (p < 0.001). 
 
Post-treatment management: Following treatment with teriparatide, 1262 postmenopausal women 
from the pivotal trial enrolled in a post-treatment follow-up study. The primary objective of the study 
was to collect safety data of teriparatide. During this observational period, other osteoporosis 
treatments were allowed and additional assessment of vertebral fractures was performed. 
 
During a median of 18 months following discontinuation of teriparatide, there was a 41 % reduction 
(p = 0.004) compared with placebo in the number of patients with a minimum of one new vertebral 
fracture. 
 
In an open-label study, 503 postmenopausal women with severe osteoporosis and a fragility fracture 
within the previous 3 years (83 % had received previous osteoporosis therapy) were treated with 
Teriparatide for up to 24 months. At 24 months, the mean increase from baseline in lumbar spine, total 
hip and femoral neck BMD was 10.5 %, 2.6 %, and 3.9 % respectively. The mean increase in BMD 
from 18 to 24 months was 1.4 %, 1.2 %, and 1.6 % at the lumbar spine, total hip and femoral neck, 
respectively. 
 
A 24-month, randomized, double-blind, comparator-controlled Phase 4 study included 1,360 
postmenopausal women with established osteoporosis. 680 subjects were randomised to teriparatide 
and 680 subjects were randomised to oral risedronate 35 mg/week. At baseline, the women had a mean 
age of 72.1 years and a median of 2 prevalent vertebral fractures; 57.9 % of patients had received 
previous bisphosphonate therapy and 18.8 % took concomitant glucocorticoids during the study. 1,013 
(74.5 %) patients completed the 24-month follow-up. The mean (median) cumulative dose of 
glucocorticoid was 474.3 (66.2) mg in the teriparatide arm and 898.0 (100.0) mg in the risedronate 
arm. The mean (median) vitamin D intake for the teriparatide arm was 1433 IU/day (1400 IU/day) and 
for the risedronate arm was 1191 IU/day (900 IU/day). For those subjects who had baseline and 
follow-up spine radiographs, the incidence of new vertebral fractures was 28/516 (5.4 %) in 
teriparatide- and 64/533 (12.0 %) in risedronate-treated patients, relative risk (95 % CI) = 0.44 (0.29-
0.68), P < 0.0001. The cumulative incidence of pooled clinical fractures (clinical vertebral and non 
vertebral fractures) was 4.8 % in teriparatide and 9.8 % in Risedronate-treated patients, hazard ratio 
(95 % CI) = 0.48 (0.32-0.74), P=0.0009. 
 
Male osteoporosis 
437 patients (mean age 58.7 years) were enrolled in a clinical trial for men with hypogonadal (defined 
as low-morning free testosterone or an elevated FSH or LH) or idiopathic osteoporosis. Baseline 

 
9 
 
 
spinal and femoral neck bone mineral density mean T-scores were -2.2 and -2.1, respectively. At 
baseline, 35 % of patients had a vertebral fracture and 59 % had a non-vertebral fracture. 
 
All patients were offered 1,000 mg calcium per day and at least 400 IU vitamin D per day. Lumbar 
spine BMD significantly increased by 3 months. After 12 months, BMD had increased in the lumbar 
spine and total hip by 5 % and 1 %, respectively, compared with placebo. However, no significant 
effect on fracture rates was demonstrated. 
 
Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis 
The efficacy of teriparatide in men and women (N =428) receiving sustained systemic glucocorticoid 
therapy (equivalent to 5 mg or greater of prednisone for at least 3 months) was demonstrated in the 18-
month primary phase of a 36-month, randomised, double-blind, comparator-controlled study 
(alendronate 10 mg/day). Twenty-eight percent of patients had one or more radiographic vertebral 
fractures at baseline. All patients were offered 1,000 mg calcium per day and 800 IU vitamin D per day. 
 
This study included postmenopausal women (N =277), premenopausal women (N =67), and men (N 
=83). At baseline, the postmenopausal women had a mean age of 61 years, mean lumbar spine BMD 
T-score of −2.7, median prednisone equivalent dose of 7.5 mg/day, and 34 % had one or more 
radiographic vertebral fractures; premenopausal women had a mean age of 37 years, mean lumbar 
spine BMD T-score of −2.5, median prednisone equivalent dose of 10 mg/day, and 9 % had one or 
more radiographic vertebral fractures; and men had a mean age of 57 years, mean lumbar spine BMD 
T-score of −2.2, median prednisone equivalent dose of 10 mg/day, and 24 % had one or more 
radiographic vertebral fractures. 
 
Sixty-nine percent of patients completed the 18-month primary phase. At the 18-month endpoint, 
teriparatide significantly increased lumbar spine BMD (7.2 %) compared with alendronate (3.4 %) 
(p<0.001). Teriparatide increased BMD at the total hip (3.6 %) compared with alendronate (2.2 %) 
(p<0.01), as well as at the femoral neck (3.7 %) compared with alendronate (2.1 %) (p<0.05). In 
patients treated with teriparatide, lumbar spine, total hip and femoral neck BMD increased between 18 
and 24 months by an additional 1.7 %, 0.9 %, and 0.4 %, respectively. 
 
At 36 months, analysis of spinal X-rays from 169 alendronate patients and 173 teriparatide patients 
showed that 13 patients in the alendronate group (7.7 %) had experienced a new vertebral fracture 
compared with 3 patients in the teriparatide group (1.7 %) (p=0.01). In addition, 15 of 214 patients in 
the alendronate group (7.0 %) had experienced a non-vertebral fracture compared with 16 of 214 
patients in the teriparatide group (7.5 %) (p=0.84). 
 
In premenopausal women, the increase in BMD from baseline to 18-month endpoint was significantly 
greater in the teriparatide group compared with the alendronate group at the lumbar spine (4.2 % 
versus −1.9 %; p<0.001) and total hip (3.8 % versus 0.9 %; p =0.005). However, no significant effect 
on fracture rates was demonstrated. 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties 
 
Distribution 
 
The volume of distribution is approximately 1.7 L/kg. The half-life of teriparatide is approximately 1 
hour when administered subcutaneously, which reflects the time required for absorption from the 
injection site. 
 
Biotransformation 
 
No metabolism or excretion studies have been performed with teriparatide, but the peripheral 
metabolism of parathyroid hormone is believed to occur predominantly in liver and kidney. 
 
Elimination 
 

 
10 
 
 
Teriparatide is eliminated through hepatic and extra-hepatic clearance (approximately 62 L/hr in 
women and 94 L/hr in men). 
 
Elderly 
 
No differences in Teriparatide pharmacokinetics were detected with regard to age (range 31 to 85 
years). Dose adjustment based on age is not required. 
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data 
 
Teriparatide was not genotoxic in a standard battery of tests. It produced no teratogenic effects in rats, 
mice or rabbits. There were no important effects observed in pregnant rats or mice administered 
teriparatide at daily doses of 30 to 1,000 µg/kg. However, foetal resorption and reduced litter size 
occurred in pregnant rabbits administered daily doses of 3 to 100 µg/kg. The embryotoxicity observed 
in rabbits may be related to their much greater sensitivity to the effects of PTH on blood-ionised 
calcium compared with rodents. 
 
Rats treated with near-lifetime daily injections had dose-dependent exaggerated bone formation and 
increased incidence of osteosarcoma most probably due to an epigenetic mechanism. Teriparatide did 
not increase the incidence of any other type of neoplasia in rats. Due to the differences in bone 
physiology in rats and humans, the clinical relevance of these findings is probably minor. No bone 
tumors were observed in ovariectomised monkeys treated for 18 months or during a 3-year follow-up 
period after treatment cessation. In addition, no osteosarcomas have been observed in clinical trials or 
during the post-treatment follow-up study. 
 
Animal studies have shown that severely reduced hepatic blood flow decreases exposure of PTH to the 
principal cleavage system (Kupffer cells) and consequently clearance of PTH(1-84). 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients 
 
Acetic acid, glacial 
Sodium acetate, anhydrous 
Mannitol 
Metacresol 
Hydrochloric acid (for pH adjustment) 
Sodium hydroxide (for pH adjustment) 
Water for injections 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities 
 
In the absence of compatibility studies, this medicinal product must not be mixed with other medicinal 
products. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life 
 
2 years 
 
Chemical, physical and microbiological in-use stability has been demonstrated for 28 days at 2°C-8°C. 
Once opened, the product may be stored for a maximum of 28 days at 2°C to 8°C. Other in-use storage 
times and conditions are the responsibility of the user. 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage 
 
Store in a refrigerator (2°C-8°C) at all times. The pen should be returned to the refrigerator 
immediately after use. Do not freeze. Store in the original package in order to protect from light. 

 
11 
 
 
 
Do not store the injection device with the needle attached. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container 
2.4 mL solution in cartridge (siliconized glass USP type I borosilicate glass) with a plunger (halobutyl 
rubber), disc seal (polyisoprene/bromobutyl rubber laminate)/aluminium assembled into a disposable 
pen. 
 
Zandoriah is presented in pack sizes of 1 pen. Each pen contains 28 doses of 20 micrograms (per 80 
microliters). 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling 
 
 Zandoriah is supplied in a pre-filled pen. Each pen should be used by only one patient. A new, sterile 
needle must be used for every injection. Each teriparatide pack is provided with a user Manual that 
fully describes the use of the pen. No needles are supplied with the product.  
The pre-filled pen should be used with the stainless-steel insulin needles of 30-32 gauge with a length 
range between 5-8 mm. Pen needles with a CE mark are recommended for use with the device. 
After each injection, the Zandoriah pen should be returned to the refrigerator. 
 
 Zandoriah should not be used if the solution is cloudy, colored or contains particles. 
 
Please also refer to the user manual for instructions on how to use the pen. 
 
Any unused product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORIZATION HOLDER 
 
CINNAGEN CO, UNIPESSOAL LDA. Rua da Alfândega 78-3rd floor. 9000-059 Funchal, Madeira, 
Portugal. 
                                            
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORIZATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/26/2031/001 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORIZATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORIZATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 

 
12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
A. 
MANUFACTURER(S) 
OF 
THE 
BIOLOGICAL 
ACTIVE 
SUBSTANCE(S) 
AND 
MANUFACTURING 
AUTHORISATION 
HOLDER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE 
AND EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
 
 

 
13 
 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER(S) OF THE BIOLOGICAL ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) AND 
MANUFACTURER(S) 
RESPONSIBLE 
FOR 
BATCH 
RELEASE 
 
Names and addresses of the manufacturer(s) of the biological active substance(s) 
 
CinnaGen Research and Production Company (CinnaGen Co.), 3rd Sq., Simin Dasht Industrial Area, 
Karaj, Alborz, I.R.IRAN. 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer(s) responsible for batch release 
 
UAB Profarma, V.A.Graiciuno 6, LT02241 Vilnius, Lithuania 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to medical prescription. 
 
 
C. 
OTHER 
CONDITIONS 
AND 
REQUIREMENTS 
OF 
THE 
MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
The requirements for submission of periodic safety update reports for this medicinal product are set 
out in the list of Union reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 
2001/83/EC and any subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk Management Plan (RMP)  
 
The MAH shall perform the required pharmacovigilance activities and interventions detailed in the 
agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the marketing authorisation and any agreed subsequent 
updates of the RMP. 
 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• 
At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• 
Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new 
information being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or 
as the result of an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being 
reached.  
 

 
14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 
 

 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING 
 
 

 
16 
 
 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
CARTON OF UNIT PACK  
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Zandoriah 20 micrograms/80 microliters solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
teriparatide 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S) 
 
Each mL contains 250 micrograms of teriparatide. 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS 
 
Glacial acetic acid (E260), sodium acetate, anhydrous(E262), mannitol (E421), metacresol (E507), 
water for injections. 
Hydrochloric acid (E507) and/or sodium hydroxide (E524) solution. 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS 
 
Solution for injection. 
1 pen of 2.4 mL solution. 
 
Each pen contains 28 doses of 20 micrograms (per 80 microliters). 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Read both the package leaflet and the instruction for use of  Zandoriah pen before use. 
Subcutaneous use 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED 
OUT OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN 
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY 
 
Injection needles are not included with the pen. 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
The pen should be discarded 28 days after the first use. 
Date of first use: 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS 
 
Store in a refrigerator. 

 
17 
 
 
Do not freeze. 
Store in the original package in order to protect from light. 
 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
CINNAGEN CO, UNIPESSOAL LDA 
Rua da Alfândega 78-3rd floor 
9000-059 Funchal, Madeira, Portugal. 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/26/2031/001 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY 
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
 Zandoriah 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
 
 

 
18 
 
 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON SMALL IMMEDIATE PACKAGING UNITS 
 
LABEL TEXT 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
 Zandoriah 20 micrograms/80 microliters, injection 
teriparatide 
 
 
2. 
METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION 
 
Subcutaneous use 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE 
 
EXP 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER 
 
Lot 
 
5. 
CONTENTS BY WEIGHT, BY VOLUME OR BY UNIT 
 
2.4 mL 
 
6. 
OTHER 
 
Store in a refrigerator 
 
 

 
19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET 
 
 

 
20 
 
 
Package leaflet: Information for the user 
 Zandoriah 20 micrograms/80 microliters  
solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
teriparatide 
 
This medicine is subject to additional monitoring. This will allow quick identification of new 
safety information. You can help by reporting any side effects you may get. See the end of section 4 
for how to report side effects. 
 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start using this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet: 
 
1. 
What  Zandoriah  is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you use  Zandoriah  
3. 
How to use  Zandoriah  
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store  Zandoriah  
6. 
Content of the pack and other information 
 
1. What is  Zandoriah and what it is used for? 
 
Zandoriah contains the active substance teriparatide that is used to make the bones stronger, and to 
reduce the risk of fractures by stimulating bone formation.  
 
 Zandoriah  is used to treat osteoporosis in adults. Osteoporosis is a disease that causes your bones to 
become thin and fragile. This disease is especially common in women after the menopause, but it can 
also occur in men. Osteoporosis is also common in patients receiving corticosteroids. 
 
2. What you need to know before using  Zandoriah? 
 
Do not use  Zandoriah 
• 
if you are allergic to teriparatide or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in section 
6). 
• 
if you suffer from high calcium levels (pre-existing hypercalcaemia). 
• 
if you suffer from serious kidney problems. 
• 
if you have ever been diagnosed with bone cancer or other cancers that have spread 
(metastasised) to your bones. 
• 
if you have certain bone diseases. If you have a bone disease, tell your doctor. 
• 
if you have unexplained high levels of alkaline phosphatase in your blood, which means you 
might have Paget’s disease of bone (disease with abnormal bone changes). If you are not sure, 
ask your doctor. 
• 
if you have had radiation therapy involving your bones. 
• 
if you are pregnant or breast-feeding. 
 

 
21 
 
 
Warnings and precautions 
 
 Zandoriah  may cause an increase in the amount of calcium in your blood or urine.  
 
Talk to your doctor or pharmacist before or while using  Zandoriah: 
 
• 
if you have continuing nausea, vomiting, constipation, low energy, or muscle weakness. These 
may be signs there is too much calcium in your blood. 
• 
if you suffer from kidney stones or have a history of kidney stones. 
• 
if you suffer from kidney problems (moderate renal impairment).  
 
Some patients get dizzy or get a fast heartbeat after the first few doses. For the first doses, inject  
Zandoriah where you can sit or lie down right away if you get dizzy.  
The recommended treatment time of 24 months should not be exceeded.  
 
 Zandoriah should not be used in growing adults. 
 
Children and adolescents 
 Zandoriah should not be used in children and adolescents (less than 18 years).  
 
Other medicines and  Zandoriah  
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other 
medicines, because occasionally they may interact (e.g. digoxin/digitalis, a medicine used to treat 
heart disease). 
 
Pregnancy and breast-feeding 
Do not use  Zandoriah if you are pregnant or breast-feeding. If you are a woman of child-bearing 
potential, you should use effective methods of contraception during use of  Zandoriah. If you become 
pregnant,  Zandoriah should be discontinued. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice before taking 
any medicine. 
 
Driving and using machines 
Some patients may feel dizzy after injecting  Zandoriah. If you feel dizzy you should not drive or use 
machines until you feel better. 
 
 Zandoriah contains sodium: 
This medicine contains less than 1 mmol sodium (23 mg) per dose, that is to say essentially “sodium-
free”. 
 
 
3. How to use  Zandoriah  
 
Always use this medicine exactly as your doctor has told you to. Check with your doctor or pharmacist 
if you are not sure. 
 
The recommended dose is 20 micrograms given once daily by injection under the skin (sub-cutaneous 
injection) in the thigh or abdomen. To help you remember to use your medicine, inject it at about the 
same time each day.  
 
Inject  Zandoriah each day for as long as your doctor prescribes it for you. The total duration of treatment 
with  Zandoriah should not exceed 24 months. You should not receive more than one treatment course 
of 24 months over your lifetime. 
 Zandoriah can be injected at meal times.  
 

 
22 
 
 
Read the user manual for instructions on how to use the  Zandoriah pre-filled pen. 
 
Injection needles are not included with the pen.  
 
The pre-filled pen should be used with the stainless-steel insulin needles of 30-32 gauge with a length 
range between 5-8 mm.  
Pen needles with a CE mark are recommended for use with the device. 
 
You should use your Zandoriah injection shortly after you take the pen out of the refrigerator as 
described in the user manual. Put the pen back into the refrigerator immediately after you have used it. 
Use a new injection needle for each injection and dispose of it after each use. Never store your pen with 
the needle attached. Never share your  Zandoriah pen with others.  
 
Your doctor may advise you to use  Zandoriah with calcium and vitamin D. Your doctor will tell you 
how much you should take each day. 
 
 Zandoriah can be given with or without food. 
 
If you use more  Zandoriah than you should 
If, by mistake, you have used more  Zandoriah than you should, contact your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
The effects of overdose that might be expected include nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and headache. 
 
If you forget or cannot take  Zandoriah at your usual time,  
Use it as soon as possible on that day.  Do not use a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose. Do 
not use more than one injection in the same day. Do not try to make up for a missed dose.  
 
If you stop taking  Zandoriah  
If you are considering stopping  Zandoriah treatment, please discuss this with your doctor. Your doctor 
will advise you and decide how long you should be treated with  Zandoriah.  
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor or pharmacist. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
The most common side effects are pain in limb (frequency is very common, may affect more than 1 in 
10 people) and feeling sick, headache and dizziness (frequency is common, may affect up to 1 in 10 
people). If you become dizzy (light-headed) after your injection, you should sit or lie down until you 
feel better. If you do not feel better, you should call a doctor before you continue treatment. Cases of 
fainting have been reported in association with teriparatide use.  
 
If you experience discomfort such as redness of the skin, pain, swelling, itching, bruising or minor 
bleeding around the area of the injection (frequency is common), this should clear up in a few days or 
weeks. Otherwise, tell your doctor as soon as possible.  
 
Some patients may have experienced allergic reactions soon after injection, consisting of breathlessness, 
swelling of the face, rash and chest pain (frequency is rare, may affect up to 1 in 1,000 people). In rare 
cases, serious and potentially life-threatening allergic reactions including anaphylaxis can occur. 
 
Other side effects include: 
Common: may affect up to 1 in 10 people 

 
23 
 
 
• 
increase in blood cholesterol levels 
• 
depression 
• 
neuralgic pain in the leg 
• 
feeling faint 
• 
irregular heart beats 
• 
breathlessness 
• 
increased sweating 
• 
muscle cramps 
• 
loss of energy 
• 
tiredness 
• 
chest pain 
• 
low blood pressure 
• 
heartburn (painful or burning sensation just below the breast bone) 
• 
being sick (vomiting) 
• 
a hernia of the tube that carries food to your stomach 
• 
low haemoglobin or red blood cell count (anaemia) 
 
Uncommon: may affect up to 1 in 100 people 
• 
increased heart rate 
• 
abnormal heart sound 
• 
shortness of breath 
• 
haemorrhoids (piles) 
• 
accidental loss or leakage of urine 
• 
increased need to pass water 
• 
weight increase 
• 
kidney stones 
• 
pain in the muscles and pain in the joints. Some patients have experienced severe back cramps 
or pain which lead to hospitalisation. 
• 
increase in blood calcium level 
• 
increase in blood uric acid level 
• 
increase in an enzyme called alkaline phosphatase. 
 
Rare: may affect up to 1 in 1,000 people 
• 
reduced kidney function, including renal failure 
• 
swelling, mainly in the hands, feet and legs. 
 
Reporting of side effects 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. This includes any possible side effects not 
listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting system. By 
reporting side affects you can help provide more information on the safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. How to store  Zandoriah  
 
• 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
• 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the carton and pen after EXP. 
The expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
• 
Store in the original package in order to protect from light. 
• 
 Zandoriah should be stored in a refrigerator (2 °C to 8 °C) at all times. You can use  Zandoriah 
for up to 28 days after the first injection, as long as the pen is stored in a refrigerator (2 °C to 8 
°C). 

 
24 
 
 
• 
Do not freeze  Zandoriah. Avoid placing the pens close to the ice compartment of the 
refrigerator to prevent freezing. Do not use  Zandoriah if it is, or has been, frozen. 
• 
Each pen should be properly disposed of after 28 days, even if it is not completely empty. 
• 
Zandoriah contains a clear and colourless solution. Do not use  Zandoriah if solid particles 
appear or if the solution is cloudy or coloured. 
• 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist 
how to throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help to protect the 
environment. 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
What  Zandoriah contains 
- 
The active substance is teriparatide. Each dose of 80 microliters contains 20 micrograms of 
teriparatide. 
Each pre-filled pen of 2.4 mL contains 600 micrograms of teriparatide (corresponding to 250 
micrograms per mL). 
- 
The other ingredients are glacial acetic acid (E260), sodium acetate, anhydrous (E262), 
mannitol (E421), metacresol and water for injections. In addition, hydrochloric acid (E507) 
solution and/or sodium hydroxide (E524) solution may have been added for pH adjustment. 
 
What  Zandoriah looks like and contents of the pack 
Zandoriah is a colourless and clear solution. It is supplied in a cartridge contained in a pre-filled pen. 
Each pen contains 2.4 mL of solution enough for 28 doses.  
 
The device can be used with the stainless steel insulin pen injection needles with a length range 
between 5-8 mm and ranging between 30-32 gauge. 
 
Needles not included in the package. 
 
Each pack contains 1 pre-filled pen. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
CINNAGEN CO, UNIPESSOAL LDA. Rua da Alfândega 78-3rd floor. 9000-059 Funchal, Madeira, 
Portugal.  
 
Manufacturer 
UAB Profarma, V.A.Graiciuno 6, LT02241 Vilnius, Lithuania. 
 
 
 
 

 
25 
 
 
PEN USER MANUAL 
To watch a video tutorial on how to administer the medicine, please scan the below QR code or follow 
the URL: https://products.cinnagen.com/teriparatide 
 
Zandoriah 20 micrograms (μg)/ 80 microliters  
solution for injection in pre-filled pen 
 
Instructions for use 
Before you use your new pen, please read the section Instructions for use completely. Follow the 
directions carefully when using the pen. Also read the package leaflet provided. 
 
Do not share your pen or your needles as this may risk transmission of infectious agents. 
 
Your pen contains 28 days of medicine. 
 
 
 
Always wash your hands before every injection. Prepare the injection site as directed by your 
doctor or pharmacist. 
 
Step 1: Pull off the cap 
 
 
Step 2: Attach a new needle 
 
Pull off paper tab. 
 
 
Push needle straight onto medicine cartridge. 
 

 
26 
 
 
 
Screw on needle until firmly attached. 
 
Pull off large needle cover and save it. 
 
Step 3: Set dose 
 
Pull out the black injection button until it stops. 
If you cannot pull out the black injection button see Troubleshooting Problem E. 
 
 
Check to make sure red stripe shows. 
 
 
Pull off small needle protector and throw away. 
Note: After removal of inner needle protector, you may see drop(s) of medicine coming out of the 
needle. It is normal and will not affect your dose. 
 
Step 4: Inject dose 
 
Gently hold a fold of skin from thigh or abdomen and insert needle straight into skin. 
 
 

 
27 
 
 
Push in black injection button until it stops. Hold it in and count to 5 slowly. You must wait until the 
count of 5 to make sure you receive the correct dose. Then pull the needle from skin. 
 
 
Important 
 
Step 5: Confirm dose 
 
After completing the injection: 
Once the needle is removed from the skin, take your thumb off the injection 
button.  
Check to make sure the black injection button is all the way in. If the yellow shaft does not show, 
you have completed the injection steps correctly. 
 
 
You should NOT see any of the yellow shaft. If you do and have already injected the medicine, do 
not inject yourself a second time on the same day. Instead, you MUST reset Zandoriah pen. (See 
Troubleshooting Problem A). 
 
 
Step 6: Remove needle 
 
Put large needle cover on needle. Do not try to put the needle cover back on with your hands. 
 
 
Unscrew the covered needle all the way by giving the large needle cover 3 to 5 complete turns. 
 
 
Pull off needle and throw away in a puncture - resistant container. 
 
 

 
28 
 
 
Push the cap back on. Place Zandoriah in the refrigerator immediately after use. 
 
 
Troubleshooting 
 
Problem 
 
Solution 
A. The yellow shaft is still showing after 
I push in the black injection button. 
How do I reset my Zandoriah ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To reset the Zandoriah , follow the steps 
below. 
1. The recommended dose is 20 
micrograms given once daily. If you 
have already injected, DO NOT inject 
yourself a second time on the same day. 
2. Remove the needle. 
3. Attach a new needle, pull off the 
large needle cover and save it. 
4. Pull out the black injection button 
until it stops. Check to make sure the red 
stripe shows. (See step 3) 
5. Pull off the small needle protector 
and throw away. 
6. Point the needle down into an empty 
container. Push in the black injection 
button until it stops. Hold it in and count 
to 5 s-l-o-w-l-y. You may see a small 
stream or drop of fluid. When you have 
finished, the black injection button 
should be all the way in. 
7. If you still see the yellow shaft 
showing, please contact your doctor or 
pharmacist 
8. Put the large needle cover on needle. 
Unscrew the needle all the way by 
giving the needle cover 3 to 5 complete 
turns. Pull off needle cover and throw 
away as directed by your doctor or 
pharmacist. Push the cap back on, and 
place Zandoriah in the refrigerator. (See 
step 6) 
You can prevent this problem by always 
using a NEW needle for each 
injection, and by pushing the black 
injection button all the way in and 
counting to 5 s-l-o-w-l-y. 
 
 

 
29 
 
 
B. How do I know if my Zandoriah  
works? 
 
The Zandoriah is designed to inject the 
full dose every time it is used according 
to the directions in the section How to 
use. The black injection button will be 
all the way in to show that the full dose 
has been injected from the Zandoriah. 
Remember to use a new needle every 
time you inject to be sure your 
Zandoriah will work properly. 
 
C. I see an air bubble in my Zandoriah 
 
A small air bubble will not affect your 
dose nor will it harm you. You can 
continue to take your dose as usual. 
 
D. I cannot get the needle off. 
 
1. Put the large needle cover on the 
needle. (See step 6) 
2. Use the large needle cover to unscrew 
the needle. 
3. Unscrew the needle all the way by 
giving the large needle cover 3 to 5 
complete turns. 
4. If you still cannot get the needle off, 
ask someone to help you. 
 
E. What should I do if I cannot pull out 
the black injection button 
 
Change to a new Zandoriah  to take your 
dose as directed by your doctor or 
pharmacist. 
This indicates that you have now used all 
the medicine that can be injected accurately 
even though you may still see some 
medicine left in the cartridge. 
 
Cleaning and Storage 
 
Cleaning Zandoriah pre-filled pen 
• 
Wipe the outside of the Zandoriah pen with a damp cloth. 
• 
Do not place the Zandoriah pre-filled pen in water, or wash or clean it with any liquid. 
Storing Zandoriah pre-filled pen 
• 
Refrigerate the Zandoriah pen immediately after every use. Read and follow the instructions in 
the Information for the Patient leaflet on how to store your pen. 
• 
Do not store the Zandoriah pen with a needle attached as this may cause air bubbles to form in 
the cartridge and leakage of medicine, which can cause inaccurate dosing. 
• 
Store the Zandoriah with the cap on. 
• 
Never store the Zandoriah pen in the freezer. 
• 
If the medicine has been frozen, throw the device away and use a new Zandoriah pre-filled pen. 
 
Disposal of Pen Needles and Zandoriah pre-filled pen 

 
30 
 
 
• 
Before disposing of the Zandoriah pre-filled pen, be sure to remove the pen needle. 
• 
Put used needles in puncture - resistant container or a hard plastic container with a secure lid. 
Do not throw needles directly into your household waste. 
• 
Do not recycle the filled puncture - resistant container. 
• 
Ask your healthcare professional about options to dispose of the pen and the puncture - resistant 
container properly. 
• 
The directions regarding needle handling are not intended to replace local, healthcare 
professional or institutional policies. 
• 
Dispose of the pen 28 days after first use. 
 
Other Important Notes 
• 
The Zandoriah pre-filled pen contains 28 days of medicine. 
• 
Do not transfer the medicine into a syringe. 
• 
Write down your first injection date on a calendar and product packaging. 
• 
Check the Zandoriah label to make sure you have the correct medicine, and that it has not 
expired. 
• 
Contact your doctor or pharmacist if you notice any of the following: 
− 
The Zandoriah pre-filled pen appears damaged. 
− 
The solution is NOT clear, colourless and free of particles. 
• 
Use a new needle for each injection. 
• 
Zandoriah is not recommended for use by the blind or visually impaired persons without the 
assistance of a person trained in the proper use of the pre-filled pen 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
CINNAGEN CO, UNIPESSOAL LDA. Rua da Alfândega 78-3rd ﬂoor. 9000-059 Funchal, Madeira, 
Portugal. 
 
This leaflet was last revised in  
