1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX I  
 
SUMMARY OF PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICS  
 
 
 
 
 

2 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Zejula 100 mg hard capsules 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each hard capsule contains niraparib tosylate monohydrate equivalent to 100 mg niraparib. 
 
Excipients with known effect 
 
Each hard capsule contains 254.5 mg of lactose monohydrate (see section 4.4). 
 
Each hard capsule shell also contains 0.0172 mg of the colouring agent tartrazine (E 102). 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1.  
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Hard capsule (capsule). 
 
Hard capsule of approximately 22 mm × 8 mm; white body with “100 mg” printed in black ink and 
purple cap with “Niraparib” printed in white ink. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications  
 
Zejula is indicated: 
• 
as monotherapy for the maintenance treatment of adult patients with advanced epithelial (FIGO 
Stages III and IV) high-grade ovarian, fallopian tube or primary peritoneal cancer who are in 
response (complete or partial) following completion of first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. 
• 
as monotherapy for the maintenance treatment of adult patients with platinum-sensitive relapsed 
high grade serous epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer who are in 
response (complete or partial) to platinum-based chemotherapy. 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration  
 
Treatment with Zejula should be initiated and supervised by a physician experienced in the use of 
anticancer medicinal products. 
 
Posology 
 
First-line ovarian cancer maintenance treatment 
The recommended starting dose of Zejula is 200 mg (two 100-mg capsules), taken once daily. 
However, for those patients who weigh ≥77 kg and have baseline platelet count ≥150,000/μL, the 
recommended starting dose of Zejula is 300 mg (three 100-mg capsules), taken once daily (see 
section 4.4 and 4.8). 
 
Recurrent ovarian cancer maintenance treatment 
The dose is three 100 mg hard capsules once daily, equivalent to a total daily dose of 300 mg. 
 
Patients should be encouraged to take their dose at approximately the same time each day. Bedtime 
administration may be a potential method for managing nausea. 
 

3 
It is recommended that treatment should be continued until disease progression or toxicity. 
 
Missing dose 
If patients miss a dose, they should take their next dose at its regularly scheduled time. 
 
Dose adjustments for adverse reactions 
The recommended dose modifications for adverse reactions are listed in Tables 1, 2 and 3. 
 
In general, it is recommended to first interrupt the treatment (but no longer than 28 consecutive days) 
to allow the patient to recover from the adverse reaction and then restart at the same dose. In the case 
that the adverse reaction recurs, it is recommended to interrupt the treatment and then resume at the 
lower dose. If adverse reactions persist beyond a 28-day dose interruption, it is recommended that 
Zejula be discontinued. If adverse reactions are not manageable with this strategy of dose interruption 
and reduction, it is recommended that Zejula be discontinued. 
 
Table 1: Recommended dose modifications for adverse reactions 
Starting dose level 
200 mg 
300 mg 
First dose reduction 
100 mg/day 
200 mg/day (two 100-mg capsules) 
Second dose reduction 
Discontinue Zejula. 
100 mg/daya (one 100-mg capsule) 
a If further dose reduction below 100 mg/day is required, discontinue Zejula. 
 
Table 2: Dose modifications for non-haematologic adverse reactions 
Non-haematologic CTCAE ≥Grade 3 treatment-related 
adverse reaction where prophylaxis is not considered 
feasible or adverse reaction persists despite treatment 
First occurrence: 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 
28 days or until resolution of 
adverse reaction. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose 
level per Table 1. 
Second occurrence: 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 
28 days or until resolution of 
adverse reaction. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose 
or discontinue per Table 1. 
CTCAE ≥Grade 3 treatment-related adverse reaction 
lasting more than 28 days while patient is administered 
Zejula 100 mg/day 
Discontinue treatment. 
CTCAE=Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events. 
 

4 
Table 3: Dose modifications for haematologic adverse reactions 
Haematologic adverse reactions have been observed during the treatment with Zejula especially 
during the initial phase of the treatment. It is therefore recommended to monitor complete blood 
counts (CBCs) weekly during the first month of treatment and modify the dose as needed. After the 
first month, it is recommended to monitor CBCs monthly and periodically after this time (see 
section 4.4). Based on individual laboratory values, weekly monitoring for the second month may 
be warranted. 
Haematologic adverse reaction 
requiring transfusion or 
haematopoietic growth factor 
support 
• 
For patients with platelet count ≤10,000/μL, platelet 
transfusion should be considered. If there are other risk 
factors for bleeding such as co-administration of 
anticoagulation or antiplatelet medicinal products, 
consider interrupting these substances and/or 
transfusion at a higher platelet count. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose per Table 1. 
Platelet count <100,000/μL 
 
First occurrence: 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 28 days and monitor 
blood counts weekly until platelet counts return to 
≥100,000/µL. 
• 
Resume Zejula at same or reduced dose per Table 1 
based on clinical evaluation. 
• 
If platelet count is <75,000/μL at any time, resume at a 
reduced dose per Table 1. 
Second occurrence: 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 28 days and monitor 
blood counts weekly until platelet counts return to 
≥100,000/µL. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose per Table 1. 
• 
Discontinue Zejula if the platelet count has not returned 
to acceptable levels within 28 days of the dose 
interruption period, or if the patient has already 
undergone dose reduction to 100 mg daily. 
Neutrophil <1,000/µL or 
Haemoglobin <8 g/dL 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 28 days and monitor 
blood counts weekly until neutrophil counts return to 
≥1,500/µL or haemoglobin returns to ≥9 g/dL. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose per Table 1. 
• 
Discontinue Zejula if neutrophils and/or haemoglobin 
have not returned to acceptable levels within 28 days of 
the dose interruption period, or if the patient has already 
undergone dose reduction to 100 mg daily. 
Confirmed diagnosis of 
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) 
or acute myeloid leukaemia 
(AML) 
• 
Permanently discontinue Zejula. 
 
Patients with low body weight in recurrent ovarian cancer maintenance treatment 
Approximately 25% of patients in the NOVA study weighed less than 58 kg, and approximately 25% 
of patients weighed more than 77 kg. The incidence of Grade 3 or 4 adverse reactions was greater 
among low body weight patients (78%) than high body weight patients (53%). Only 13% of low body 
weight patients remained at a dose of 300 mg beyond Cycle 3. A starting dose of 200 mg for patients 
weighing less than 58 kg may be considered. 
 
Elderly 
No dose adjustment is necessary for elderly patients (≥65 years). There are limited clinical data in 
patients aged 75 or over. 
 

5 
Renal impairment 
No dose adjustment is necessary for patients with mild to moderate renal impairment. There are no 
data in patients with severe renal impairment or end stage renal disease undergoing haemodialysis; use 
with caution in these patients (see section 5.2). 
 
Hepatic impairment 
No dose adjustment is needed in patients with mild hepatic impairment (either aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) >upper limit of normal (ULN) and total bilirubin (TB)≤ULN or any AST and 
TB>1.0 x – 1.5 x ULN). For patients with moderate hepatic impairment (any AST and TB >1.5 x – 3 x 
ULN) the recommended starting dose of Zejula is 200 mg once daily. There are no data in patients 
with severe hepatic impairment (any AST and TB >3 x ULN); use with caution in these patients (see 
sections 4.4 and 5.2). 
 
Patients with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status 2 to 4 
Clinical data are not available in patients with ECOG performance status 2 to 4. 
 
Paediatric population 
The safety and efficacy of Zejula in children and adolescents aged below 18 years of age have not 
been established. Outside its authorised indications, Zejula in combination with dostarlimab has been 
studied in children aged 5 to less than 18 years with recurrent or refractory solid tumours including 
osteosarcoma and neuroblastoma; however, the study data were limited and the results of the study did 
not allow to conclude that the benefits of such use outweigh the risks. Currently available data are 
described in sections 5.1 and 5.2. 
 
Method of administration 
 
Zejula is for oral use. The capsules should be swallowed whole with water. The capsules should not be 
chewed or crushed. 
 
Zejula capsules can be taken without regard to meals (see section 5.2). 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
Breast-feeding (see section 4.6). 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Haematologic adverse reactions 
 
Haematologic adverse reactions (thrombocytopenia, anaemia, neutropenia) have been reported in 
patients treated with Zejula (see section 4.8). Patients with lower body weight or lower baseline 
platelet count may be at increased risk of Grade 3+ thrombocytopenia (see section 4.2). 
 
Testing complete blood counts weekly for the first month, followed by monthly monitoring for the 
next 10 months of treatment and periodically after this time is recommended to monitor for clinically 
significant changes in any haematologic parameter during treatment (see section 4.2). 
 
If a patient develops severe persistent haematologic toxicity including pancytopenia that does not 
resolve within 28 days following interruption, Zejula should be discontinued. 
 
Due to the risk of thrombocytopenia, anticoagulants and medicinal products known to reduce the 
thrombocyte count should be used with caution (see section 4.8). 
 

6 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukaemia 
 
Cases of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia (MDS/AML), including cases with fatal 
outcome, have been observed in patients treated with Zejula monotherapy or combination therapy in 
clinical trials and postmarketing (see section 4.8). 
 
In clinical trials, the duration of Zejula treatment in patients prior to developing MDS/AML varied 
from 0.5 months to >4.9 years. The cases were typical of secondary, cancer therapy-related 
MDS/AML. All patients had received platinum-containing chemotherapy regimens and many had also 
received other DNA damaging agents and radiotherapy. Some patients had a history of bone marrow 
suppression. In the NOVA trial, the incidence of MDS/AML was higher in the gBRCAmut cohort 
(7.4%) than in the non-gBRCAmut cohort (1.7%). 
 
For suspected MDS/AML or prolonged haematological toxicities, the patient should be referred to a 
haematologist for further evaluation. If MDS/AML is confirmed, Zejula treatment should be 
discontinued and the patient treated appropriately. 
 
Hypertension, including hypertensive crisis 
 
Hypertension, including hypertensive crisis, has been reported with the use of Zejula (see section 4.8). 
Pre-existing hypertension should be adequately controlled before starting Zejula treatment. Blood 
pressure should be monitored at least weekly for two months, monitored monthly afterwards for the 
first year and periodically thereafter during treatment with Zejula. Home blood pressure monitoring 
may be considered for appropriate patients with instruction to contact their health care provider in case 
of rise in blood pressure. 
 
Hypertension should be medically managed with antihypertensive medicinal products as well as 
adjustment of the Zejula dose (see section 4.2), if necessary. In the clinical programme, blood pressure 
measurements were obtained on Day 1 of each 28-day cycle while the patient remained on Zejula. In 
most cases, hypertension was controlled adequately using standard antihypertensive treatment with or 
without Zejula dose adjustment (see section 4.2). Zejula should be discontinued in case of 
hypertensive crisis or if medically significant hypertension cannot be adequately controlled with 
antihypertensive therapy. 
 
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) 
 
There have been reports of PRES in patients receiving Zejula (see section 4.8). PRES is a rare, 
reversible, neurological disorder which can present with rapidly evolving symptoms including 
seizures, headache, altered mental status, visual disturbance, or cortical blindness, with or without 
associated hypertension. A diagnosis of PRES requires confirmation by brain imaging, preferably 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
 
In case of PRES, it is recommended to discontinue Zejula and to treat specific symptoms including 
hypertension. The safety of reinitiating Zejula therapy in patients previously experiencing PRES is not 
known. 
 
Pregnancy/contraception 
 
Zejula should not be used during pregnancy or in women of childbearing potential not willing to use 
highly effective contraception during therapy and for 6 months after receiving the last dose of Zejula 
(see section 4.6). A pregnancy test should be performed on all women of childbearing potential prior 
to treatment. 
 

7 
Hepatic impairment 
 
Patients with severe hepatic impairment could have increased exposure of niraparib based on data 
from patients with moderate hepatic impairment and should be carefully monitored (see sections 4.2 
and 5.2). 
 
Lactose 
 
Zejula hard capsules contain lactose monohydrate. Patients with rare hereditary problems of galactose 
intolerance, total lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption should not take this medicine. 
 
Tartrazine (E 102) 
 
This medicinal product contains tartrazine (E 102), which may cause allergic reactions. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction  
 
Pharmacodynamic interactions 
 
The combination of niraparib with vaccines or immunosuppressant agents has not been studied. 
 
The data on niraparib in combination with cytotoxic medicinal products are limited. Therefore, caution 
should be taken if niraparib is used in combination with vaccines, immunosuppressant agents or with 
other cytotoxic medicinal products. 
 
Pharmacokinetic interactions 
 
No clinical drug interaction studies have been performed with niraparib. 
 
Effect of niraparib on other medicinal products 
 
Induction of CYP1A2  
In vitro, niraparib induces CYP1A2. Therefore, caution is recommended when niraparib is combined 
with active substances the metabolism of which is CYP1A2-dependent and, notably, those having a 
narrow therapeutic range (e.g. clozapine, theophylline, and ropinirole). 
 
Inhibition of efflux transporters [P-glycoprotein (P-gp), Breast Cancer Resistance Protein (BCRP) 
and MATE1/2K)]  
In vitro, niraparib is an inhibitor of P-gp. As no clinical data are available, it cannot be excluded that 
niraparib may increase the systemic exposure of other medicines transported by P-gp that are sensitive 
to intestinal P-gp inhibition (e.g., dabigatran etexilate).  
 
In vitro, niraparib is an inhibitor of BCRP. A clinically relevant interaction with BCRP substrates 
cannot be excluded. Caution is therefore recommended when niraparib is combined with substrates of 
BCRP (e.g., irinotecan, rosuvastatin, simvastatin, atorvastatin, and methotrexate) due to risk of 
increased systemic exposure. 
  
Niraparib is an inhibitor of MATE1 and -2K in vitro. Plasma concentrations of metformin may 
increase when concomitantly administered with niraparib. Close monitoring of glycaemia is 
recommended when starting or stopping niraparib in patients receiving metformin. A dose adjustment 
of metformin may be necessary. 
 

8 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Women of childbearing potential/Contraception in females 
 
Women of childbearing potential should not become pregnant while on treatment and should not be 
pregnant at the beginning of treatment. A pregnancy test should be performed on all women of 
childbearing potential prior to treatment. 
 
Women of childbearing potential must use highly effective contraception during therapy and for 
6 months after receiving the last dose of Zejula. 
 
Pregnancy 
 
There are no or limited amount of data from the use of niraparib in pregnant women. Animal 
reproductive and developmental toxicity studies have not been conducted. However, based on its 
mechanism of action, niraparib could cause embryonic or foetal harm, including embryo-lethal and 
teratogenic effects, when administered to a pregnant woman. 
 
Zejula should not be used during pregnancy. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
It is unknown whether niraparib or its metabolites are excreted in human milk. 
 
Breast-feeding is contraindicated during administration of Zejula and for 1 month after receiving the 
last dose (see section 4.3). 
 
Fertility 
 
There are no clinical data on fertility. A reversible reduction of spermatogenesis was observed in rats 
and dogs (see section 5.3). 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines  
 
Zejula has moderate influence on the ability to drive or use machines. Patients who take Zejula may 
experience asthenia, fatigue, dizziness or difficulties concentrating. Patients who experience these 
symptoms should observe caution when driving or using machines. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects  
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
Adverse reactions of all grades occurring in ≥10% of the 851 patients receiving Zejula monotherapy in 
the pooled PRIMA (either 200 mg or 300 mg starting dose) and NOVA trials were nausea, anaemia, 
thrombocytopenia, fatigue, constipation, vomiting, headache, insomnia, platelet count decreased, 
neutropenia, abdominal pain, decreased appetite, diarrhoea, dyspnoea, hypertension, asthenia, 
dizziness, neutrophil count decreased, cough, arthralgia, back pain, white blood cell count decreased, 
and hot flush. 
 
The most common serious adverse reactions >1% (treatment-emergent frequencies) were 
thrombocytopenia and anaemia. 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
The following adverse reactions have been identified based on clinical trials and post-marketing 
surveillance in patients receiving Zejula monotherapy (see Table 4). 
 

9 
Frequencies of occurrence of undesirable effects are based on pooled adverse events data generated 
from the PRIMA and NOVA studies (fixed starting dose of 300 mg/day) where patient exposure is 
known and defined as: 
 
Very common: ≥1/10 
Common: ≥1/100 to <1/10 
Uncommon: ≥1/1,000 to <1/100 
Rare: ≥1/10,000 to <1/1,000 
Very rare: <1/10,000 
 
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness. 
 
Table 4: Tabulated list of adverse reactions  
System organ class 
Frequency of all CTCAE 
grades 
Frequency of CTCAE 
grade 3 or 4 
Infections and infestations 
Very common 
Urinary tract infection 
Common 
Bronchitis, conjunctivitis 
Uncommon 
Urinary tract infection, 
bronchitis 
Neoplasms benign, malignant 
and unspecified (including 
cysts and polyps) 
Common 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/ 
acute myeloid leukaemiaa 
Common 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/ 
acute myeloid leukaemiaa 
Blood and lymphatic system 
disorders 
Very common 
Thrombocytopenia, anaemia, 
neutropenia, leukopenia 
Uncommon 
Pancytopenia, febrile 
neutropenia 
Very common 
Thrombocytopenia, anaemia, 
neutropenia 
Common 
Leukopenia 
Uncommon 
Pancytopenia, febrile 
neutropenia 
Immune system disorders 
Common 
Hypersensitivityb 
Uncommon 
Hypersensitivity 
Metabolism and nutrition 
disorders 
Very common 
Decreased appetite 
Common 
Hypokalemia 
Common 
Hypokalemia 
Uncommon 
Decreased appetite 
Psychiatric disorders 
Very common 
Insomnia 
Common 
Anxiety, depression,  
cognitive impairmentc 
Uncommon 
Confusional state 
Uncommon 
Insomnia, anxiety, depression, 
confusional state 
Nervous system disorders 
Very common 
Headache, dizziness 
Common 
Dysgeusia 
Rare 
Posterior Reversible 
Encephalopathy Syndrome 
(PRES)a 
Uncommon 
Headache 
Cardiac disorders 
Very common 
Palpitations 
Common 
Tachycardia 
 

10 
System organ class 
Frequency of all CTCAE 
grades 
Frequency of CTCAE 
grade 3 or 4 
Vascular disorders 
Very common 
Hypertension 
Rare 
Hypertensive crisis 
Common 
Hypertension 
Respiratory, thoracic and 
mediastinal disorders 
Very common 
Dyspnoea, cough, 
nasopharyngitis 
Common 
Epistaxis 
Uncommon 
Pneumonitis 
Uncommon 
Dyspnoea, epistaxis, 
pneumonitis 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Very common 
Nausea, constipation, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, 
dyspepsia 
Common 
Dry mouth, abdominal 
distension, mucosal 
inflammation, stomatitis 
Common 
Nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain 
Uncommon 
Diarrhoea, constipation, 
mucosal inflammation, 
stomatitis, dry mouth  
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
disorders 
Common 
Photosensitivity, rash 
Uncommon 
Photosensitivity, rash 
Musculoskeletal and 
connective tissue disorders 
Very common 
Back pain, arthralgia 
Common 
Myalgia 
Uncommon 
Back pain, arthralgia, myalgia 
General disorders and 
administration site conditions 
Very common 
Fatigue, asthenia 
Common 
Oedema peripheral 
Common 
Fatigue, asthenia 
Investigations 
Common 
Gamma-glutamyl transferase 
increased, AST increased, 
blood creatinine increased, 
ALT increased, blood alkaline 
phosphatase increased, weight 
decreased 
Common 
Gamma-glutamyl transferase 
increased, ALT increased 
Uncommon 
AST increased, blood alkaline 
phosphatase increased 
 
CTCAE=Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.02. 
a Based on niraparib clinical trial data. This is not limited to pivotal ENGOT-OV16 monotherapy 
study. 
b Includes hypersensitivity, drug hypersensitivity, anaphylactoid reaction, drug eruption, angioedema, 
and urticaria. 
c Includes memory impairment, concentration impairment. 
 
The adverse reactions noted in the group of patients who were administered a 200 mg starting dose of 
Zejula based on baseline weight or platelet count were of similar or lesser frequency compared to the 
group administered a fixed starting dose of 300 mg (Table 4). 
 
See below for specific information regarding frequency of thrombocytopenia, anaemia and 
neutropenia. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Haematologic adverse reactions (thrombocytopenia, anaemia, neutropenia) including clinical 
diagnoses and/or laboratory findings generally occurred early during niraparib treatment with the 
incidence decreasing over time. 

11 
 
In NOVA and PRIMA, patients eligible for Zejula therapy had the following baseline haematologic 
parameters: absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥1,500 cells/µL; platelets ≥100,000 cells/µL and 
haemoglobin ≥9 g/dL (NOVA) or ≥10 g/dL (PRIMA) prior to therapy. In the clinical programme, 
haematologic adverse reactions were managed with laboratory monitoring and dose modifications (see 
section 4.2). 
 
In PRIMA, patients who were administered a starting dose of Zejula based on baseline weight or 
platelet count, Grade ≥3 thrombocytopenia, anaemia and neutropenia were reduced from 48% to 21%, 
36% to 23% and 24% to 15%, respectively, compared to the group administered a fixed starting dose 
of 300 mg. Discontinuation due to thrombocytopenia, anaemia, and neutropenia occurred in 3%, 3%, 
and 2% of patients, respectively. 
 
Thrombocytopenia 
In PRIMA, 39% of Zejula-treated patients experienced Grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia compared to 
0.4% of placebo-treated patients with a median time from first dose to first onset of 22 days (range: 
15 to 335 days) and with a median duration of 6 days (range: 1 to 374 days). Discontinuation due to 
thrombocytopenia occurred in 4% of patients receiving niraparib. 
 
In NOVA, approximately 60% of patients experienced thrombocytopenia of any grade, and 34% of 
patients experienced Grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia. In patients with baseline platelet count less than 
180 × 109/L, thrombocytopenia of any grade and Grade 3/4 occurred in 76% and 45% of patients, 
respectively. The median time to onset of thrombocytopenia regardless of grade and Grade 3/4 
thrombocytopenia was 22 and 23 days, respectively. The rate of new incidences of thrombocytopenia 
after intensive dose modifications were performed during the first two months of treatment from 
Cycle 4 was 1.2%. The median duration of thrombocytopenia events of any grade was 23 days, and 
the median duration of Grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia was 10 days. Patients treated with Zejula who 
develop thrombocytopenia might have an increased risk of haemorrhage. In the clinical programme, 
thrombocytopenia was managed with laboratory monitoring, dose modification and platelet 
transfusion where appropriate (see section 4.2). Discontinuation due to thrombocytopenia events 
(thrombocytopenia and platelet count decreased) occurred in approximately 3% of patients. 
 
In NOVA, 13% (48/367) of patients experienced bleeding with concurrent thrombocytopenia; all 
bleeding events concurrent with thrombocytopenia were Grade 1 or 2 in severity except for one event 
of Grade 3 petechiae and haematoma observed concurrently with a serious adverse reaction of 
pancytopenia. Thrombocytopenia occurred more commonly in patients whose baseline platelet count 
was less than 180 × 109/L. Approximately 76% of patients with lower baseline platelets 
(<180 × 109/L) who received Zejula experienced thrombocytopenia of any grade, and 45% of patients 
experienced Grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia. Pancytopenia has been observed in <1% of patients 
receiving niraparib. 
 
Anaemia 
In PRIMA, 31% of Zejula-treated patients experienced Grade 3/4 anaemia compared to 2% of 
placebo-treated patients with a median time from first dose to first onset of 80 days (range: 15 to 
533 days) and with a median duration of 7 days (range: 1 to 119 days). Discontinuation due to 
anaemia occurred in 2% of patients receiving niraparib. 
 
In NOVA, approximately 50% of patients experienced anaemia of any grade, and 25% experienced 
Grade 3/4 anaemia. The median time to onset of anaemia of any grade was 42 days, and 85 days for 
Grade 3/4 events. The median duration of anaemia of any grade was 63 days, and 8 days for Grade 3/4 
events. Anaemia of any grade might persist during Zejula treatment. In the clinical programme, 
anaemia was managed with laboratory monitoring, dose modification (see section 4.2), and where 
appropriate with red blood cell transfusions. Discontinuation due to anaemia occurred in 1% of 
patients. 
 
Neutropenia 
In PRIMA, 21% of Zejula-treated patients experienced Grade 3/4 neutropenia compared to 1% of 

12 
placebo-treated patients with a median time from first dose to first onset of 29 days (range: 15 to 
421 days) and with a median duration of 8 days (range: 1 to 42 days). Discontinuation due to 
neutropenia occurred in 2% of patients receiving niraparib. 
 
In NOVA, approximately 30% of patients experienced neutropenia of any grade, and 20% of patients 
experienced Grade 3/4 neutropenia. The median time to onset of neutropenia of any grade was 
27 days, and 29 days for Grade 3/4 events. The median duration of neutropenia of any grade was 
26 days, and 13 days for Grade 3/4 events. In addition, Granulocyte-Colony Stimulating Factor 
(G-CSF) was administered to approximately 6% of patients treated with niraparib as concomitant 
therapy for neutropenia. Discontinuation due to neutropenia events occurred in 2% of patients. 
 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/Acute myeloid leukaemia 
In clinical studies, MDS/AML occurred in 1% patients treated with Zejula, with 41% of cases having a 
fatal outcome. The incidence was higher in patients with relapsed ovarian cancer who had received 
2 or more lines of prior platinum chemotherapy and with gBRCAmut following 75 months survival 
follow-up. All patients had potential contributing factors for the development of MDS/AML, having 
received previous chemotherapy with platinum agents. Many had also received other DNA damaging 
agents and radiotherapy. The majority of reports were in gBRCAmut carriers. Some patients had a 
history of previous cancer or of bone marrow suppression. 
 
In PRIMA, the incidence of MDS/AML was 2.3% in patients receiving Zejula and 1.6% in patients 
receiving placebo with a follow-up of 74 months. 
 
In NOVA, in patients with relapsed ovarian cancer who had received at least two prior lines of 
platinum chemotherapy, the overall incidence of MDS/AML was 3.8% in patients receiving Zejula 
and 1.7% in patients receiving placebo with a follow-up of 75 months. In gBRCAmut and non-
gBRCAmut cohorts, the incidence of MDS/AML was 7.4% and 1.7% in patients receiving Zejula and 
3.1% and 0.9% in patients receiving placebo, respectively. 
 
Hypertension 
In PRIMA, Grade 3/4 hypertension occurred in 6% of Zejula-treated patients compared to 1% of 
placebo-treated patients with a median time from first dose to first onset of 50 days (range: 1 to 
589 days) and with a median duration of 12 days (range: 1 to 61 days). No patients discontinued 
Zejula due to hypertension. 
 
In NOVA, hypertension of any grade occurred in 19.3% of patients treated with Zejula. Grade 3/4 
hypertension occurred in 8.2% of patients. Hypertension was readily managed with anti-hypertensive 
medicinal products. Discontinuation due to hypertension occurred in <1% of patients. 
 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose  
 
There is no specific treatment in the event of overdose with Zejula, and symptoms of overdose are not 
established. In the event of an overdose, physicians should follow general supportive measures and 
should treat symptomatically. 
 
 

13 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties  
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: antineoplastic agents, other antineoplastic agents, ATC code: L01XK02. 
 
Mechanism of action and pharmacodynamic effects 
 
Niraparib is an inhibitor of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) enzymes, PARP-1 and PARP-2, 
which play a role in DNA repair. In vitro studies have shown that niraparib-induced cytotoxicity may 
involve inhibition of PARP enzymatic activity and increased formation of PARP-DNA complexes 
resulting in DNA damage, apoptosis and cell death. Increased niraparib-induced cytotoxicity was 
observed in tumour cell lines with or without deficiencies in the BReast CAncer (BRCA) 1 and 2 
tumour suppressor genes. In orthotopic high-grade serous ovarian cancer patient-derived xenograft 
tumours (PDX) grown in mice, niraparib has been shown to reduce tumour growth in BRCA 1 and 2 
mutant, BRCA wild-type but homologous recombination (HR) deficient, and in tumours that are BRCA 
wild-type and without detectable HR deficiency. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety 
 
First-line ovarian cancer maintenance treatment  
 
PRIMA was a Phase 3 double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in which patients (n = 733) in complete 
or partial response to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy were randomised 2:1 to niraparib or 
matched placebo. PRIMA was initiated with a starting dose of 300 mg daily in 475 patients (whereof 
317 was randomised to the niraparib arm vs 158 in the placebo arm) in continuous 28-day cycles. The 
starting dose in PRIMA was changed with Amendment 2 of the Protocol. From that point forward, 
patients with a baseline body weight ≥77 kg and baseline platelet count ≥150,000/µL were 
administered niraparib 300 mg (n = 34) or placebo daily (n = 21) while patients with a baseline body 
weight <77 kg or baseline platelet count <150,000/μL were administered niraparib 200 mg (n = 122) 
or placebo daily (n = 61). 
 
Patients were randomised post completion of first-line platinum-based chemotherapy plus or minus 
surgery. Subjects were randomised within 12 weeks of the first day of the last cycle of chemotherapy. 
Subjects had ≥6 and ≤9 cycles of platinum-based therapy. Following interval debulking surgery 
subjects had ≥2 post-operative cycles of platinum-based therapy. Patients who had received 
bevacizumab with chemotherapy but could not receive bevacizumab as maintenance therapy were not 
excluded from the study. Patients could not have received prior PARP inhibitor (PARPi) therapy, 
including niraparib. Patients who had neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by interval debulking 
surgery could have visible residual or no residual disease. Patients with Stage III disease who had 
complete cytoreduction (i.e., no visible residual disease) after primary debulking surgery were 
excluded. Randomisation was stratified by best response during the front-line platinum regimen 
(complete response vs partial response), neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) (Yes vs No); and 
homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status [positive (HR-deficient) vs negative (HR-
proficient) or not determined]. Testing for HRD was performed using the HRD test on tumour tissue 
obtained at the time of initial diagnosis. The CA-125 levels should be in the normal range (or a CA-
125 decrease by >90%) during the patient’s front-line therapy, and be stable for at least 7 days. 
 
Patients began treatment on Cycle 1/Day 1 (C1/D1) with niraparib 200 or 300 mg or matched placebo 
administered daily in continuous 28-day cycles. Clinic visits occurred each cycle (4 weeks ± 3 days). 
 
The primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS), as determined by blinded independent 
central review (BICR) per RECIST, version 1.1. PFS testing was performed hierarchically: first in the 
HR-deficient population, then in the overall population. Secondary efficacy endpoints included PFS 
after the first subsequent therapy (PFS2) and overall survival (OS) (Table 5). The median age was 
62 years among patients randomised to niraparib (range 32 to 85 years) or placebo (range 33 to 88 
years). Eighty-nine percent of all patients were white. Sixty-nine percent of patients randomised to 

14 
niraparib and 71% of patients randomised to placebo had an ECOG of 0 at study baseline. In the 
overall population, 65% of patients had stage III disease and 35% had stage IV disease. In the overall 
population, the primary tumour site in most patients (≥80%) was the ovary; most patients (>90%) had 
tumours with serous histology. Sixty-seven percent of patients received NACT. Sixty-nine percent of 
patients had a complete response to the first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. A total of 6 patients in 
the Zejula group had received bevacizumab as prior treatment for their ovarian cancer. 
 
PRIMA demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in PFS for patients randomised to 
niraparib as compared with placebo in the HR-deficient and overall population (Table 5, and Figures 1 
and 2). Efficacy results for the final analysis of OS data are presented in Table 5. 
 
Table 5: Efficacy results – PRIMA 
 
HR-deficient population 
Overall population 
Zejula 
(N = 247) 
Placebo 
(N = 126) 
Zejula 
(N = 487) 
Placebo 
(N = 246) 
Primary endpoint 
(determined by BICR) 
 
PFS median, months 
(95% CI) 
21.9 
(19.3, NE) 
10.4 
(8.1, 12.1) 
13.8 
(11.5, 14.9) 
8.2 
(7.3, 8.5) 
Hazard ratio 
(95% CI) 
0.43 
(0.31, 0.59) 
0.62 
(0.50, 0.76) 
p-value 
<0.0001 
<0.0001 
Secondary endpointsa, b, c 
PFS2 median, months 
(95% CI) 
43.4 
(37.2, 54.1) 
39.3 
(30.3, 55.7) 
30.1 
(27.1, 33.1) 
27.6 
(24.2, 33.1) 
Hazard ratio 
(95% CI) 
0.87 
(0.66, 1.17) 
0.96 
(0.79, 1.17) 
OS median, monthsd 
(95% CI) 
71.9 
(55.5, NE) 
69.8 
(51.6, NE) 
46.6 
(43.7, 52.8) 
48.8 
(43.1, 61.0) 
Hazard ratio 
(95% CI) 
0.95 
(0.70, 1.29) 
1.01 
(0.84, 1.23) 
PFS = progression-free survival; CI = confidence interval; NE = not evaluable; PFS2 = PFS after the 
first subsequent therapy; OS = overall survival. 
a Data based on final analysis. 
b In the HR-deficient population and overall population, 15.8% and 11.7% of patients in the Zejula 
arm received subsequent PARPi therapy, respectively. 
c In the HR-deficient population and overall population, 48.4% and 37.8% of placebo patients 
received subsequent PARPi therapy, respectively. 
d The maturity of OS data for the HR-deficient population and overall population was 49.6% and 
62.5%, respectively. 

15 
Figure 1: Progression-free survival in the HR-deficient population – PRIMA (ITT) 
 
 
Figure 2: Progression-free survival in the overall population – PRIMA (ITT)  
 
HR (95% CI) 
0.43 (0.310,0.588) 
Zejula 
Placebo 
Time since Randomization (Months) 
Estimated Survival Function (%) 
Censored Observations 
Zejula 
Placebo 
HR (95% CI)              0.62 (0.502,0.755) 
 Placebo 
Censored Observations
 Zejula 
Estimated Survival Function (%) 
Time since Randomization (Months) 
Zejula 
Placebo 

16 
PFS subgroup analyses  
 
Within the HR-deficient population, a PFS hazard ratio of 0.40 (95% CI: 0.27, 0.62) was observed in 
the subgroup of patients with BRCA mutation ovarian cancer (n = 223). In the subgroup of HR-
deficient patients without a BRCA mutation (n = 150), a hazard ratio of 0.50 (95% CI: 0.31, 0.83) was 
observed. 
 
The median PFS in the HR-proficient population (n = 249) was 8.1 months for patients randomised to 
Zejula compared with 5.4 months for placebo with a hazard ratio of 0.68 (95% CI: 0.49, 0.94). 
 
In exploratory subgroup analyses of patients who were administered 200 or 300 mg dose of Zejula 
based on baseline weight or platelet count, comparable efficacy (investigator-assessed PFS) was 
observed with a PFS hazard ratio of 0.54 (95% CI: 0.33, 0.91) in the HR-deficient population, and 
with a hazard ratio of 0.68 (95% CI: 0.49, 0.94) in the overall population. In the HR-proficient 
subgroup, the dose of 200 mg appeared to give a lower treatment effect compared to the 300 mg dose. 
 
OS subgroup analyses 
 
In the subgroup of HR-deficient patients with BRCA mutation ovarian cancer (n = 223), an OS hazard 
ratio of 0.94 (95% CI: 0.63, 1.41) was observed. In the subgroup of HR-deficient patients without a 
BRCA mutation (n = 149), a hazard ratio of 0.97 (95% CI: 0.62, 1.53) was observed. 
 
The median OS in the HR-proficient population (n = 249) was 36.6 months for patients randomised to 
Zejula compared with 32.2 months for placebo, with a hazard ratio of 0.93 (95% CI: 0.69, 1.26). 
 
 
Platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer maintenance treatment 
 
The safety and efficacy of niraparib as maintenance therapy was studied in a Phase 3 randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled international trial (NOVA) in patients with relapsed predominantly 
high grade serous epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer who were platinum 
sensitive, defined by complete response (CR) or partial response (PR) for more than six months to 
their penultimate (next to last) platinum-based therapy. To be eligible for niraparib treatment, the 
patient should be in response (CR or PR) following completion of last platinum-based chemotherapy. 
The CA-125 levels should be normal (or a >90% decrease in CA-125 from baseline) following their 
last platinum treatment and be stable for at least 7 days. Patients could not have received prior PARPi 
therapy, including Zejula. Eligible patients were assigned to one of two cohorts based on the results of 
a germline BRCA (gBRCA) mutation test. Within each cohort, patients were randomised using a 2:1 
allocation of niraparib and placebo. Patients were assigned to the gBRCAmut cohort based on blood 
samples for gBRCA analysis that were taken prior to randomisation. Testing for tumour BRCA 
(tBRCA) mutation and HRD was performed using the HRD test on tumour tissue obtained at the time 
of initial diagnosis or at the time of recurrence. 
 
Randomisation within each cohort was stratified by time to progression after the penultimate platinum 
therapy before study enrolment (6 to <12 months and ≥12 months); use or not of bevacizumab in 
conjunction with the penultimate or last platinum regimen; and best response during the most recent 
platinum regimen (complete response and partial response). 
 
Patients began treatment on Cycle 1/Day 1 (C1/D1) with niraparib 300 mg or matched placebo 
administered daily in continuous 28-day cycles. Clinic visits occurred each cycle (4 weeks ± 3 days). 
 
In the NOVA study, 48% of patients had a dose interruption in Cycle 1. Approximately 47% of 
patients restarted at a reduced dose in Cycle 2. 
 
The most commonly used dose in niraparib-treated patients in the NOVA study was 200 mg. 
 

17 
Progression-free survival (PFS) was determined per RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
Tumors, version 1.1) or clinical signs and symptoms and increased CA-125. PFS was measured from 
the time of randomisation (which occurred up to 8 weeks after completion of the chemotherapy 
regimen) to disease progression or death. 
 
The primary efficacy analysis for PFS was determined by blinded central independent assessment and 
was prospectively defined and assessed for the gBRCAmut cohort and the non-gBRCAmut cohort 
separately. Overall survival (OS) analyses were secondary outcome measures. 
 
Secondary efficacy endpoints included chemotherapy-free interval (CFI), time to first subsequent 
therapy (TFST), PFS after the first subsequent therapy (PFS2), and OS. 
 
Demographics, baseline disease characteristics, and prior treatment history were generally well 
balanced between the niraparib and placebo arms in the gBRCAmut (n = 203) and the non-gBRCAmut 
cohorts (n = 350). Median ages ranged from 57 to 63 years across treatments and cohorts. The primary 
tumour site in most patients (>80%) within each cohort was the ovary; most patients (>84%) had 
tumours with serous histology. A high proportion of patients in both treatment arms in both cohorts 
had received 3 or more prior lines of chemotherapy, including 49% and 34% of niraparib patients in 
the gBRCAmut and non-gBRCAmut cohorts, respectively. Most patients were age 18 to 64 years 
(78%), Caucasian (86%) and had an ECOG performance status of 0 (68%). 
 
In the gBRCAmut cohort, the median number of treatment cycles was higher in the niraparib arm than 
the placebo arm (14 and 7 cycles, respectively). More patients in the niraparib group continued 
treatment for more than 12 months than patients in the placebo group (54.4% and 16.9% respectively). 
 
In the overall non-gBRCAmut cohort, the median number of treatment cycles was higher in the 
niraparib arm than in the placebo arm (8 and 5 cycles, respectively). More patients in the niraparib 
group continued treatment for more than 12 months than patients in the placebo group (34.2% and 
21.1%, respectively). 
 
The study met its primary objective of statistically significantly improved PFS for niraparib 
maintenance monotherapy compared with placebo in the gBRCAmut cohort as well as in the overall 
non-gBRCAmut cohort. Table 6 and Figures 3 and 4 show the results for the PFS primary endpoint for 
the primary efficacy populations (gBRCAmut cohort and the overall non-gBRCAmut cohort). 
 
Table 6: Summary of primary objective outcomes in the NOVA study 
 
gBRCAmut cohort 
Non-gBRCAmut cohort 
 
Zejula 
(N = 138) 
Placebo 
(N = 65) 
Zejula 
(N = 234) 
Placebo 
(N = 116) 
PFS median 
(95% CI) 
21.0 
(12.9, NE) 
5.5 
(3.8, 7.2) 
9.3 
(7.2, 11.2) 
3.9 
(3.7, 5.5) 
p-value 
<0.0001 
<0.0001 
Hazard ratio 
(Zejula:placebo) 
(95% CI) 
0.27 
(0.173, 0.410) 
0.45 
(0.338, 0.607) 
PFS = progression-free survival; CI = confidence interval; NE = not evaluable. 
 
 

18 
Figure 3: 
Progression-free survival in the gBRCAmut cohort based on IRC assessment - 
NOVA (ITT) 
 
 
Figure 4: 
Progression-free survival in the non-gBRCAmut cohort /overall based on IRC 
assessment – NOVA (ITT) 
 
 
Secondary efficacy endpoints in NOVA 
 
At the final analysis, the median PFS2 in the gBRCAmut cohort was 29.9 months for patients treated 
with niraparib compared to 22.7 months for patients on placebo (HR = 0.70; 95% CI: 0.50, 0.97). The 
median PFS2 in the non-gBRCAmut cohort was 19.5 months for patients treated with niraparib 
compared to 16.1 months for patients on placebo (HR = 0.80; 95% CI: 0.63, 1.02). 
 
At the final analysis of overall survival, the median OS in the gBRCAmut cohort (n = 203) was 
40.9 months for patients treated with niraparib compared with 38.1 months for patients on placebo 
(HR = 0.85; 95% CI: 0.61, 1.20). The cohort maturity for the gBRCAmut cohort was 76%. The median 
OS in the non-gBRCAmut cohort (n = 350) was 31.0 months for patients treated with niraparib 
Time since Randomization (Months) 
Estimated Survival Function 
Treatment 
HR (95% CI) 
 0.27 (0.173,0.410) 
A: Zejula 
B: Placebo 
Time since Randomization (Months) 
Estimated Survival Function 
A: Zejula 
B: Placebo 
Treatment 
HR (95% CI)  
0.45 (0.338,0.607) 

19 
compared with 34.8 months for patients on placebo (HR = 1.06; 95% CI: 0.81, 1.37). The cohort 
maturity for the non-gBRCAmut cohort was 79%. 
 
Patient-reported outcomes 
 
Patient-reported outcome data from validated survey tools (FOSI and EQ-5D) indicate that niraparib-
treated patients reported no difference from placebo in measures associated with quality of life (QoL). 
 
Paediatric population 
 
The European Medicines Agency has waived the obligation to submit the results of studies with Zejula 
in all subsets of the paediatric population in ovarian carcinoma, excluding rhabdomyosarcoma and 
germ cell tumours (see section 4.2 for information on paediatric use). However, paediatric 
development was conducted in children and adolescents with other oncology conditions. 
 
In a Phase 1 study (SCOOP), the safety, pharmacokinetics, and antitumour activity of Zejula in 
combination with dostarlimab were evaluated in 47 children and adolescents with recurrent or 
refractory solid tumours including osteosarcoma and neuroblastoma. Patients aged 5 to ˂18 years 
received Zejula 75 to 200 mg daily. 
 
The study was terminated prematurely due to observed toxicities in conjunction with insufficient 
efficacy. No efficacy response was observed in the 17 patients with osteosarcoma or neuroblastoma 
included in the expansion part of the study. The safety profile of the combination in the paediatric 
population cannot be considered established due to the limited number of paediatric patients evaluated 
with limited exposure. See section 4.2 for information on paediatric use. 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties  
 
Absorption 
 
Following a single-dose administration of 300 mg niraparib, niraparib was measurable in plasma 
within 30 minutes and the mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax) for niraparib was reached within 
3 to 5 hours (ranged 508-875 ng/mL across studies). Following multiple oral doses of niraparib from 
30 mg to 400 mg once daily, accumulation of niraparib was approximately 2 to 3 folds. 
 
The systemic exposures (Cmax and AUC) to niraparib increased in a dose-proportional manner when 
the dose of niraparib increased from 30 mg to 400 mg. The absolute bioavailability of niraparib is 
approximately 73%, indicating minimal first pass effect. In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of 
niraparib, the inter-individual variability in bioavailability was estimated to a coefficient of variation 
(CV) of 33.8%. 
 
A concomitant high-fat meal did not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of niraparib after 
administration of 300 mg of niraparib capsule (Cmax decreased by 22% and AUCinf increased by 10% 
compared with fasting conditions; see section 4.2). 
 
The tablet and capsule formulations have been demonstrated to be bioequivalent. Following 
administration of either one 300 mg tablet or three 100 mg capsules of niraparib in 108 patients with 
solid tumours under fasting conditions, the 90% confidence intervals of the geometric mean ratios for 
tablet compared to capsules for Cmax, AUClast and AUC∞ fell within the limits of bioequivalence 
(0.80 and 1.25). 
 
Distribution 
 
Niraparib was moderately protein bound in human plasma (83%), mainly with serum albumin. In a 
population pharmacokinetic analysis of niraparib, the apparent volume of distribution (Vd/F) was 
1,206 L (based on a 70 kg patient) in cancer patients (CV 18.4%), indicating extensive tissue 
distribution of niraparib. 

20 
 
Biotransformation 
 
Niraparib is metabolised primarily by carboxylesterases (CEs) to form a major inactive metabolite, 
M1. In a mass balance study, M1 and M10 (the subsequently formed M1 glucuronides) were the major 
circulating metabolites. 
 
Elimination 
 
Following a single oral 300-mg dose of niraparib, the mean terminal half-life (t½) of niraparib ranged 
from 44 to 54 hours (approximately 2 days) across studies. In a population pharmacokinetic analysis, 
the apparent total clearance (CL/F) of niraparib was 15.9 L/h in cancer patients (CV 24.0%). 
 
Niraparib is eliminated primarily through the hepatobiliary and renal routes. Following an oral 
administration of a single 300-mg dose of [14C]-niraparib, on average 86.2% (range 71% to 91%) of 
the dose was recovered in urine and faeces over 21 days. Radioactive recovery in the urine accounted 
for 47.5% (range 33.4% to 60.2%) and in the faeces for 38.8% (range 28.3% to 47%) of the dose. In 
pooled samples collected over 6 days, 40% of the dose was recovered in the urine primarily as 
metabolites and 31.6% of the dose was recovered in the faeces primarily as unchanged niraparib. 
 
In vitro studies 
 
Niraparib is an inducer of CYP1A2 in vitro (see section 4.5). 
 
Niraparib is a substrate of P-gp and BCRP. However, due to niraparib’s high permeability and 
bioavailability, the risk of clinically relevant interactions with medicinal products that inhibit these 
transporters is unlikely. 
 
Niraparib is an inhibitor of P-gp, BCRP, MATE1/2K and organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1) in vitro 
(see section 4.5).  
 
Special populations 
 
Renal impairment 
In the population pharmacokinetic analysis, patients with mild (creatinine clearance 60-90 mL/min) 
and moderate (30-60 mL/min) renal impairment had mildly reduced niraparib clearance compared to 
individuals with normal renal function. The difference in exposure is not considered to warrant dose 
adjustment. No patients with pre-existing severe renal impairment or end-stage renal disease 
undergoing hemodialysis were identified in clinical studies (see section 4.2). 
 
Hepatic impairment 
In the population pharmacokinetic analysis of data from clinical studies in patients, pre-existing mild 
hepatic impairment (n = 155) did not influence the clearance of niraparib. In a clinical study of cancer 
patients using NCI-ODWG criteria to classify the degree of hepatic impairment, niraparib AUCinf in 
patients with moderate hepatic impairment (n = 8) was 1.56 (90% CI: 1.06, 2.30) times the niraparib 
AUCinf in patients with normal hepatic function (n = 9) following administration of a single 300 mg 
dose. Niraparib dose adjustment is recommended for patients with moderate hepatic impairment (see 
section 4.2). Moderate hepatic impairment did not have an effect on niraparib Cmax or on niraparib 
protein binding. The pharmacokinetics of niraparib have not been assessed in patients with severe 
hepatic impairment (see sections 4.2 and 4.4). 
 
Weight, age and race 
Increasing weight was found to increase niraparib volume of distribution in the population 
pharmacokinetic analysis. No impact of weight was identified on niraparib clearance or overall 
exposure. 
 
Age (range 26 to 91 years) was not a significant factor on niraparib clearance or volume of distribution 

21 
in the population pharmacokinetic analysis. 
 
There are insufficient data across races to conclude on the impact of race on niraparib 
pharmacokinetics. 
 
Paediatric population 
In a Phase 1 study (SCOOP), the pharmacokinetics of niraparib was evaluated in 44 children and 
adolescents with recurrent or refractory solid tumours. While a clinical study was initiated to evaluate 
pharmacokinetics in this population, the study was prematurely terminated. Consequently, the 
pharmacokinetic data obtained were limited and insufficient to reliably characterise exposures in 
paediatric patients.  
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data  
 
Safety pharmacology 
 
In vitro, niraparib inhibited the dopamine transporter DAT at concentration levels below human 
exposure levels. In mice, single doses of niraparib increased intracellular levels of dopamine and 
metabolites in cortex. Reduced locomotor activity was seen in one of two single dose studies in mice. 
The clinical relevance of these findings is not known. No effect on behavioural and/or neurological 
parameters have been observed in repeat-dose toxicity studies in rats and dogs at estimated CNS 
exposure levels similar to or below expected therapeutic exposure levels. 
 
Repeat-dose toxicity 
 
Decreased spermatogenesis was observed in rats and dogs at exposure levels below those seen 
clinically and was largely reversible within 4 weeks of cessation of dosing. 
 
Genotoxicity 
 
Niraparib was not mutagenic in a bacterial reverse mutation assay (Ames) test but was clastogenic in 
an in vitro mammalian chromosomal aberration assay and in an in vivo rat bone marrow micronucleus 
assay. This clastogenicity is consistent with genomic instability resulting from the primary 
pharmacology of niraparib and indicates potential for genotoxicity in humans. 
 
Reproductive toxicology 
 
Reproductive and developmental toxicity studies have not been conducted with niraparib. 
 
Carcinogenicity 
 
Carcinogenicity studies have not been conducted with niraparib. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients  
 
Capsule content 
Magnesium stearate 
Lactose monohydrate 
 
Capsule shell 
Titanium dioxide (E 171) 
Gelatin 
Brilliant blue FCF (E 133) 
Erythrosine (E 127) 

22 
Tartrazine (E 102) 
 
Printing ink 
Shellac (E 904) 
Propylene glycol (E 1520) 
Potassium hydroxide (E 525) 
Black iron oxide (E 172) 
Sodium hydroxide (E 524) 
Povidone (E 1201)  
Titanium dioxide (E 171) 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities  
 
Not applicable. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life  
 
3 years. 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage  
 
Do not store above 30°C. 
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container  
 
Aclar/PVC/aluminium foil perforated unit dose blisters in cartons of 84 × 1, 56 × 1 and 28 × 1 hard 
capsules. 
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling  
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
12 Riverwalk 
Citywest Business Campus 
Dublin 24 
Ireland 
D24 YK11 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/17/1235/001 
EU/1/17/1235/002  
EU/1/17/1235/003  
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 16 November 2017 
Date of latest renewal: 18 July 2022 

23 
 
 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 

24 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
Zejula 100 mg film-coated tablets 
 
 
2. 
QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION 
 
Each film-coated tablet contains niraparib tosylate monohydrate equivalent to 100 mg niraparib. 
 
Excipients with known effect 
 
Each film-coated tablet contains 34.7 mg of lactose monohydrate (see section 4.4). 
 
For the full list of excipients, see section 6.1.  
 
 
3. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM 
 
Film-coated tablet (tablet). 
 
Grey, oval-shaped (12 mm x 8 mm), film-coated tablet debossed with “100” on one side and “Zejula” 
on the other side. 
 
 
4. 
CLINICAL PARTICULARS 
 
4.1 
Therapeutic indications  
 
Zejula is indicated: 
• 
as monotherapy for the maintenance treatment of adult patients with advanced epithelial (FIGO 
Stages III and IV) high-grade ovarian, fallopian tube or primary peritoneal cancer who are in 
response (complete or partial) following completion of first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. 
• 
as monotherapy for the maintenance treatment of adult patients with platinum-sensitive relapsed 
high grade serous epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer who are in 
response (complete or partial) to platinum-based chemotherapy. 
 
4.2 
Posology and method of administration  
 
Treatment with Zejula should be initiated and supervised by a physician experienced in the use of 
anticancer medicinal products. 
 
Posology 
 
First-line ovarian cancer maintenance treatment 
The recommended starting dose of Zejula is 200 mg (two 100-mg tablets), taken once daily. However, 
for those patients who weigh ≥ 77 kg and have baseline platelet count ≥ 150,000/μL, the 
recommended starting dose of Zejula is 300 mg (three 100-mg tablets), taken once daily (see section 
4.4 and 4.8). 
 
Recurrent ovarian cancer maintenance treatment 
The dose is three 100 mg tablets once daily, equivalent to a total daily dose of 300 mg. 
 
Patients should be encouraged to take their dose at approximately the same time each day. Bedtime 
administration may be a potential method for managing nausea. 
 
It is recommended that treatment should be continued until disease progression or toxicity. 

25 
 
Missing dose 
If patients miss a dose, they should take their next dose at its regularly scheduled time. 
 
Dose adjustments for adverse reactions 
The recommended dose modifications for adverse reactions are listed in Tables 1, 2 and 3. 
 
In general, it is recommended to first interrupt the treatment (but no longer than 28 consecutive days) 
to allow the patient to recover from the adverse reaction and then restart at the same dose. In the case 
that the adverse reaction recurs, it is recommended to interrupt the treatment and then resume at the 
lower dose. If adverse reactions persist beyond a 28-day dose interruption, it is recommended that 
Zejula be discontinued. If adverse reactions are not manageable with this strategy of dose interruption 
and reduction, it is recommended that Zejula be discontinued. 
 
Table 1: Recommended dose modifications for adverse reactions 
Starting dose level 
200 mg 
300 mg 
First dose reduction 
100 mg/day 
200 mg/day (two 100-mg tablets) 
Second dose reduction 
Discontinue Zejula. 
100 mg/daya (one 100-mg tablet) 
a If further dose reduction below 100 mg/day is required, discontinue Zejula. 
 
Table 2: Dose modifications for non-haematologic adverse reactions 
Non-haematologic CTCAE ≥Grade 3 treatment-related 
adverse reaction where prophylaxis is not considered 
feasible or adverse reaction persists despite treatment 
First occurrence: 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 
28 days or until resolution of 
adverse reaction. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose 
level per Table 1. 
Second occurrence: 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 
28 days or until resolution of 
adverse reaction. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose 
or discontinue per Table 1. 
CTCAE ≥ Grade 3 treatment-related adverse reaction 
lasting more than 28 days while patient is administered 
Zejula 100 mg/day 
Discontinue treatment. 
CTCAE=Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events. 
 

26 
Table 3: Dose modifications for haematologic adverse reactions 
Haematologic adverse reactions have been observed during the treatment with Zejula especially 
during the initial phase of the treatment. It is therefore recommended to monitor complete blood 
counts (CBCs) weekly during the first month of treatment and modify the dose as needed. After the 
first month, it is recommended to monitor CBCs monthly and periodically after this time (see 
section 4.4). Based on individual laboratory values, weekly monitoring for the second month may 
be warranted. 
Haematologic adverse reaction 
requiring transfusion or 
haematopoietic growth factor 
support 
• 
For patients with platelet count ≤10,000/μL, platelet 
transfusion should be considered. If there are other risk 
factors for bleeding such as co-administration of 
anticoagulation or antiplatelet medicinal products, 
consider interrupting these substances and/or 
transfusion at a higher platelet count. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose per Table 1. 
Platelet count < 100,000/μL 
 
First occurrence: 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 28 days and monitor 
blood counts weekly until platelet counts return to 
≥100,000/µL. 
• 
Resume Zejula at same or reduced dose per Table 1 
based on clinical evaluation. 
• 
If platelet count is <75,000/μL at any time, resume at a 
reduced dose per Table 1. 
Second occurrence: 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 28 days and monitor 
blood counts weekly until platelet counts return to 
≥100,000/µL. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose per Table 1. 
• 
Discontinue Zejula if the platelet count has not returned 
to acceptable levels within 28 days of the dose 
interruption period, or if the patient has already 
undergone dose reduction to 100 mg daily. 
Neutrophil < 1,000/µL or 
Haemoglobin < 8 g/dL 
• 
Withhold Zejula for a maximum of 28 days and monitor 
blood counts weekly until neutrophil counts return to 
≥1,500/µL or haemoglobin returns to ≥9 g/dL. 
• 
Resume Zejula at a reduced dose per Table 1. 
• 
Discontinue Zejula if neutrophils and/or haemoglobin 
have not returned to acceptable levels within 28 days of 
the dose interruption period, or if the patient has already 
undergone dose reduction to 100 mg daily. 
Confirmed diagnosis of 
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) 
or acute myeloid leukaemia 
(AML) 
• 
Permanently discontinue Zejula. 
 
Patients with low body weight in recurrent ovarian cancer maintenance treatment 
Approximately 25% of patients in the NOVA study weighed less than 58 kg, and approximately 25% 
of patients weighed more than 77 kg. The incidence of Grade 3 or 4 adverse reactions was greater 
among low body weight patients (78%) than high body weight patients (53%). Only 13% of low body 
weight patients remained at a dose of 300 mg beyond Cycle 3. A starting dose of 200 mg for patients 
weighing less than 58 kg may be considered. 
 
Elderly 
No dose adjustment is necessary for elderly patients (≥65 years). There are limited clinical data in 
patients aged 75 or over. 
 

27 
Renal impairment 
No dose adjustment is necessary for patients with mild to moderate renal impairment. There are no 
data in patients with severe renal impairment or end stage renal disease undergoing haemodialysis; use 
with caution in these patients (see section 5.2). 
 
Hepatic impairment 
No dose adjustment is needed in patients with mild hepatic impairment (either aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) > upper limit of normal (ULN) and total bilirubin (TB) ≤ ULN or any AST 
and TB > 1.0 x – 1.5 x ULN). For patients with moderate hepatic impairment (any AST and TB > 1.5 
x - 3 x ULN) the recommended starting dose of Zejula is 200 mg once daily. There are no data in 
patients with severe hepatic impairment (any AST and TB > 3 x ULN); use with caution in these 
patients (see sections 4.4 and 5.2). 
 
Patients with an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status 2 to 4 
Clinical data are not available in patients with ECOG performance status 2 to 4. 
 
Paediatric population 
The safety and efficacy of Zejula in children and adolescents aged below 18 years of age have not 
been established. Outside its authorised indications, Zejula in combination with dostarlimab has been 
studied in children aged 5 to less than 18 years with recurrent or refractory solid tumours including 
osteosarcoma and neuroblastoma; however, the study data were limited and the results of the study did 
not allow to conclude that the benefits of such use outweigh the risks. Currently available data are 
described in sections 5.1 and 5.2. 
 
Method of administration 
 
Zejula is for oral use. 
 
It is advised to take Zejula tablets without food (at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal) or with 
a light meal (see section 5.2). 
 
4.3 
Contraindications 
 
Hypersensitivity to the active substance or to any of the excipients listed in section 6.1. 
 
Breast-feeding (see section 4.6). 
 
4.4 
Special warnings and precautions for use 
 
Haematologic adverse reactions 
 
Haematologic adverse reactions (thrombocytopenia, anaemia, neutropenia) have been reported in 
patients treated with Zejula (see section 4.8). Patients with lower body weight or lower baseline 
platelet count may be at increased risk of Grade 3+ thrombocytopenia (see section 4.2). 
 
Testing complete blood counts weekly for the first month, followed by monthly monitoring for the 
next 10 months of treatment and periodically after this time is recommended to monitor for clinically 
significant changes in any haematologic parameter during treatment (see section 4.2). 
 
If a patient develops severe persistent haematologic toxicity including pancytopenia that does not 
resolve within 28 days following interruption, Zejula should be discontinued. 
 
Due to the risk of thrombocytopenia, anticoagulants and medicinal products known to reduce the 
thrombocyte count should be used with caution (see section 4.8). 
 

28 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukaemia 
 
Cases of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia (MDS/AML), including cases with fatal 
outcome, have been observed in patients treated with Zejula monotherapy or combination therapy in 
clinical trials and postmarketing (see section 4.8). 
 
In clinical trials, the duration of Zejula treatment in patients prior to developing MDS/AML varied 
from 0.5 months to >4.9 years. The cases were typical of secondary, cancer therapy-related 
MDS/AML. All patients had received platinum-containing chemotherapy regimens and many had also 
received other DNA damaging agents and radiotherapy. Some patients had a history of bone marrow 
suppression. In the NOVA trial, the incidence of MDS/AML was higher in the gBRCAmut cohort 
(7.4%) than in the non-gBRCAmut cohort (1.7%). 
 
For suspected MDS/AML or prolonged haematological toxicities, the patient should be referred to a 
haematologist for further evaluation. If MDS/AML is confirmed Zejula treatment should be 
discontinued and the patient treated appropriately. 
 
Hypertension, including hypertensive crisis 
 
Hypertension, including hypertensive crisis, has been reported with the use of Zejula (see section 4.8). 
Pre-existing hypertension should be adequately controlled before starting Zejula treatment. Blood 
pressure should be monitored at least weekly for two months, monitored monthly afterwards for the 
first year and periodically thereafter during treatment with Zejula. Home blood pressure monitoring 
may be considered for appropriate patients with instruction to contact their health care provider in case 
of rise in blood pressure. 
 
Hypertension should be medically managed with antihypertensive medicinal products as well as 
adjustment of the Zejula dose (see section 4.2), if necessary. In the clinical programme, blood pressure 
measurements were obtained on Day 1 of each 28-day cycle while the patient remained on Zejula. In 
most cases, hypertension was controlled adequately using standard antihypertensive treatment with or 
without Zejula dose adjustment (see section 4.2). Zejula should be discontinued in case of 
hypertensive crisis or if medically significant hypertension cannot be adequately controlled with 
antihypertensive therapy. 
 
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) 
 
There have been reports of PRES in patients receiving Zejula (see section 4.8). PRES is a rare, 
reversible, neurological disorder which can present with rapidly evolving symptoms including 
seizures, headache, altered mental status, visual disturbance, or cortical blindness, with or without 
associated hypertension. A diagnosis of PRES requires confirmation by brain imaging, preferably 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
 
In case of PRES, it is recommended to discontinue Zejula and to treat specific symptoms including 
hypertension. The safety of reinitiating Zejula therapy in patients previously experiencing PRES is not 
known. 
 
Pregnancy/contraception 
 
Zejula should not be used during pregnancy or in women of childbearing potential not willing to use 
highly effective contraception during therapy and for 6 months after receiving the last dose of Zejula 
(see section 4.6). A pregnancy test should be performed on all women of childbearing potential prior 
to treatment. 
 
Hepatic impairment 
 
Patients with severe hepatic impairment could have increased exposure of niraparib based on data 
from patients with moderate hepatic impairment and should be carefully monitored (see sections 4.2 

29 
and 5.2). 
 
Lactose 
 
Zejula film-coated tablets contain lactose monohydrate. Patients with rare hereditary problems of 
galactose intolerance, total lactase deficiency or glucose-galactose malabsorption should not take this 
medicine. 
 
4.5 
Interaction with other medicinal products and other forms of interaction  
 
Pharmacodynamic interactions 
 
The combination of niraparib with vaccines or immunosuppressant agents has not been studied. 
 
The data on niraparib in combination with cytotoxic medicinal products are limited. Therefore, caution 
should be taken if niraparib is used in combination with vaccines, immunosuppressant agents or with 
other cytotoxic medicinal products. 
 
Pharmacokinetic interactions 
 
No clinical drug interaction studies have been performed with niraparib. 
 
Effect of niraparib on other medicinal products 
 
Induction of CYP1A2  
In vitro, niraparib induces CYP1A2. Therefore, caution is recommended when niraparib is combined 
with active substances the metabolism of which is CYP1A2-dependent and, notably, those having a 
narrow therapeutic range (e.g. clozapine, theophylline, and ropinirole). 
 
Inhibition of efflux transporters [P-glycoprotein (P-gp), Breast Cancer Resistance Protein (BCRP) 
and MATE1/2K)]  
In vitro, niraparib is an inhibitor of P-gp. As no clinical data are available, it cannot be excluded that 
niraparib may increase the systemic exposure of other medicines transported by P-gp that are sensitive 
to intestinal P-gp inhibition (e.g., dabigatran etexilate).  
 
In vitro, niraparib is an inhibitor of BCRP. A clinically relevant interaction with BCRP substrates 
cannot be excluded. Caution is therefore recommended when niraparib is combined with substrates of 
BCRP (e.g., irinotecan, rosuvastatin, simvastatin, atorvastatin, and methotrexate) due to risk of 
increased systemic exposure. 
 
Niraparib is an inhibitor of MATE1 and -2K in vitro. Plasma concentrations of metformin may 
increase when concomitantly administered with niraparib. Close monitoring of glycaemia is 
recommended when starting or stopping niraparib in patients receiving metformin. A dose adjustment 
of metformin may be necessary. 
 
 
4.6 
Fertility, pregnancy and lactation 
 
Women of childbearing potential/Contraception in females 
 
Women of childbearing potential should not become pregnant while on treatment and should not be 
pregnant at the beginning of treatment. A pregnancy test should be performed on all women of 
childbearing potential prior to treatment. 
 
Women of childbearing potential must use highly effective contraception during therapy and for 
6 months after receiving the last dose of Zejula. 
 

30 
Pregnancy 
 
There are no or limited amount of data from the use of niraparib in pregnant women. Animal 
reproductive and developmental toxicity studies have not been conducted. However, based on its 
mechanism of action, niraparib could cause embryonic or foetal harm, including embryo-lethal and 
teratogenic effects, when administered to a pregnant woman. 
 
Zejula should not be used during pregnancy. 
 
Breast-feeding 
 
It is unknown whether niraparib or its metabolites are excreted in human milk. 
 
Breast-feeding is contraindicated during administration of Zejula and for 1 month after receiving the 
last dose (see section 4.3). 
 
Fertility 
 
There are no clinical data on fertility. A reversible reduction of spermatogenesis was observed in rats 
and dogs (see section 5.3). 
 
4.7 
Effects on ability to drive and use machines  
 
Zejula has moderate influence on the ability to drive or use machines. Patients who take Zejula may 
experience asthenia, fatigue, dizziness or difficulties concentrating. Patients who experience these 
symptoms should observe caution when driving or using machines. 
 
4.8 
Undesirable effects  
 
Summary of the safety profile 
 
Adverse reactions of all grades occurring in ≥10% of the 851 patients receiving Zejula monotherapy in 
the pooled PRIMA (either 200 mg or 300 mg starting dose) and NOVA trials were nausea, anaemia, 
thrombocytopenia, fatigue, constipation, vomiting, headache, insomnia, platelet count decreased, 
neutropenia, abdominal pain, decreased appetite, diarrhoea, dyspnoea, hypertension, asthenia, 
dizziness, neutrophil count decreased, cough, arthralgia, back pain, white blood cell count decreased, 
and hot flush. 
 
The most common serious adverse reactions >1% (treatment-emergent frequencies) were 
thrombocytopenia and anaemia. 
 
Tabulated list of adverse reactions 
 
The following adverse reactions have been identified based on clinical trials and post-marketing 
surveillance in patients receiving Zejula monotherapy (see Table 4). 
 
Frequencies of occurrence of undesirable effects are based on pooled adverse events data generated 
from the PRIMA and NOVA studies (fixed starting dose of 300 mg/day) where patient exposure is 
known and defined as: 
 
Very common: ≥1/10 
Common: ≥1/100 to <1/10 
Uncommon: ≥1/1,000 to <1/100 
Rare: ≥1/10,000 to <1/1,000 
Very rare: <1/10,000 
 
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness. 

31 
 
Table 4: Tabulated list of adverse reactions  
System organ class 
Frequency of all CTCAE 
grades 
Frequency of CTCAE 
grade 3 or 4 
Infections and infestations 
Very common 
Urinary tract infection 
Common 
Bronchitis, conjunctivitis 
Uncommon 
Urinary tract infection, 
bronchitis 
Neoplasms benign, malignant 
and unspecified (including 
cysts and polyps) 
Common 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/ 
acute myeloid leukaemiaa 
Common 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/ 
acute myeloid leukaemiaa 
Blood and lymphatic system 
disorders 
Very common 
Thrombocytopenia, anaemia, 
neutropenia, leukopenia 
Uncommon 
Pancytopenia, febrile 
neutropenia 
Very common 
Thrombocytopenia, anaemia, 
neutropenia 
Common 
Leukopenia 
Uncommon 
Pancytopenia, febrile 
neutropenia 
Immune system disorders 
Common 
Hypersensitivityb 
Uncommon 
Hypersensitivity 
Metabolism and nutrition 
disorders 
Very common 
Decreased appetite 
Common 
Hypokalemia 
Common 
Hypokalemia 
Uncommon 
Decreased appetite 
Psychiatric disorders 
Very common 
Insomnia 
Common 
Anxiety, depression, 
cognitive impairmentc 
Uncommon 
Confusional state 
Uncommon 
Insomnia, anxiety, depression, 
confusional state 
Nervous system disorders 
Very common 
Headache, dizziness 
Common 
Dysgeusia 
Rare 
Posterior Reversible 
Encephalopathy Syndrome 
(PRES)a 
Uncommon 
Headache 
Cardiac disorders 
Very common 
Palpitations 
Common 
Tachycardia 
 
Vascular disorders 
Very common 
Hypertension 
Rare 
Hypertensive crisis 
Common 
Hypertension 
Respiratory, thoracic and 
mediastinal disorders 
Very common 
Dyspnoea, cough, 
nasopharyngitis 
Common 
Epistaxis 
Uncommon 
Pneumonitis 
Uncommon 
Dyspnoea, epistaxis, 
pneumonitis 

32 
System organ class 
Frequency of all CTCAE 
grades 
Frequency of CTCAE 
grade 3 or 4 
Gastrointestinal disorders 
Very common 
Nausea, constipation, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, diarrhoea, 
dyspepsia 
Common 
Dry mouth, abdominal 
distension, mucosal 
inflammation, stomatitis 
Common 
Nausea, vomiting, abdominal 
pain 
Uncommon 
Diarrhoea, constipation, 
mucosal inflammation, 
stomatitis, dry mouth  
Skin and subcutaneous tissue 
disorders 
Common 
Photosensitivity, rash 
Uncommon 
Photosensitivity, rash 
Musculoskeletal and 
connective tissue disorders 
Very common 
Back pain, arthralgia 
Common 
Myalgia 
Uncommon 
Back pain, arthralgia, myalgia 
General disorders and 
administration site conditions 
Very common 
Fatigue, asthenia 
Common 
Oedema peripheral 
Common 
Fatigue, asthenia 
Investigations 
Common 
Gamma-glutamyl transferase 
increased, AST increased, 
blood creatinine increased, 
ALT increased, blood alkaline 
phosphatase increased, weight 
decreased 
Common 
Gamma-glutamyl transferase 
increased, ALT increased 
Uncommon 
AST increased, blood alkaline 
phosphatase increased 
 
CTCAE=Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.02. 
a Based on niraparib clinical trial data. This is not limited to pivotal ENGOT-OV16 monotherapy 
study. 
b Includes hypersensitivity, drug hypersensitivity, anaphylactoid reaction, drug eruption, angioedema, 
and urticaria. 
c Includes memory impairment, concentration impairment. 
 
The adverse reactions noted in the group of patients who were administered a 200 mg starting dose of 
Zejula based on baseline weight or platelet count were of similar or lesser frequency compared to the 
group administered a fixed starting dose of 300 mg (Table 4). 
 
See below for specific information regarding frequency of thrombocytopenia, anaemia and 
neutropenia. 
 
Description of selected adverse reactions 
 
Haematologic adverse reactions (thrombocytopenia, anaemia, neutropenia) including clinical 
diagnoses and/or laboratory findings generally occurred early during niraparib treatment with the 
incidence decreasing over time. 
 
In NOVA and PRIMA, patients eligible for Zejula therapy had the following baseline haematologic 
parameters: absolute neutrophil count (ANC) ≥1,500 cells/µL; platelets ≥100,000 cells/µL and 
haemoglobin ≥9 g/dL (NOVA) or ≥10 g/dL (PRIMA) prior to therapy. In the clinical programme, 
haematologic adverse reactions were managed with laboratory monitoring and dose modifications (see 
section 4.2). 
 
In PRIMA, patients who were administered a starting dose of Zejula based on baseline weight or 
platelet count, Grade ≥3 thrombocytopenia, anaemia and neutropenia were reduced from 48% to 21%, 
36% to 23% and 24% to 15%, respectively, compared to the group administered a fixed starting dose 
of 300 mg. Discontinuation due to thrombocytopenia, anaemia, and neutropenia occurred in 3%, 3%, 

33 
and 2% of patients, respectively. 
 
Thrombocytopenia 
In PRIMA, 39% of Zejula-treated patients experienced Grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia compared to 
0.4% of placebo-treated patients with a median time from first dose to first onset of 22 days (range: 
15 to 335 days) and with a median duration of 6 days (range: 1 to 374 days). Discontinuation due to 
thrombocytopenia occurred in 4% of patients receiving niraparib. 
 
In NOVA, approximately 60% of patients experienced thrombocytopenia of any grade, and 34% of 
patients experienced Grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia. In patients with baseline platelet count less than 
180 × 109/L, thrombocytopenia of any grade and Grade 3/4 occurred in 76% and 45% of patients, 
respectively. The median time to onset of thrombocytopenia regardless of grade and Grade 3/4 
thrombocytopenia was 22 and 23 days, respectively. The rate of new incidences of thrombocytopenia 
after intensive dose modifications were performed during the first two months of treatment from 
Cycle 4 was 1.2%. The median duration of thrombocytopenia events of any grade was 23 days, and 
the median duration of Grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia was 10 days. Patients treated with Zejula who 
develop thrombocytopenia might have an increased risk of haemorrhage. In the clinical programme, 
thrombocytopenia was managed with laboratory monitoring, dose modification and platelet 
transfusion where appropriate (see section 4.2). Discontinuation due to thrombocytopenia events 
(thrombocytopenia and platelet count decreased) occurred in approximately 3% of patients. 
 
In NOVA, 13% (48/367) of patients experienced bleeding with concurrent thrombocytopenia; all 
bleeding events concurrent with thrombocytopenia were Grade 1 or 2 in severity except for one event 
of Grade 3 petechiae and haematoma observed concurrently with a serious adverse reaction of 
pancytopenia. Thrombocytopenia occurred more commonly in patients whose baseline platelet count 
was less than 180 × 109/L. Approximately 76% of patients with lower baseline platelets 
(< 180 × 109/L) who received Zejula experienced thrombocytopenia of any grade, and 45% of patients 
experienced Grade 3/4 thrombocytopenia. Pancytopenia has been observed in <1% of patients 
receiving niraparib. 
 
Anaemia 
In PRIMA, 31% of Zejula-treated patients experienced Grade 3/4 anaemia compared to 2% of 
placebo-treated patients with a median time from first dose to first onset of 80 days (range: 15 to 533 
days) and with a median duration of 7 days (range: 1 to 119 days). Discontinuation due to anaemia 
occurred in 2% of patients receiving niraparib. 
 
In NOVA, approximately 50% of patients experienced anaemia of any grade, and 25% experienced 
Grade 3/4 anaemia. The median time to onset of anaemia of any grade was 42 days, and 85 days for 
Grade 3/4 events. The median duration of anaemia of any grade was 63 days, and 8 days for Grade 3/4 
events. Anaemia of any grade might persist during Zejula treatment. In the clinical programme, 
anaemia was managed with laboratory monitoring, dose modification (see section 4.2), and where 
appropriate with red blood cell transfusions. Discontinuation due to anaemia occurred in 1% of 
patients. 
 
Neutropenia 
In PRIMA, 21% of Zejula-treated patients experienced Grade 3/4 neutropenia compared to 1% of 
placebo-treated patients with a median time from first dose to first onset of 29 days (range: 15 to 
421 days) and with a median duration of 8 days (range: 1 to 42 days). Discontinuation due to 
neutropenia occurred in 2% of patients receiving niraparib. 
 
In NOVA, approximately 30% of patients experienced neutropenia of any grade, and 20% of patients 
experienced Grade 3/4 neutropenia. The median time to onset of neutropenia of any grade was 
27 days, and 29 days for Grade 3/4 events. The median duration of neutropenia of any grade was 
26 days, and 13 days for Grade 3/4 events. In addition, Granulocyte-Colony Stimulating Factor 
(G-CSF) was administered to approximately 6% of patients treated with niraparib as concomitant 
therapy for neutropenia. Discontinuation due to neutropenia events occurred in 2% of patients. 
 

34 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/Acute myeloid leukaemia 
In clinical studies, MDS/AML occurred in 1% patients treated with Zejula, with 41% of cases having a 
fatal outcome. The incidence was higher in patients with relapsed ovarian cancer who had received 
2 or more lines of prior platinum chemotherapy and with gBRCAmut following 75 months survival 
follow-up. All patients had potential contributing factors for the development of MDS/AML, having 
received previous chemotherapy with platinum agents. Many had also received other DNA damaging 
agents and radiotherapy. The majority of reports were in gBRCAmut carriers. Some patients had a 
history of previous cancer or of bone marrow suppression. 
 
In PRIMA, the incidence of MDS/AML was 2.3% in patients receiving Zejula and 1.6% in patients 
receiving placebo with a follow-up of 74 months. 
 
In NOVA, in patients with relapsed ovarian cancer who had received at least two prior lines of 
platinum chemotherapy, the overall incidence of MDS/AML was 3.8% in patients receiving Zejula 
and 1.7% in patients receiving placebo with a follow-up of 75 months. In gBRCAmut and non-
gBRCAmut cohorts, the incidence of MDS/AML was 7.4% and 1.7% in patients receiving Zejula and 
3.1% and 0.9% in patients receiving placebo, respectively. 
 
Hypertension 
In PRIMA, Grade 3/4 hypertension occurred in 6% of Zejula-treated patients compared to 1% of 
placebo-treated patients with a median time from first dose to first onset of 50 days (range: 1 to 
589 days) and with a median duration of 12 days (range: 1 to 61 days). No patients discontinued 
Zejula due to hypertension. 
 
In NOVA, hypertension of any grade occurred in 19.3% of patients treated with Zejula. Grade 3/4 
hypertension occurred in 8.2% of patients. Hypertension was readily managed with anti-hypertensive 
medicinal products. Discontinuation due to hypertension occurred in <1% of patients. 
 
 
Reporting of suspected adverse reactions 
 
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after authorisation of the medicinal product is important. It 
allows continued monitoring of the benefit/risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare 
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions via the national reporting system 
listed in Appendix V. 
 
4.9 
Overdose  
 
There is no specific treatment in the event of overdose with Zejula, and symptoms of overdose are not 
established. In the event of an overdose, physicians should follow general supportive measures and 
should treat symptomatically. 
 
 
5. 
PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 
 
5.1 
Pharmacodynamic properties  
 
Pharmacotherapeutic group: antineoplastic agents, other antineoplastic agents, ATC code: L01XK02. 
 
Mechanism of action and pharmacodynamic effects 
 
Niraparib is an inhibitor of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) enzymes, PARP-1 and PARP-2, 
which play a role in DNA repair. In vitro studies have shown that niraparib-induced cytotoxicity may 
involve inhibition of PARP enzymatic activity and increased formation of PARP-DNA complexes 
resulting in DNA damage, apoptosis and cell death. Increased niraparib-induced cytotoxicity was 
observed in tumour cell lines with or without deficiencies in the Beast Cancer (BRCA) 1 and 2 tumour 
suppressor genes. In orthotopic high-grade serous ovarian cancer patient-derived xenograft tumours 

35 
(PDX) grown in mice, niraparib has been shown to reduce tumour growth in BRCA 1 and 2 mutant, 
BRCA wild-type but homologous recombination (HR) deficient, and in tumours that are BRCA wild-
type and without detectable HR deficiency. 
 
Clinical efficacy and safety 
 
First-line ovarian cancer maintenance treatment  
 
PRIMA was a Phase 3 double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in which patients (n = 733) in complete 
or partial response to first-line platinum-based chemotherapy were randomised 2:1 to niraparib or 
matched placebo. PRIMA was initiated with a starting dose of 300 mg daily in 475 patients (whereof 
317 was randomised to the niraparib arm vs 158 in the placebo arm) in continuous 28-day cycles. The 
starting dose in PRIMA was changed with Amendment 2 of the Protocol. From that point forward, 
patients with a baseline body weight ≥77 kg and baseline platelet count ≥150,000/µL were 
administered niraparib 300 mg (n = 34) or placebo daily (n = 21) while patients with a baseline body 
weight <77 kg or baseline platelet count <150,000/μL were administered niraparib 200 mg (n = 122) 
or placebo daily (n = 61). 
 
Patients were randomised post completion of first-line platinum-based chemotherapy plus or minus 
surgery. Subjects were randomised within 12 weeks of the first day of the last cycle of chemotherapy. 
Subjects had ≥6 and ≤9 cycles of platinum-based therapy. Following interval debulking surgery 
subjects had ≥2 post-operative cycles of platinum-based therapy. Patients who had received 
bevacizumab with chemotherapy but could not receive bevacizumab as maintenance therapy were not 
excluded from the study. Patients could not have received prior PARP inhibitor (PARPi) therapy, 
including niraparib. Patients who had neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by interval debulking 
surgery could have visible residual or no residual disease. Patients with Stage III disease who had 
complete cytoreduction (i.e., no visible residual disease) after primary debulking surgery were 
excluded. Randomisation was stratified by best response during the front-line platinum regimen 
(complete response vs partial response), neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) (Yes vs No); and 
homologous recombination deficiency (HRD) status [positive (HR-deficient) vs negative (HR-
proficient) or not determined]. Testing for HRD was performed using the HRD test on tumour tissue 
obtained at the time of initial diagnosis. The CA-125 levels should be in the normal range (or a CA-
125 decrease by >90%) during the patient’s front-line therapy, and be stable for at least 7 days. 
 
Patients began treatment on Cycle 1/Day 1 (C1/D1) with niraparib 200 or 300 mg or matched placebo 
administered daily in continuous 28-day cycles. Clinic visits occurred each cycle (4 weeks ± 3 days). 
 
The primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS), as determined by blinded independent 
central review (BICR) per RECIST, version 1.1. PFS testing was performed hierarchically: first in the 
HR-deficient population, then in the overall population. Secondary efficacy endpoints included PFS 
after the first subsequent therapy (PFS2) and overall survival (OS) (Table 5). The median age was 
62 years among patients randomised to niraparib (range 32 to 85 years) or placebo (range 33 to 88 
years). Eighty-nine percent of all patients were white. Sixty-nine percent of patients randomised to  
niraparib and 71% of patients randomised to placebo had an ECOG of 0 at study baseline. In the 
overall population, 65% of patients had stage III disease and 35% had stage IV disease. In the overall 
population, the primary tumour site in most patients (≥80%) was the ovary; most patients (>90%) had 
tumours with serous histology. Sixty-seven percent of patients received NACT. Sixty-nine percent of 
patients had a complete response to the first-line platinum-based chemotherapy. A total of 6 patients in 
the Zejula group had received bevacizumab as prior treatment for their ovarian cancer. 
 
PRIMA demonstrated a statistically significant improvement in PFS for patients randomised to 
niraparib as compared with placebo in the HR-deficient and overall population (Table 5, and Figures 1 
and 2). Efficacy results for the final analysis of OS data are presented in Table 5. 
 

36 
Table 5: Efficacy results – PRIMA 
 
HR-deficient population 
Overall population 
Zejula 
(N = 247) 
Placebo 
(N = 126) 
Zejula 
(N = 487) 
Placebo 
(N = 246) 
Primary endpoint 
(determined by BICR) 
 
PFS median, months 
(95% CI) 
21.9 
(19.3, NE) 
10.4 
(8.1, 12.1) 
13.8 
(11.5, 14.9) 
8.2 
(7.3, 8.5) 
Hazard ratio  
(95% CI) 
0.43 
(0.31, 0.59) 
0.62 
(0.50, 0.76) 
p-value 
<0.0001 
<0.0001 
Secondary endpointsa, b, c 
PFS2 median, months 
(95% CI) 
43.4 
(37.2, 54.1) 
39.3 
(30.3, 55.7) 
30.1 
(27.1, 33.1) 
27.6 
(24.2, 33.1) 
Hazard ratio 
(95% CI) 
0.87 
(0.66, 1.17) 
0.96 
(0.79, 1.17) 
OS median, monthsd 
(95% CI) 
71.9 
(55.5, NE) 
69.8 
(51.6, NE) 
46.6 
(43.7, 52.8) 
48.8 
(43.1, 61.0) 
Hazard ratio 
(95% CI) 
0.95 
(0.70, 1.29) 
1.01 
(0.84, 1.23) 
PFS = progression-free survival; CI = confidence interval; NE = not evaluable; PFS2 = PFS after the 
first subsequent therapy; OS = overall survival. 
a Data based on final analysis. 
b In the HR-deficient population and overall population, 15.8% and 11.7% of patients in the Zejula 
arm received subsequent PARPi therapy, respectively. 
c In the HR-deficient population and overall population, 48.4% and 37.8% of placebo patients 
received subsequent PARPi therapy, respectively. 
d The maturity of the OS data for the HR-deficient population and overall population was 49.6% and 
62.5%, respectively. 
 

37 
Figure 1: Progression-free survival in the HR-deficient population – PRIMA (ITT) 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Progression-free survival in the overall population – PRIMA (ITT)  
 
 
HR (95% CI) 
0.43 (0.310,0.588) 
Zejula 
Placebo 
Time since Randomization (Months) 
Estimated Survival Function (%) 
Censored Observations 
Zejula 
Placebo 
HR (95% CI)              0.62 (0.502,0.755) 
Time since Randomization (Months) 
Estimated Survival Function (%) 
 Placebo 
Censored Observations
Zejula 
Placebo 
 Zejula 

38 
PFS subgroup analyses 
 
Within the HR-deficient population, a PFS hazard ratio of 0.40 (95% CI: 0.27, 0.62) was observed in 
the subgroup of patients with BRCA mutation ovarian cancer (n = 223). In the subgroup of HR-
deficient patients without a BRCA mutation (n = 150), a hazard ratio of 0.50 (95% CI: 0.31, 0.83) was 
observed. 
 
The median PFS in the HR-proficient population (n = 249) was 8.1 months for patients randomised to 
Zejula compared with 5.4 months for placebo with a hazard ratio of 0.68 (95% CI: 0.49, 0.94). 
 
In exploratory subgroup analyses of patients who were administered 200 or 300 mg dose of Zejula 
based on baseline weight or platelet count, comparable efficacy (investigator-assessed PFS) was 
observed with a PFS hazard ratio of 0.54 (95% CI: 0.33, 0.91) in the HR-deficient population, and 
with a hazard ratio of 0.68 (95% CI: 0.49, 0.94) in the overall population. In the HR-proficient 
subgroup, the dose of 200 mg appeared to give a lower treatment effect compared to the 300 mg dose. 
 
OS subgroup analyses 
 
In the subgroup of HR-deficient patients with BRCA mutation ovarian cancer (n = 223), an OS hazard 
ratio of 0.94 (95% CI: 0.63, 1.41) was observed. In the subgroup of HR-deficient patients without a 
BRCA mutation (n = 149), a hazard ratio of 0.97 (95% CI: 0.62, 1.53) was observed. 
 
The median OS in the HR-proficient population (n = 249) was 36.6 months for patients randomised to 
Zejula compared to 32.2 months in the placebo arm, with a hazard ratio of 0.93 (95% CI: 0.69, 1.26). 
 
Platinum-sensitive recurrent ovarian cancer maintenance treatment 
 
The safety and efficacy of niraparib as maintenance therapy was studied in a Phase 3 randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled international trial (NOVA) in patients with relapsed predominantly 
high grade serous epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer who were platinum 
sensitive, defined by complete response (CR) or partial response (PR) for more than six months to 
their penultimate (next to last) platinum-based therapy. To be eligible for niraparib treatment, the 
patient should be in response (CR or PR) following completion of last platinum-based chemotherapy. 
The CA-125 levels should be normal (or a > 90% decrease in CA-125 from baseline) following their 
last platinum treatment, and be stable for at least 7 days. Patients could not have received prior PARPi 
therapy, including Zejula. Eligible patients were assigned to one of two cohorts based on the results of 
a germline BRCA (gBRCA) mutation test. Within each cohort, patients were randomised using a 2:1 
allocation of niraparib and placebo. Patients were assigned to the gBRCAmut cohort based on blood 
samples for gBRCA analysis that were taken prior to randomisation. Testing for tumour BRCA 
(tBRCA) mutation and HRD was performed using the HRD test on tumour tissue obtained at the time 
of initial diagnosis or at the time of recurrence. 
 
Randomisation within each cohort was stratified by time to progression after the penultimate platinum 
therapy before study enrolment (6 to <12 months and ≥12 months); use or not of bevacizumab in 
conjunction with the penultimate or last platinum regimen; and best response during the most recent 
platinum regimen (complete response and partial response). 
 
Patients began treatment on Cycle 1/Day 1 (C1/D1) with niraparib 300 mg or matched placebo 
administered daily in continuous 28-day cycles. Clinic visits occurred each cycle (4 weeks ± 3 days). 
 
In the NOVA study, 48% of patients had a dose interruption in Cycle 1. Approximately 47% of 
patients restarted at a reduced dose in Cycle 2. 
 
The most commonly used dose in niraparib-treated patients in the NOVA study was 200 mg. 
 
Progression-free survival (PFS) was determined per RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid 
Tumors, version 1.1) or clinical signs and symptoms and increased CA-125. PFS was measured from 

39 
the time of randomisation (which occurred up to 8 weeks after completion of the chemotherapy 
regimen) to disease progression or death. 
 
The primary efficacy analysis for PFS was determined by blinded central independent assessment and 
was prospectively defined and assessed for the gBRCAmut cohort and the non-gBRCAmut cohort 
separately. Overall survival (OS) analyses were secondary outcome measures. 
 
Secondary efficacy endpoints included chemotherapy-free interval (CFI), time to first subsequent 
therapy (TFST), PFS after the first subsequent therapy (PFS2), and OS. 
 
Demographics, baseline disease characteristics, and prior treatment history were generally well 
balanced between the niraparib and placebo arms in the gBRCAmut (n = 203) and the non-gBRCAmut 
cohorts (n = 350). Median ages ranged from 57 to 63 years across treatments and cohorts. The primary 
tumour site in most patients (>80%) within each cohort was the ovary; most patients (>84%) had 
tumours with serous histology. A high proportion of patients in both treatment arms in both cohorts 
had received 3 or more prior lines of chemotherapy, including 49% and 34% of niraparib patients in 
the gBRCAmut and non-gBRCAmut cohorts, respectively. Most patients were age 18 to 64 years 
(78%), Caucasian (86%) and had an ECOG performance status of 0 (68%). 
 
In the gBRCAmut cohort, the median number of treatment cycles was higher in the niraparib arm than 
the placebo arm (14 and 7 cycles, respectively). More patients in the niraparib group continued 
treatment for more than 12 months than patients in the placebo group (54.4% and 16.9% respectively). 
 
In the overall non-gBRCAmut cohort, the median number of treatment cycles was higher in the 
niraparib arm than in the placebo arm (8 and 5 cycles, respectively). More patients in the niraparib 
group continued treatment for more than 12 months than patients in the placebo group (34.2% and 
21.1%, respectively). 
 
The study met its primary objective of statistically significantly improved PFS for niraparib 
maintenance monotherapy compared with placebo in the gBRCAmut cohort as well as in the overall 
non-gBRCAmut cohort. Table 6 and Figures 3 and 4 show the results for the PFS primary endpoint for 
the primary efficacy populations (gBRCAmut cohort and the overall non-gBRCAmut cohort). 
 
Table 6: Summary of primary objective outcomes in the NOVA study 
PFS = progression-free survival; CI = confidence interval; NE = not evaluable. 
 
 
gBRCAmut cohort 
Non-gBRCAmut cohort 
Zejula 
(N = 138) 
Placebo 
(N = 65) 
Zejula 
(N = 234) 
Placebo 
(N = 116) 
PFS median  
(95% CI) 
21.0 
(12.9, NE) 
5.5 
(3.8, 7.2) 
9.3 
(7.2, 11.2) 
3.9 
(3.7, 5.5) 
p-value 
<0.0001 
<0.0001 
Hazard ratio 
(Zejula:placebo) (95% 
CI) 
0.27 
(0.173, 0.410) 
0.45 
(0.338, 0.607) 

40 
Figure 3: 
Progression-free survival in the gBRCAmut cohort based on IRC assessment - 
NOVA (ITT) 
 
 
Figure 4: 
Progression-free survival in the non-gBRCAmut cohort /overall based on IRC 
assessment – NOVA (ITT) 
 
 
Secondary efficacy endpoints in NOVA 
 
At the final analysis, the median PFS2 in the gBRCAmut cohort was 29.9 months for patients treated 
with niraparib compared to 22.7 months for patients on placebo (HR = 0.70; 95% CI: 0.50, 0.97). The 
median PFS2 in the non-gBRCAmut cohort was 19.5 months for patients treated with niraparib 
compared to 16.1 months for patients on placebo (HR = 0.80; 95% CI: 0.63, 1.02). 
 
At the final analysis of overall survival, the median OS in the gBRCAmut cohort (n = 203) was 
40.9 months for patients treated with niraparib compared with 38.1 months for patients on placebo 
(HR = 0.85; 95% CI: 0.61, 1.20). The cohort maturity for the gBRCAmut cohort was 76%. The median 
OS in the non-gBRCAmut cohort (n = 350) was 31.0 months for patients treated with niraparib 
compared with 34.8 months for patients on placebo (HR = 1.06; 95% CI: 0.81, 1.37). The cohort 
maturity for the non-gBRCAmut cohort was 79%. 
Time since Randomization (Months) 
Estimated Survival Function 
Treatment 
HR (95% CI) 
 0.27 (0.173,0.410) 
A: Zejula 
B: Placebo 
Time since Randomization (Months) 
Estimated Survival Function 
A: Zejula 
B: Placebo 
Treatment 
HR (95% CI)  
0.45 (0.338,0.607) 

41 
 
Patient reported outcomes 
 
Patient-reported outcome data from validated survey tools (FOSI and EQ-5D) indicate that niraparib-
treated patients reported no difference from placebo in measures associated with quality of life (QoL). 
 
Paediatric population 
 
The European Medicines Agency has waived the obligation to submit the results of studies with Zejula 
in all subsets of the paediatric population in ovarian carcinoma, excluding rhabdomyosarcoma and 
germ cell tumours (see section 4.2 for information on paediatric use). However, paediatric 
development was conducted in children and adolescents with other oncology conditions. 
 
In a Phase 1 study (SCOOP), the safety, pharmacokinetics, and antitumour activity of Zejula in 
combination with dostarlimab were evaluated in 47 children and adolescents with recurrent or 
refractory solid tumours including osteosarcoma and neuroblastoma. Patients aged 5 to ˂18 years 
received Zejula 75 to 200 mg daily. 
 
The study was terminated prematurely due to observed toxicities in conjunction with insufficient 
efficacy. No efficacy response was observed in the 17 patients with osteosarcoma or neuroblastoma 
included in the expansion part of the study. The safety profile of the combination in the paediatric 
population cannot be considered established due to the limited number of paediatric patients evaluated 
with limited exposure. See section 4.2 for information on paediatric use. 
 
5.2 
Pharmacokinetic properties  
 
Absorption 
 
Following a single-dose administration of 300 mg niraparib under fasting conditions, niraparib was 
measurable in plasma within 30 minutes and the mean peak plasma concentration (Cmax) for niraparib 
was reached within 3 to 5 hours (ranged 508-875 ng/mL across studies). Following multiple oral doses 
of niraparib from 30 mg to 400 mg once daily, accumulation of niraparib was approximately 
2 to 3 folds. 
 
The systemic exposures (Cmax and AUC) to niraparib increased in a dose-proportional manner when 
the dose of niraparib increased from 30 mg to 400 mg. The absolute bioavailability of niraparib is 
approximately 73%, indicating minimal first pass effect. In a population pharmacokinetic analysis of 
niraparib, the inter-individual variability in bioavailability was estimated to a coefficient of variation 
(CV) of 33.8%. 
 
Following a high-fat meal in patients with solid tumours, the Cmax and AUCinf of niraparib tablets 
increased by 11% and 28%, respectively, as compared with fasting conditions (see section 4.2). 
 
The tablet and capsule formulations have been demonstrated to be bioequivalent. Following 
administration of either one 300 mg tablet or three 100 mg capsules of niraparib in 108 patients with 
solid tumours under fasting conditions, the 90% confidence intervals of the geometric mean ratios for 
tablet compared to capsules for Cmax, AUClast and AUC∞ fell within the limits of bioequivalence 
(0.80 and 1.25). 
 
Distribution 
 
Niraparib was moderately protein bound in human plasma (83%), mainly with serum albumin. In a 
population pharmacokinetic analysis of niraparib, the apparent volume of distribution (Vd/F) was 
1,206 L (based on a 70 kg patient) in cancer patients (CV 18.4%), indicating extensive tissue 
distribution of niraparib. 
 

42 
Biotransformation 
 
Niraparib is metabolised primarily by carboxylesterases (CEs) to form a major inactive metabolite, 
M1. In a mass balance study, M1 and M10 (the subsequently formed M1 glucuronides) were the major 
circulating metabolites. 
 
Elimination 
 
Following a single oral 300-mg dose of niraparib, the mean terminal half-life (t½) of niraparib ranged 
from 44 to 54 hours (approximately 2 days) across studies. In a population pharmacokinetic analysis, 
the apparent total clearance (CL/F) of niraparib was 15.9 L/h in cancer patients (CV 24.0%). 
 
Niraparib is eliminated primarily through the hepatobiliary and renal routes. Following an oral 
administration of a single 300-mg dose of [14C]-niraparib, on average 86.2% (range 71% to 91%) of 
the dose was recovered in urine and faeces over 21 days. Radioactive recovery in the urine accounted 
for 47.5% (range 33.4% to 60.2%) and in the faeces for 38.8% (range 28.3% to 47%) of the dose. In 
pooled samples collected over 6 days, 40% of the dose was recovered in the urine primarily as 
metabolites and 31.6% of the dose was recovered in the faeces primarily as unchanged niraparib. 
 
In vitro studies 
 
Niraparib is an inducer of CYP1A2 in vitro (see section 4.5). 
 
Niraparib is a substrate of P-gp and BCRP. However, due to niraparib’s high permeability and 
bioavailability, the risk of clinically relevant interactions with medicinal products that inhibit these 
transporters is unlikely. 
 
Niraparib is an inhibitor of P-gp, BCRP, MATE1/2K and organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1) in vitro 
(see section 4.5).  
 
Special populations 
 
Renal impairment 
In the population pharmacokinetic analysis, patients with mild (creatinine clearance 60-90 mL/min) 
and moderate (30-60 mL/min) renal impairment had mildly reduced niraparib clearance compared to 
individuals with normal renal function. The difference in exposure is not considered to warrant dose 
adjustment. No patients with pre-existing severe renal impairment or end-stage renal disease 
undergoing hemodialysis were identified in clinical studies (see section 4.2). 
 
Hepatic impairment 
In the population pharmacokinetic analysis of data from clinical studies in patients, pre-existing mild 
hepatic impairment (n = 155) did not influence the clearance of niraparib. In a clinical study of cancer 
patients using NCI-ODWG criteria to classify the degree of hepatic impairment, niraparib AUCinf in 
patients with moderate hepatic impairment (n = 8) was 1.56 (90% CI: 1.06, 2.30) times the niraparib 
AUCinf in patients with normal hepatic function (n = 9) following administration of a single 300 mg 
dose. Niraparib dose adjustment is recommended for patients with moderate hepatic impairment (see 
section 4.2). Moderate hepatic impairment did not have an effect on niraparib Cmax or on niraparib 
protein binding. The pharmacokinetics of niraparib have not been assessed in patients with severe 
hepatic impairment (see sections 4.2 and 4.4). 
 
Weight, age and race 
Increasing weight was found to increase niraparib volume of distribution in the population 
pharmacokinetic analysis. No impact of weight was identified on niraparib clearance or overall 
exposure.  
 
Age (range 26 to 91 years) was not a significant factor on niraparib clearance or volume of distribution 
in the population pharmacokinetic analysis.  

43 
 
There are insufficient data across races to conclude on the impact of race on niraparib 
pharmacokinetics. 
 
Paediatric population 
In a Phase 1 study (SCOOP), the pharmacokinetics of niraparib was evaluated in 44 children and 
adolescents with recurrent or refractory solid tumours. While a clinical study was initiated to evaluate 
pharmacokinetics in this population, the study was prematurely terminated. Consequently, the 
pharmacokinetic data obtained were limited and insufficient to reliably characterise exposures in 
paediatric patients.  
 
5.3 
Preclinical safety data  
 
Safety pharmacology 
 
In vitro, niraparib inhibited the dopamine transporter DAT at concentration levels below human 
exposure levels. In mice, single doses of niraparib increased intracellular levels of dopamine and 
metabolites in cortex. Reduced locomotor activity was seen in one of two single dose studies in mice. 
The clinical relevance of these findings is not known. No effect on behavioural and/or neurological 
parameters have been observed in repeat-dose toxicity studies in rats and dogs at estimated CNS 
exposure levels similar to or below expected therapeutic exposure levels. 
 
Repeat-dose toxicity 
 
Decreased spermatogenesis was observed in rats and dogs at exposure levels below those seen 
clinically and was largely reversible within 4 weeks of cessation of dosing. 
 
Genotoxicity 
 
Niraparib was not mutagenic in a bacterial reverse mutation assay (Ames) test but was clastogenic in 
an in vitro mammalian chromosomal aberration assay and in an in vivo rat bone marrow micronucleus 
assay. This clastogenicity is consistent with genomic instability resulting from the primary 
pharmacology of niraparib and indicates potential for genotoxicity in humans. 
 
Reproductive toxicology 
 
Reproductive and developmental toxicity studies have not been conducted with niraparib. 
 
Carcinogenicity 
 
Carcinogenicity studies have not been conducted with niraparib. 
 
 
6. 
PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS 
 
6.1 
List of excipients  
 
Tablet core 
Crospovidone 
Lactose monohydrate 
Magnesium stearate 
Microcrystalline cellulose (E 460) 
Povidone (E 1201) 
Silica, colloidal hydrated 
 
Tablet coat 
Polyvinyl alcohol (E 1203) 

44 
Titanium dioxide (E 171) 
Macrogol (E 1521) 
Talc (E 553b) 
Iron oxide black (E 172) 
 
6.2 
Incompatibilities  
 
Not applicable. 
 
6.3 
Shelf life  
 
4 years. 
 
6.4 
Special precautions for storage  
 
This medicinal product does not require any special storage conditions, store in the original package to 
protect the tablets from absorption of water under high humidity conditions.  
 
6.5 
Nature and contents of container  
 
OPA/aluminium/PVC/aluminium/vinyl/acrylic blisters in cartons of 84 and 56 film-coated tablets, or 
OPA/aluminium/PVC/aluminium/vinyl/acrylic/paper child-resistant blisters in cartons of 84 and 56 
film-coated tablets. 
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
6.6 
Special precautions for disposal and other handling  
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
7. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER 
 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
12 Riverwalk 
Citywest Business Campus 
Dublin 24 
Ireland 
D24 YK11 
 
 
8. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S) 
 
EU/1/17/1235/004 
EU/1/17/1235/005 
EU/1/17/1235/006 
EU/1/17/1235/007 
 
 
9. 
DATE OF FIRST AUTHORISATION/RENEWAL OF THE AUTHORISATION 
 
Date of first authorisation: 16 November 2017 
Date of latest renewal: 18 July 2022 
 
 

45 
10. 
DATE OF REVISION OF THE TEXT 
 
Detailed information on this medicinal product is available on the website of the European Medicines 
Agency https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 

46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX II 
 
A. 
MANUFACTURER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE  
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
 

47 
A. 
MANUFACTURER(S) RESPONSIBLE FOR BATCH RELEASE 
 
Name and address of the manufacturer(s) responsible for batch release 
 
Hard Capsules and Film-coated Tablets: 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
12 Riverwalk 
Citywest Business Campus 
Dublin 24 
Ireland 
D24 YK11 
 
Film-coated Tablets: 
Millmount Healthcare Ltd. 
Block 7, City North Business Campus, 
Stamullen, Co Meath 
Ireland 
 
OR 
 
Glaxo Wellcome, S.A. 
Avda. Extremadura, 3 
09400 Aranda de Duero 
Burgos 
Spain 
 
 
B. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS REGARDING SUPPLY AND USE 
 
Medicinal product subject to restricted medical prescription (see Annex I: Summary of Product 
Characteristics, section 4.2). 
 
 
C. 
OTHER CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF THE MARKETING 
AUTHORISATION  
 
• 
Periodic safety update reports (PSURs) 
 
The requirements for submission of PSURs for this medicinal product are set out in the list of Union 
reference dates (EURD list) provided for under Article 107c(7) of Directive 2001/83/EC and any 
subsequent updates published on the European medicines web-portal. 
 
 
D. 
CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS WITH REGARD TO THE SAFE AND 
EFFECTIVE USE OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT 
 
• 
Risk management plan (RMP) 
 
The marketing authorisation holder (MAH) shall perform the required pharmacovigilance activities 
and interventions detailed in the agreed RMP presented in Module 1.8.2 of the marketing 
authorisation and any agreed subsequent updates of the RMP. 
 
An updated RMP should be submitted: 
• 
At the request of the European Medicines Agency; 
• 
Whenever the risk management system is modified, especially as the result of new information 
being received that may lead to a significant change to the benefit/risk profile or as the result of 
an important (pharmacovigilance or risk minimisation) milestone being reached. 

48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEX III  
 
LABELLING AND PACKAGE LEAFLET  
 
 
 

49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. LABELLING  
 

50 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
CAPSULE CARTON 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
Zejula 100 mg hard capsules 
niraparib 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
Each hard capsule contains niraparib tosylate monohydrate equivalent to 100 mg of niraparib. 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Also contains lactose and tartrazine (E 102). See leaflet for further information. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Hard capsule 
84 × 1 hard capsules 
56 × 1 hard capsules 
28 × 1 hard capsules 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Oral use. 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 
Do not store above 30°C. 
 
 
 

51 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
12 Riverwalk 
Citywest Business Campus 
Dublin 24 
Ireland 
D24 YK11 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/17/1235/001 84 hard capsules 
EU/1/17/1235/002 56 hard capsules 
EU/1/17/1235/003 28 hard capsules 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
zejula 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 

52 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS 
 
CAPSULE BLISTER 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
Zejula 100 mg capsules 
niraparib 
 
 
2. 
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
OTHER  
 
 
 

53 
PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON THE OUTER PACKAGING 
 
TABLET CARTON  
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
Zejula 100 mg film-coated tablets  
niraparib 
 
 
2. 
STATEMENT OF ACTIVE SUBSTANCE(S)  
 
Each film-coated tablet contains niraparib tosylate monohydrate equivalent to 100 mg of niraparib. 
 
 
3. 
LIST OF EXCIPIENTS  
 
Also contains lactose. See leaflet for further information. 
 
 
4. 
PHARMACEUTICAL FORM AND CONTENTS  
 
Film-coated tablets 
56 film-coated tablets 
84 film-coated tablets 
 
 
5. 
METHOD AND ROUTE(S) OF ADMINISTRATION  
 
Read the package leaflet before use. 
Oral use. 
 
 
6. 
SPECIAL WARNING THAT THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT MUST BE STORED OUT 
OF THE SIGHT AND REACH OF CHILDREN  
 
Keep out of the sight and reach of children.  
 
 
7. 
OTHER SPECIAL WARNING(S), IF NECESSARY  
 
 
8. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
9. 
SPECIAL STORAGE CONDITIONS  
 
Store in the original package. 
 
 
 
 

54 
10. 
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL OF UNUSED MEDICINAL PRODUCTS 
OR WASTE MATERIALS DERIVED FROM SUCH MEDICINAL PRODUCTS, IF 
APPROPRIATE  
 
Any unused medicinal product or waste material should be disposed of in accordance with local 
requirements. 
 
 
11. 
NAME AND ADDRESS OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
12 Riverwalk 
Citywest Business Campus 
Dublin 24 
Ireland  
D24 YK11 
 
 
12. 
MARKETING AUTHORISATION NUMBER(S)  
 
EU/1/17/1235/004 56 film-coated tablets 
EU/1/17/1235/005 84 film-coated tablets 
EU/1/17/1235/006 56 film-coated tablets in child-resistant blisters 
EU/1/17/1235/007 84 film-coated tablets in child-resistant blisters 
 
 
 
13. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
14. 
GENERAL CLASSIFICATION FOR SUPPLY  
 
 
15. 
INSTRUCTIONS ON USE  
 
 
16. 
INFORMATION IN BRAILLE 
 
zejula tablet 
 
 
17. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER – 2D BARCODE 
 
2D barcode carrying the unique identifier included. 
 
18. 
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER - HUMAN READABLE DATA 
 
PC 
SN 
NN 

55 
MINIMUM PARTICULARS TO APPEAR ON BLISTERS OR STRIPS 
 
TABLET BLISTER 
 
 
1. 
NAME OF THE MEDICINAL PRODUCT  
 
Zejula 100 mg tablets  
niraparib 
 
 
2. 
NAME OF THE MARKETING AUTHORISATION HOLDER  
 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
 
 
3. 
EXPIRY DATE  
 
EXP 
 
 
4. 
BATCH NUMBER  
 
Lot 
 
 
5. 
OTHER  
 
 
 
 

56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. PACKAGE LEAFLET  

57 
Package leaflet: Information for the patient  
 
Zejula 100 mg hard capsules  
niraparib 
 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What Zejula is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you take Zejula  
3. 
How to take Zejula 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store Zejula 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What Zejula is and what it is used for 
 
What Zejula is and how it works 
Zejula contains the active substance niraparib. Niraparib is a type of anti-cancer medicine called a 
PARP inhibitor. PARP inhibitors block an enzyme called poly [adenosine diphosphate-ribose] 
polymerase (PARP). PARP helps cells repair damaged DNA so blocking it means that the DNA of 
cancer cells cannot be repaired. This results in tumour cell death, helping to control the cancer. 
 
What Zejula is used for 
Zejula is used in adult women for the treatment of cancer of the ovary, the fallopian tubes (part of the 
female reproductive system that connects the ovaries to the uterus), or the peritoneum (the membrane 
lining the abdomen). 
 
Zejula is used for cancer that has: 
• 
responded to the first treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy, or 
• 
come back (recurred) after the cancer has responded to previous treatment with standard 
platinum-based chemotherapy. 
 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you take Zejula 
 
Do not take Zejula  
• 
if you are allergic to niraparib or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in 
section 6). 
• 
if you are breast-feeding. 
 
Warnings and precautions  
Talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before or while taking this medicine if any of the following 
could apply to you: 
 
Low blood-cell counts 
Zejula lowers your blood-cell counts, such as your red blood-cell count (anaemia), white blood-cell 

58 
count (neutropenia), or blood-platelet count (thrombocytopenia). Signs and symptoms you need to 
look out for include fever or infection, and abnormal bruising or bleeding (see section 4 for more 
information). Your doctor will test your blood regularly throughout your treatment. 
 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukaemia 
Rarely, low blood-cell counts may be a sign of more serious problems with the bone marrow such as 
‘myelodysplastic syndrome’ (MDS) or ‘acute myeloid leukaemia’ (AML). Your doctor may want to 
test your bone marrow to check for these problems. 
 
High blood pressure 
Zejula can cause high blood pressure, which in some cases, could be severe. Your doctor will measure 
your blood pressure regularly throughout your treatment. He or she may also give you medicine to 
treat high blood pressure and adjust your Zejula dose, if necessary. Your doctor may advise home 
blood pressure monitoring and instruction on when to contact him or her in case of a rise in blood 
pressure. 
 
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) 
A rare neurological side effect named PRES has been associated with Zejula treatment. If you have 
headache, vision changes, confusion or seizure with or without high blood pressure, please contact 
your doctor. 
 
Children and adolescents 
Children and adolescents under 18 years of age should not be given Zejula. The safety and efficacy of 
Zejula have not been established in this age group. 
 
Other medicines and Zejula 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other 
medicines. 
 
Zejula can affect how other medicines work. It is particularly important that you mention any 
medicines containing the active substance, metformin (used to lower blood sugar), as your doctor 
may need to adjust the dose of metformin. 
 
 
Pregnancy  
Zejula should not be taken during pregnancy as it could harm your baby. If you are pregnant, think 
you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask your doctor for advice before taking this 
medicine. 
 
If you are a woman who could become pregnant you must use highly effective contraception while 
you are taking Zejula, and you must continue to use highly effective contraception for 6 months after 
taking your last dose. Your doctor will ask you to confirm that you are not pregnant with a pregnancy 
test before starting your treatment. Contact your doctor straightaway if you become pregnant while 
you are taking Zejula. 
 
Breast-feeding 
Zejula should not be taken if you are breast-feeding as it is not known if it passes into breast milk. If 
you are breast-feeding, you must stop before you start taking Zejula and you must not begin 
breast-feeding again until 1 month after taking your last dose. Ask your doctor for advice before 
taking this medicine. 
 
Driving and using machines  
When you are taking Zejula it may make you feel weak, unfocused, tired or dizzy and therefore 
influence your ability to drive and use machines. Observe caution when driving or using machines. 
 
Zejula contains lactose  
If you have been told by your doctor that you have an intolerance to some sugars, contact your doctor 

59 
before taking this medicinal product. 
 
Zejula contains tartrazine (E 102) 
It may cause allergic reactions. 
 
 
3. 
How to take Zejula 
 
Always take this medicine exactly as your doctor or pharmacist has told you. Check with your doctor 
or pharmacist if you are not sure. 
 
For ovarian cancer that has responded to the first treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy 
The recommended starting dose is 200 mg (two 100 mg capsules), taken together once a day, with or 
without food. If you weigh ≥ 77 kg and have platelet count ≥ 150,000/μL before starting treatment, the 
recommended starting dose is 300 mg (three 100 mg capsules), taken together once a day, with or 
without food. 
 
For ovarian cancer that has come back (recurred) 
The recommended starting dose is 300 mg (three 100 mg capsules), taken together once a day, with or 
without food. 
 
Take Zejula at approximately the same time each day. Taking Zejula at bedtime may help you to 
manage nausea. 
 
Your doctor may adjust your starting dose if you have problems with your liver. 
 
Swallow the capsules whole, with some water. Do not chew or crush the capsules. This will ensure the 
medicine works as well as possible. 
 
Your doctor may recommend a lower dose if you experience side effects (such as nausea, tiredness, 
abnormal bleeding/bruising, anaemia). 
 
Your doctor will check you on a regular basis, and you will normally continue to take Zejula as long 
as you experience benefit, and do not suffer unacceptable side effects. 
 
If you take more Zejula than you should  
If you take more than your normal dose, contact your doctor immediately.  
 
If you forget to take Zejula  
Do not take an additional dose if you miss a dose or vomit after taking Zejula. Take your next dose at 
its scheduled time. Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the following SERIOUS side effects - you may 
need urgent medical treatment: 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Bruising or bleeding for longer than usual if you hurt yourself -- these may be signs of a low 
blood platelet count (thrombocytopenia). 
• 
Being short of breath, feeling very tired, having pale skin, or fast heartbeat -- these may be signs 
of a low red blood cell count (anaemia). 

60 
• 
Fever or infection – low white blood cell count (neutropenia) can increase your risk for 
infection. Signs may include fever, chills, feeling weak or confused, cough, pain or burning 
feeling when passing urine. Some infections can be serious and may lead to death. 
• 
Reduction in the number of white cells in the blood (leukopenia) 
 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Allergic reaction (including severe allergic reaction that can be life-threatening). Signs include 
raised and itchy rash (hives) and swelling—sometimes of the face or mouth (angioedema), 
causing difficulty in breathing, and collapse or loss of consciousness. 
• 
Low blood cell counts due to a problem in the bone marrow or blood cancer starting from the 
bone marrow ‘myelodysplastic syndrome’ (MDS) or ‘acute myeloid leukaemia’ (AML). 
 
Uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
• 
Fever with low white blood cell count (febrile neutropenia) 
• 
Reduction in the number of red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets (pancytopenia) 
 
Rare (may affect up to 1 in 1000 people) 
• 
A sudden increase in blood pressure, which may be a medical emergency that could lead to 
organ damage or can be life-threatening. 
• 
A brain condition with symptoms including seizures (fits), headache, confusion, and changes in 
vision (Posterior Reversible Encephalopathy Syndrome or PRES), which is a medical 
emergency that could lead to organ damage or can be life-threatening. 
 
Talk to your doctor if you get any other side effects. These can include: 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Feeling sick (nausea) 
• 
Decreased number of white cells in the blood 
• 
Decreased number of platelets in the blood 
• 
Decreased number of red cells in the blood (anaemia) 
• 
Feeling tired 
• 
Feeling of weakness 
• 
Constipation 
• 
Vomiting 
• 
Stomach pain 
• 
Inability to sleep 
• 
Headache 
• 
Decreased appetite 
• 
Runny or stuffy nose 
• 
Diarrhoea 
• 
Shortness of breath 
• 
Back pain 
• 
Joint pain 
• 
High blood pressure 
• 
Indigestion (dyspepsia) 
• 
Dizziness 
• 
Cough 
• 
Urinary tract infection 
• 
Palpitations (feeling like your heart is skipping beats or beating harder than usual) 
 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Sunburn-like reactions following exposure to light 
• 
Swelling in the feet, ankles, legs, and/or hands 
• 
Low potassium levels in the blood 
• 
Inflammation or swelling of the air passages between the mouth and nose and the lungs, 

61 
bronchitis 
• 
Abdominal bloating 
• 
Feeling of worry, nervousness, or unease 
• 
Feelings of sadness, depressed 
• 
Nose bleed 
• 
Decrease in weight 
• 
Muscle pain 
• 
Impaired concentration, understanding, memory and thinking (cognitive impairment) 
• 
Pink eye 
• 
Fast heart beat may cause dizziness, chest pain or breathlessness 
• 
Dry mouth 
• 
Inflammation of the mouth and/or digestive tract 
• 
Rash 
• 
Elevated blood tests 
• 
Abnormal blood tests 
• 
Abnormal taste in mouth 
 
Uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
• 
Confusional state 
• 
Inflammation of the lungs which can cause shortness of breath and difficulty breathing (non-
infectious pneumonitis) 
 
Reporting of side effects  
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store Zejula 
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the carton and blister after EXP. The 
expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
Do not store above 30°C. 
 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to 
throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What Zejula contains 
 
• 
The active substance is niraparib. Each hard capsule contains niraparib tosylate monohydrate 
equivalent to 100 mg niraparib. 
 
• 
The other ingredients (excipients) are: 
Capsule content: magnesium stearate, lactose monohydrate 
Capsule shell: titanium dioxide (E 171), gelatin, brilliant blue FCF (E 133), erythrosine (E 127), 
tartrazine (E 102) 
Printing ink: shellac (E 904), propylene glycol (E 1520), potassium hydroxide (E 525), black 
iron oxide (E 172), sodium hydroxide (E 524), povidone (E 1201), and titanium dioxide 
(E 171). 

62 
 
This medicine contains lactose and tartrazine - see section 2 for more information. 
 
What Zejula looks like and contents of the pack 
 
Zejula hard capsules have a white opaque body and a purple opaque cap. The white opaque capsule 
body is printed with ‘100 mg’ in black ink, and the purple capsule cap is printed with ‘Niraparib’ in 
white ink. The capsules contain a white to off-white powder. 
 
The hard capsules are packed in unit dose blister packs of 
• 
84 × 1 hard capsules 
• 
56 × 1 hard capsules 
• 
28 × 1 hard capsules 
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
12 Riverwalk 
Citywest Business Campus 
Dublin 24 
Ireland  
D24 YK11 
 
Manufacturer 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
12 Riverwalk 
Citywest Business Campus 
Dublin 24 
Ireland 
D24 YK11 
 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
 
België/Belgique/Belgien 
GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals s.a./n.v. 
Tél/Tel: + 32 (0) 10 85 52 00 
Lietuva 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited  
Tel: + 370 80000334 
 
България 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Teл.: + 359  80018205 
 
Luxembourg/Luxemburg 
GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals s.a./n.v. 
Belgique/Belgien 
Tél/Tel: + 32 (0) 10 85 52 00 
 
Česká republika 
GlaxoSmithKline, s.r.o. 
Tel: + 420 222 001 111 
cz.info@gsk.com  
 
Magyarország 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited  
Tel.: + 36  80088309 
 
Danmark 
GlaxoSmithKline Pharma A/S 
Tlf.: + 45 36 35 91 00 
dk-info@gsk.com 
 
 
Malta 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Tel: + 356 80065004 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
Deutschland 
GlaxoSmithKline GmbH & Co. KG 
Tel.: + 49 (0)89 36044 8701 
produkt.info@gsk.com 
Nederland 
GlaxoSmithKline BV 
Tel: + 31 (0)33 2081100 
 
Eesti 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited  
Tel: + 372  8002640 
 
Norge 
GlaxoSmithKline AS 
Tlf: + 47 22 70 20 00 
 
Ελλάδα 
GlaxoSmithKline Μονοπρόσωπη A.E.B.E. 
Τηλ: + 30 210 68 82 100 
 
Österreich 
GlaxoSmithKline Pharma GmbH 
Tel: + 43 (0)1 97075 0 
at.info@gsk.com 
España 
GlaxoSmithKline, S.A. 
Tel: + 34 900 202 700 
es-ci@gsk.com 
 
Polska 
GSK Services Sp. z o.o. 
Tel.: + 48 (0)22 576 9000 
 
France 
Laboratoire GlaxoSmithKline 
Tél: + 33 (0)1 39 17 84 44 
diam@gsk.com 
Portugal 
GlaxoSmithKline – Produtos Farmacêuticos, Lda. 
Tel: + 351 21 412 95 00 
FI.PT@gsk.com  
 
Hrvatska 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Tel: +385  800787089 
 
Ireland 
GlaxoSmithKline (Ireland) Limited 
Tel: + 353 (0)1 4955000 
România 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Tel: + 40 800672524 
 
Slovenija 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Tel: + 386 80688869 
 
Ísland 
Vistor ehf. 
Sími: + 354 535 7000 
 
Slovenská republika 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited  
Tel: + 421 800500589 
 
Italia 
GlaxoSmithKline S.p.A. 
Tel: + 39 (0)45 7741111 
 
Suomi/Finland 
GlaxoSmithKline Oy 
Puh/Tel: + 358 (0)10 30 30 30 
 
Κύπρος 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Τηλ: + 357 80070017 
 
Sverige 
GlaxoSmithKline AB 
Tel: + 46 (0)8 638 93 00 
info.produkt@gsk.com  
 
Latvija 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Tel: + 371 80205045 
 
 
 
This leaflet was last revised in MM/YYYY.  
 
Other sources of information 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
 
 

64 
Package leaflet: Information for the patient  
 
Zejula 100 mg film-coated tablets  
niraparib 
 
 
Read all of this leaflet carefully before you start taking this medicine because it contains 
important information for you. 
- 
Keep this leaflet. You may need to read it again. 
- 
If you have any further questions, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
- 
This medicine has been prescribed for you only. Do not pass it on to others. It may harm them, 
even if their signs of illness are the same as yours. 
- 
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible 
side effects not listed in this leaflet. See section 4. 
 
What is in this leaflet 
 
1. 
What Zejula is and what it is used for 
2. 
What you need to know before you take Zejula 
3. 
How to take Zejula 
4. 
Possible side effects 
5. 
How to store Zejula 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
 
1. 
What Zejula is and what it is used for 
 
What Zejula is and how it works 
Zejula contains the active substance niraparib. Niraparib is a type of anti-cancer medicine called a 
PARP inhibitor. PARP inhibitors block an enzyme called poly [adenosine diphosphate-ribose] 
polymerase (PARP). PARP helps cells repair damaged DNA so blocking it means that the DNA of 
cancer cells cannot be repaired. This results in tumour cell death, helping to control the cancer. 
 
What Zejula is used for 
Zejula is used in adult women for the treatment of cancer of the ovary, the fallopian tubes (part of the 
female reproductive system that connects the ovaries to the uterus), or the peritoneum (the membrane 
lining the abdomen). 
 
Zejula is used for cancer that has: 
• 
responded to the first treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy, or 
• 
come back (recurred) after the cancer has responded to previous treatment with standard 
platinum-based chemotherapy. 
 
2. 
What you need to know before you take Zejula 
 
Do not take Zejula  
• 
if you are allergic to niraparib or any of the other ingredients of this medicine (listed in 
section 6). 
• 
if you are breast-feeding. 
 
Warnings and precautions  
Talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse before or while taking this medicine if any of the following 
could apply to you: 
 
 
Low blood-cell counts 
Zejula lowers your blood-cell counts, such as your red blood-cell count (anaemia), white blood-cell 

65 
count (neutropenia), or blood-platelet count (thrombocytopenia). Signs and symptoms you need to 
look out for include fever or infection, and abnormal bruising or bleeding (see section 4 for more 
information). Your doctor will test your blood regularly throughout your treatment. 
 
Myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukaemia 
Rarely, low blood-cell counts may be a sign of more serious problems with the bone marrow such as 
‘myelodysplastic syndrome’ (MDS) or ‘acute myeloid leukaemia’ (AML). Your doctor may want to 
test your bone marrow to check for these problems. 
 
High blood pressure 
Zejula can cause high blood pressure, which in some cases, could be severe. Your doctor will measure 
your blood pressure regularly throughout your treatment. He or she may also give you medicine to 
treat high blood pressure and adjust your Zejula dose, if necessary. Your doctor may advise home 
blood pressure monitoring and instruction on when to contact him or her in case of a rise in blood 
pressure. 
 
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) 
A rare neurological side effect named PRES has been associated with Zejula treatment. If you have 
headache, vision changes, confusion or seizure with or without high blood pressure, please contact 
your doctor. 
 
Children and adolescents 
Children and adolescents under 18 years of age should not be given Zejula. The safety and efficacy of 
Zejula have not been established in this age group. 
 
Other medicines and Zejula 
Tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking, have recently taken or might take any other 
medicines. 
 
Zejula can affect how other medicines work. It is particularly important that you mention any 
medicines containing the active substance, metformin (used to lower blood sugar), as your doctor 
may need to adjust the dose of metformin. 
 
 
Pregnancy  
Zejula should not be taken during pregnancy as it could harm your baby. If you are pregnant, think 
you may be pregnant or are planning to have a baby, ask your doctor for advice before taking this 
medicine. 
 
If you are a woman who could become pregnant you must use highly effective contraception while 
you are taking Zejula, and you must continue to use highly effective contraception for 6 months after 
taking your last dose. Your doctor will ask you to confirm that you are not pregnant with a pregnancy 
test before starting your treatment. Contact your doctor straightaway if you become pregnant while 
you are taking Zejula. 
 
Breast-feeding 
Zejula should not be taken if you are breast-feeding as it is not known if it passes into breast milk. If 
you are breast-feeding, you must stop before you start taking Zejula and you must not begin 
breast-feeding again until 1 month after taking your last dose. Ask your doctor for advice before 
taking this medicine. 
 
Driving and using machines  
When you are taking Zejula it may make you feel weak, unfocused, tired or dizzy and therefore 
influence your ability to drive and use machines. Observe caution when driving or using machines. 
 

66 
Zejula contains lactose  
If you have been told by your doctor that you have an intolerance to some sugars, contact your doctor 
before taking this medicinal product. 
 
 
3. 
How to take Zejula 
 
Always take this medicine exactly as your doctor or pharmacist has told you. Check with your doctor 
or pharmacist if you are not sure. 
 
For ovarian cancer that has responded to the first treatment with platinum-based chemotherapy 
The recommended starting dose is 200 mg (two 100 mg tablets), taken together once a day,  
without food (at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal) or with a light meal. If you weigh ≥ 77 kg 
and have platelet count ≥ 150,000/μL before starting treatment, the recommended starting dose is 
300 mg (three 100 mg tablets), taken together once a day without food (at least 1 hour before or 2 
hours after a meal) or with a light meal. 
 
For ovarian cancer that has come back (recurred) 
The recommended starting dose is 300 mg (three 100 mg tablets), taken together once a day without 
food (at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal) or with a light meal. 
 
Take Zejula at approximately the same time each day. Taking Zejula at bedtime may help you to 
manage nausea. 
 
Your doctor may adjust your starting dose if you have problems with your liver. 
 
Your doctor may recommend a lower dose if you experience side effects (such as nausea, tiredness, 
abnormal bleeding/bruising, anaemia). 
 
Your doctor will check you on a regular basis, and you will normally continue to take Zejula as long 
as you experience benefit, and do not suffer unacceptable side effects. 
 
If you take more Zejula than you should  
If you take more than your normal dose, contact your doctor immediately.  
 
If you forget to take Zejula  
Do not take an additional dose if you miss a dose or vomit after taking Zejula. Take your next dose at 
its scheduled time. Do not take a double dose to make up for a forgotten dose. 
 
If you have any further questions on the use of this medicine, ask your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. 
 
 
4. 
Possible side effects 
 
Like all medicines, this medicine can cause side effects, although not everybody gets them. 
 
Tell your doctor straight away if you notice any of the following SERIOUS side effects - you may 
need urgent medical treatment: 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Bruising or bleeding for longer than usual if you hurt yourself -- these may be signs of a low 
blood platelet count (thrombocytopenia). 
• 
Being short of breath, feeling very tired, having pale skin, or fast heartbeat -- these may be signs 
of a low red blood cell count (anaemia). 
• 
Fever or infection – low white blood cell count (neutropenia) can increase your risk for 
infection. Signs may include fever, chills, feeling weak or confused, cough, pain or burning 
feeling when passing urine. Some infections can be serious and may lead to death. 

67 
• 
Reduction in the number of white cells in the blood (leukopenia) 
 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Allergic reaction (including severe allergic reaction that can be life-threatening). Signs include 
raised and itchy rash (hives) and swelling—sometimes of the face or mouth (angioedema), 
causing difficulty in breathing, and collapse or loss of consciousness. 
• 
Low blood cell counts due to a problem in the bone marrow or blood cancer starting from the 
bone marrow ‘myelodysplastic syndrome’ (MDS) or ‘acute myeloid leukaemia’ (AML). 
 
Uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
• 
Fever with low white blood cell count (febrile neutropenia) 
• 
Reduction in the number of red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets (pancytopenia) 
 
Rare (may affect up to 1 in 1000 people) 
• 
A sudden increase in blood pressure, which may be a medical emergency that could lead to 
organ damage or can be life-threatening. 
• 
A brain condition with symptoms including seizures (fits), headache, confusion, and changes in 
vision (Posterior Reversible Encephalopathy Syndrome or PRES), which is a medical 
emergency that could lead to organ damage or can be life-threatening. 
 
Talk to your doctor if you get any other side effects. These can include: 
 
Very common (may affect more than 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Feeling sick (nausea) 
• 
Decreased number of white cells in the blood 
• 
Decreased number of platelets in the blood 
• 
Decreased number of red cells in the blood (anaemia) 
• 
Feeling tired 
• 
Feeling of weakness 
• 
Constipation 
• 
Vomiting 
• 
Stomach pain 
• 
Inability to sleep 
• 
Headache 
• 
Decreased appetite 
• 
Runny or stuffy nose 
• 
Diarrhoea 
• 
Shortness of breath 
• 
Back pain 
• 
Joint pain 
• 
High blood pressure 
• 
Indigestion (dyspepsia) 
• 
Dizziness 
• 
Cough 
• 
Urinary tract infection 
• 
Palpitations (feeling like your heart is skipping beats or beating harder than usual) 
 
Common (may affect up to 1 in 10 people) 
• 
Sunburn-like reactions following exposure to light 
• 
Swelling in the feet, ankles, legs, and/or hands 
• 
Low potassium levels in the blood 
• 
Inflammation or swelling of the air passages between the mouth and nose and the lungs, 
bronchitis 
• 
Abdominal bloating 
• 
Feeling of worry, nervousness, or unease 

68 
• 
Feelings of sadness, depressed 
• 
Nose bleed 
• 
Decrease in weight 
• 
Muscle pain 
• 
Impaired concentration, understanding, memory and thinking (cognitive impairment) 
• 
Pink eye 
• 
Fast heart beat may cause dizziness, chest pain or breathlessness 
• 
Dry mouth 
• 
Inflammation of the mouth and/or digestive tract 
• 
Rash 
• 
Elevated blood tests 
• 
Abnormal blood tests 
• 
Abnormal taste in mouth 
 
Uncommon (may affect up to 1 in 100 people) 
• 
Confusional state 
• 
Inflammation of the lungs which can cause shortness of breath and difficulty breathing (non-
infectious pneumonitis) 
 
Reporting of side effects  
If you get any side effects, talk to your doctor, pharmacist or nurse. This includes any possible side 
effects not listed in this leaflet. You can also report side effects directly via the national reporting 
system listed in Appendix V. By reporting side effects you can help provide more information on the 
safety of this medicine. 
 
 
5. 
How to store Zejula 
 
Keep this medicine out of the sight and reach of children. 
 
Do not use this medicine after the expiry date which is stated on the carton and blister after EXP. The 
expiry date refers to the last day of that month. 
 
This medicine does not require any special storage temperature conditions. 
 
Store in the original package to protect the tablets from absorption of water under high humidity 
conditions. 
 
Do not throw away any medicines via wastewater or household waste. Ask your pharmacist how to 
throw away medicines you no longer use. These measures will help protect the environment. 
 
 
6. 
Contents of the pack and other information 
 
What Zejula contains 
 
• 
The active substance is niraparib. Each film-coated tablet contains niraparib tosylate 
monohydrate equivalent to 100 mg niraparib. 
 
• 
The other ingredients (excipients) are: 
 
Tablet core: crospovidone, lactose monohydrate, magnesium stearate, microcrystalline cellulose 
(E 460), povidone (E 1201), colloidal hydrated silica. 
Tablet coating: polyvinyl alcohol (E 1203), titanium dioxide (E 171), macrogol (E 1521), talc (E 
553b), black iron oxide (E 172). 
 

69 
This medicine contains lactose – see section 2 for more information. 
 
What Zejula looks like and contents of the pack 
 
Zejula 100 mg film-coated tablets are grey, oval-shaped, film-coated tablet debossed with “100” on 
one side and “Zejula” on the other. 
 
The film-coated tablets are packed in blister packs or child-resistant blister packs of  
• 
84 film-coated tablets 
• 
56 film-coated tablets 
 
Not all pack sizes may be marketed. 
 
Marketing Authorisation Holder 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
12 Riverwalk 
Citywest Business Campus 
Dublin 24 
Ireland  
D24 YK11 
 
Manufacturer 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
12 Riverwalk 
Citywest Business Campus 
Dublin 24 
Ireland 
D24 YK11 
 
Millmount Healthcare Ltd. 
Block 7, City North Business Campus, 
Stamullen, Co Meath 
Ireland 
 
Glaxo Wellcome, S.A. 
Avda. Extremadura, 3 
09400 Aranda de Duero 
Burgos 
Spain 
 
For any information about this medicine, please contact the local representative of the Marketing 
Authorisation Holder: 
 
 
België/Belgique/Belgien 
GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals s.a./n.v. 
Tél/Tel: + 32 (0) 10 85 52 00 
Lietuva 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited  
Tel: + 370 80000334 
 
България 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Teл.: + 359  80018205 
 
Luxembourg/Luxemburg 
GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals s.a./n.v. 
Belgique/Belgien 
Tél/Tel: + 32 (0) 10 85 52 00 
 
Česká republika 
GlaxoSmithKline, s.r.o. 
Tel: + 420 222 001 111 
cz.info@gsk.com 
Magyarország 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited  
Tel.: + 36  80088309 

70 
 
 
Danmark 
GlaxoSmithKline Pharma A/S 
Tlf.: + 45 36 35 91 00 
dk-info@gsk.com 
 
 
Malta 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Tel: + 356 80065004 
 
 
Deutschland 
GlaxoSmithKline GmbH & Co. KG 
Tel.: + 49 (0)89 36044 8701 
produkt.info@gsk.com 
Nederland 
GlaxoSmithKline BV 
Tel: + 31 (0)33 2081100 
 
Eesti 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services 
Limited  
Tel: + 372  8002640 
 
Norge 
GlaxoSmithKline AS 
Tlf: + 47 22 70 20 00 
 
Ελλάδα 
GlaxoSmithKline Μονοπρόσωπη A.E.B.E. 
Τηλ: + 30 210 68 82 100 
 
Österreich 
GlaxoSmithKline Pharma GmbH 
Tel: + 43 (0)1 97075 0 
at.info@gsk.com 
 
España 
GlaxoSmithKline, S.A. 
Tel: + 34 900 202 700 
es-ci@gsk.com 
 
Polska 
GSK Services Sp. z o.o. 
Tel.: + 48 (0)22 576 9000 
 
France 
Laboratoire GlaxoSmithKline 
Tél: + 33 (0)1 39 17 84 44 
diam@gsk.com 
Portugal 
GlaxoSmithKline – Produtos Farmacêuticos, Lda. 
Tel: + 351 21 412 95 00 
FI.PT@gsk.com  
 
Hrvatska 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Tel: +385  800787089 
 
Ireland 
GlaxoSmithKline (Ireland) Limited 
Tel: + 353 (0)1 4955000 
România 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited  
Tel: + 40 800672524 
 
Slovenija 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Tel: + 386 80688869 
 
Ísland 
Vistor ehf. 
Sími: + 354 535 7000 
Slovenská republika 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited  
Tel: + 421 800500589 
 
Italia 
GlaxoSmithKline S.p.A. 
Tel: + 39 (0)45 7741111 
 
Suomi/Finland 
GlaxoSmithKline Oy 
Puh/Tel: + 358 (0)10 30 30 30 
 
Κύπρος 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Τηλ: + 357 80070017 
Sverige 
GlaxoSmithKline AB 
Tel: + 46 (0)8 638 93 00 
info.produkt@gsk.com 
 
Latvija 
GlaxoSmithKline Trading Services Limited 
Tel: + 371 80205045 
 
 
 
 

71 
This leaflet was last revised in MM/YYYY.  
 
Other sources of information 
 
Detailed information on this medicine is available on the European Medicines Agency web site: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu. 
